

THE HONOR OF CHIVALRY: Or, The Famous and Delectable HISTORY OF DON BELLIANIS
of GREECE.

CONTINUING As well the valiant Exploits of that Magnanimous and Heroic
Prince, Son unto the Emperor Don Bellaneo of Greece; as also the Wars between
Him and the Souldan of PERSIA.

Wherein is likewise described the strange and dangerous Adventures that befell
him in the prosecution of his Love toward the Princess Florisbella, Daughter
to the Souldan of Babylon: His Releasing of her Father the Souldan from a
strange Enchantment, and vanquishing the Emperor of Trebizond.

The Second Part. Illustrated with Pictures.

Now newly Written in English by F. K.

Licensed and Entered, according to Order.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Johnson, and are to be sold by Andrew Kembe at St.
Margarets Hill in Southwark. 1664.

To my loving Sister MARY KIRKMAN, The Wife of my Brother Thomas Kirkman: And
to my dear DAUGHTER, ELIZABETH KIRKMAN.
THe time which I have spent in Composing and Writing of this Piece, might have
been employed in the Company or Instructions of one or both of you, and that
with more profit to you and my self; but since I have been so employed I think
it most convenient that you should reap the benefit of my Labors. If in the
reading of it you find any of my Princesses endowed with any Virtues, such
would I have you to be. What is of good in it I intend for your Instructions,
the worst that is in it I wrote for a harmless recreation, and for such a one I
would have you to take it. If you wisely imitate the Be, you may get some
Honey from this indifferent Flower, as well as from the best and choicest: I
hope to see you both arrive to great perfections in your minds, and that what
you read, if good or excellent, you will make this use of it, to imbetter your
spirits and minds so far, that you may every day add one Virtue to another,
so that in short time you be accomplished persons, to the great content and joy
of me, who am

Your Brother, and Father, Francis Kirkman.

TO THE Courteous and Discourteous READER.
IT is now above ten years since my occasions would permit me to read any Book
of this nature, I confess that in my minority I was a great lover of Books of
Knighthood, and my fancy cost my purse, for I then translated and printed two
Books of this quality, since which time I wholly left that study; but some
friends of late knowing that I formerly recreated my self in reading these
sorts of Histories, desired me to write this, informing me that it was much
wanted: Their importunity and my own leisure permitting me, I began it, and
have whether (happily or not I know not) now finished it. I am sure I shall be
censured by many, and some will suppose me to be as wild and extravagant as Don
Quixot to renew Knight-errantry, but if he had been Master of so much reason as
to have written one, it would have prevented him from exercising that quality,
and I believe have returned less to his disadvantage; for he might have saved
both his Ribs and Teeth, and his Squire Sancho Pancha would neither have been
blanketted nor cudgelled: without doubt had he been possessed of so much brains
as to have written one, he would then have known that there was more of fancy
then truth, and by consequence not have exposed himself to those many hazardous
adventures which he undertook, and not have taken Wind mils for Giants, Flocks
of Sheep for Armies, and a Barbers Basin for the Golden Helmet of Mambrin^. I
know he intended to have begun that adventure, which I have now finished, as
the Author of his History in the first Chapter of his first Book learnedly
writes, but he was hindered by his extravagant madness. That which he attempted
and was some years in atcheiving, I have now written in a few days; for in the
invention and writing I spent not a full week. They that will bestow the pains
in reading of it, will find somewhat of recreation, I am sure the Story in the
first Part is well enough continued in this Second, and all the adventures that
are promised there, are prosecuted here. Many people love Romances, but some
are grown so squeamish, that there must be nothing of improbability, neither
Giant nor Enchantment, because there is none in our age. To whom I answer, That
this History is not of people of our time, but of many ages past, and we know
that sacred Writ mentions both and Poetry allows of them. There is somewhat in
this Book both of the old manner of Romances and somewhat of the new: Indeed
the newest form, as that of Cleopatra and Cassandra contents me best, but I was
not to follow that way in this History, lest this Second Part should neither be
brother, nor have affinity with the first, and so be either as a bastard or
stranger: Such as it is you now have it, they that delight in this sort of
Romances, if they approve of this, may have a third Part, and it is possible
more, as the Stationer receives encouragement: If it be not liked, there is too
much of it already; and to those that wholly dislike it, and would be accounted
the only Wits of the times, let them mend it, and I then doubt not but I shall
find somewhat to dislike in theirs. This is no translation but fancy: we have
many pleasant and ingenious Romances in the English tongue, but we are obliged
to other nations for their invention of them: very few have been written
originally in English, and only Sir Philip Sidneys Arcadia has had the
success to be not only approved of in our own language, but rendered into
French and other languages. If this piece had been written a hundred years ago
(though it be in nothing so worthy as that) yet it is likely that it might have
been likewise translated, because the first part was written originally in
Italian. Thus have I given you a taste of my Fancy, if it recreats or contents
you in the reading, as much as it did me in the writing, I have my desires, and
by your approving of this, you may encourage me to hear further from me, till
when I rest, if you like me,

Yours, F. K.

THE SECOND PART OF DON BELLIANIS of GREECE: OR, The Honor of Chivalry.
Continuing the valiant Exploits of that Heroic Prince, Son unto the Emperor
Don Bellaneo of Greece.
CHAP. I.
How the City of Bollera being straightly besieged by the Souldan, was well near
taken, but that it was rescued by Gorino Brother to the Duke Alfiron, and the
Knight of the Basilisks and his Companions.

IT is now full time to return to the City of Bollera, where we left the thrice
renowned and most magnificent Emperor Don Bellaneo, in company of so many
valiant and renowned Knights and great Personages, who were straightly besieged
by the Souldan of Persia, and his son Perianeo Knight of the Images. After the
last Battle was ended, which is largely described in the 59th Chapter of the
First Part of this excellent History, the Emperor commanded that a strict and
just account should be taken of how many Fighting men were left in the City and
Trenches; which Command being put in execution by Duke Alfiron and Sabian of
Trebanto, who were very vigilant and careful therein: and after they had taken
a just account thereof, they delivered it to Don Bellaneo, whereby they found
that there was not above fifty thousand men both in the City and Trenches, and
that they had lost ten thousand men: for the Duke brought twenty thousand men
with him from Persepolis, and there was within the City besides forty thousand
fighting men: when as on the other side the Souldan had at least four hundred
thousand fighting men, besides above fifty thousand which were slain in the
last Battle, and the Souldans men daily increased, and many good and hardy
Knights and Giants from all parts of the Empire of Persia came in daily to them
at the brute of these Wars, and for the love that they bore to their
magnanimous and redoubted Prince Perianeo Knight of the Images, for whose
return there was great Joy throughout all those Countries.

On the other side, great was the grief and sorrow of the most peerless
Princess Persiana, (who was married to the Duke Alfiron, as is before
recounted) and for whose sake alone all these Wars were begun, and in whose
Quarrel many redoubted Knights had lost their lives. As much troubled was the
beauteous Princess Aurora, for the absence of Don Bellianis the Knight of The
Golden Image, and Don Brianel, whose success in the winning of her Kingdom, and
other strange Adventures she had not yet heard of. But all these sorrows were
somewhat mitigated, in that the City was so well guarded by Don Bellaneo Knight
of The Imperial Crowns, and the rest of those invincible Princes and Knights.

The Prince Perianeo being greatly desirous to put an end to these Wars, and
being vexed that one City manned with so few Knights should be able to
withstand so mighty an Army as he had under his command, desired of his Father
to give him leave to assault the Place, and in order thereunto one morning very
early, two hours before the Sunrising, he being before provided of all things
necessary for so great an Attempt, took part of the Army, which he divided into
four parts, one Squadron of fifty thousand men he gave to be commanded by
Caroliano, another of fifty thousand men was commanded by Boraldo, the third of
fifty thousand men by Don Fermosel, and the last he commanded himself, being
fifty thousand well resolved Knights, and forty Giants. In this manner, with
the greatest silence that could be, they approached the Outworks of the Enemy,
which was near half a league from the City: The Defendants, who kept an
excellent order in their Camp, were ready in short time to receive them, being
commanded by the Kings of Armenia and Tesifante, who hearing of the approaches
of the Enemies, presently caused the Clarions and Trumpets to be sounded, and
buckling on their Armor went to receive them: Caroliano appreaching the Tents
of the Defendants, couched his Lance, and furiously unhorsed twenty or thirty
Knights before he met with any that could withstand him; but the King of
Armenia seeing him do so much mischief, and had so weak resistance, without any
Lance drew his sword, and cut the lance of his enemy in two pieces, and then
redoubling his blow made him bow his body to his horse neck: but he soon
recollecting his spirits drew his sword, and began a terrible Fight: By this
time they in the City having taken the Alarm, issued out under the Conduct of
the Emperor and the Duke Alfiron, leaving only a Guard of five thousand men to
defend the City and the Ladies that were therein: but when they came near to
the Cam^, they met the^ own Soldiers flying for safety into the City with all
the spee^ they could, being pursued by their enemies who came so powerfully
upon them: whereupon the Emperor, Duke Alfiron, and the rest were much
dismayed, however encouraging them in the best manner they could, they caused
them to return and face their enemies, and then the Fight began to be very hot
and bloody, Don Bellaneo couching his Lance unhorsed twenty Knights before he
brake it, and then taking another, ran so fiercely on into his enemies rancks,
that they all made way until he met with Boraldo, with whom he encountered so
fiercely, that breaking his Lance into shivers, he caused him to measure his
length on the earth, and so passed on, drawing his sword and killing many of
his enemies: thus was the Fight again renewed, and his Forces seeing the
undauntedness of his courage, followed him so vigorously, that like a torrent
he bore down all before him, till at length he met with Perianeo, who then came
up with all his Force to renew the Battle: then did the good Emperor bestir
himself, and indeed he had great need, for he was encompassed with six Giants
besides the Knight of the Images, all which did their utmost endeavors to
assail him: some of their blows he received on his shield, and others were
delivered with such puissance on his helmet, that he was enforced to hold about
his horses neck to keep him from falling, but he soon revenged himself of them,
for like a raged Lion he cut off the arm of one of the Giants, and another he
cut off one side of his face, so that now he was delivered from two of his
enemies, but the Prince Perianeo knowing him by his Arms to be the only
considerable Adversary he had, desired the other four Giants to leave him alone
with him, thinking himself to overcome him that he might gain the more honor:
then began one of the most terrible Fights between these two undaunted Warriers
that was ever heard of, both of them resolving to do their utmost devoirs, and
they behaved themselves so fiercely, that as well many other Knights, as the
four Giants, stood still to behold that incomparable Combat. During this time,
in all other places the Fight was continued with much vigor, and the brave
Knights Alfiron, Contumeliano, and Fliorispiano performed wonders: the valiant
King of Armenia was all this while engaged in Combat with Caroliano, where he
gave and received many wounds, and their Fight continued so long, that both
their horses were slain, and the King of Armenia was in a great jeopardy; for
many of the Knights of Caroliano's Squadron (seeing their Commander likely to
be overcome by the King of Armenia) did violently assault him, and brought him
to very great extremity, having wounded him in many places, and he had very
nigh fainted with his great loss of blood, when the King of Tesifante
accompanied with five hundred Knights came to his rescue, and again mounted him
on the horse of one of the Knights that he had slain.

Thus the Battle continued indifferent on both sides, till Boraldo and Don
Fermosel arrived with their several Squadrons of fifty thousand men a piece,
brake thorough the rancks of their enemies, and attempted to force their way
into the City; which they endeavored by all means possible to effect, for they
brought Scaling-Ladders, and all other instruments of War fitting to assault
it: which when Duke Alfiron, and the rest of the Knights heard, they
immediately retreated into the City, knowing that it was but weakly manned, and
not able long to resist the furious assaults that would be made.

Thus the Emperor (who as I told you before was engaged in a bloody Fight with
the Knight of the Images) was forced to leave the Combat unfinished, to retire
to the City to rescue it, which he heard was well nigh taken: being come near
the gates of the City, he saw that the enemy had gotten possession of part of
the wall, and likewise he saw the Knight of the Images coming behind him with
all his Forces, wherefore he seeing the extremity of the business hasted into
the City, and stood in rear of all his Forces, and was the last man that
entered, holding a continual Fight with his enemies, till he saw all his own
Forces were within the walls, and then he himself entered, not permitting any of
his enemies Forces to enter with him, which they by all means attempted to do:
so soon as he was entered, and the gate strongly fastened, he repaired to that
part of the wall which he saw was possessed by the enemy, and mounting thereon,
being followed by several valiant Knights, soon tumbled the enemies from the
wall, and kept the possession thereof; but all this and what ever else they
could do, did not hinder the enemy from getting the possession of the wall in
many places, which they at last kept in despite of all the Forces of the City,
and were ready to descend the wall and enter the City, when they heard a great
noise of Trumpets and Clarions, and a great company of armed Knights behind
them, who gave a great assault to those of their Forces that were below; at
which they were greatly astonished, and seeing them come forward with a great
deal of impetuosity and destruction of many of their Forces, the chief
Commander who had gotten the possession of the wall, came down to help their
companions, and the rest, who still remained on the wall, were soon forced from
thence, and thrown headlong down, where they ended their lives.

Thus was the Battle again revived, and many of the Souldans Knights and Giants
lost their lives, by the invincible arms of four or five Knights, who came in
company of the late Forces that came to relieve the City: but among the rest,
there was one Knight who was armed with an armor garnished with Basilisks, that
put all men to amaze, for they rather judged him to be a raging Tiger, or
hungry Lion, then any mortal Knight; for in a short time he dismounted above
fifty Knights, and killed four Giants, and yet he was not at all wearied, but
still bestowed such deadly strokes amongst the Souldans knights, that they all
fled from him as from their immediate death, till at last the two brothers,
Caroliano and Boraldo, both assaulted him, and laid many weighty strokes both
on his Shield and Helmet, but he reached one of them so great a blow, that he
made him catch hold on his horses neck, to save himself from falling, and then
being much enraged gave the other such a thrust that he tumbled him from his
horse, and so he proceeded killing and destroying all that durst withstand him.
In the mean time his other four companions were not idle, for they behaved
themselves with extraordinary courage. It was two hours before day, when this
battle first began, and now it was about four of the clock in the afternoon,
and yet it was not ended: but at last the Souldans Knights and Giants being
much wearied, were about to retreat when they once more saw fresh Forces coming
toward them, which was indeed commanded by the Souldan himself, who seeing the
Battle continue so long, and understanding by a messenger that the City was
likely to be relieved, came on with all his Forces to assist his Son, whereby
he might, as he hoped, put an end to this troublesome War: but he found himself
to be bravely received by the Knight of the Basilisks and his companions.

When they in the City saw this, they informed the Emperor Don Bellaneo
thereof, who commanded one of the Gates to be immediately opened, out of which
he issued with ten thousand men, and went immediately to the place where the
Knight of the Basilisks was engaged, and seeing him do such wonders, and
supposing him to command the rest, he said to him: Knight, since you have,
though unknown, endeavored to give us so great aid, I pray let it be used to
the best advantage, which will be at this time with all convenient speed, to
retire into the City, else you will presently be overpowred by their great
Forces, and then your assistance will be of little effect. The Knight of the
Basilisks gave attention to this advice, and knowing not only the person that
gave it, but that it was also very good, endeavored by his own example and
actions, to retire to the City, and so he and his companions did with all their
Forces, only with the loss of two thousand men which were killed in the
Battle, and retreat. And the Souldan and his Son, the Knight of the Images,
seeing themselves forced to retire from the City walls, by reason of the
approaching of the night, which was now coming on, retired into their enemies
trenches, with a resolution to abide there till they could take the City, but
they were prevented, as hereafter shall be declared.

CHAP. II.
Who the Knight of the Basilisks, and his Companions were, and how the Siege
was raised, and the Souldan and all his Forces retired to Persepolis.

SO soon as the Knight of the Basilisks and his Companions were entered the
City, the Emperor caused a strait Guard to be placed on the Walls, and then
retired to the Palace, where he was welcomed by the two Princesses Persiana
and Aurora; but greatly was the Joy of all increased when the Knight of the
Basilisks discovered himself to be Don Bellianis, Knight of the Golden Image,
and his Companions to be his two Brothers Don Clarineo of Spain, and Don
Lucidamore of Thessaly, and his Cousin Don Brianel of Macedon: but there was
one Knight who continued still unknown to all but the Duke Alfiron, who being
unarmed, knew him to be his brother Don Gorino; and indeed to him they were
very much engaged for his help and assistance, for he was not only a good
Knight himself, but he had brought twenty thousand valiant Knights and Soldiers
with him, to aid his Brother: and the Knight of the Basilisks and his
Companions, overtaking him in their return from Antioch, and understanding that
his design was only to relieve the City of Bollera, and their Journey being
intended for the same place, they discovered themselves to him to be friends to
his Brother the Duke Alfiron, and thereupon they joined themselves together,
and arrived at the City in so fortunate a time, that had they not come as they
did, the City must needs have been taken by the enemies, by reason of their
great forces, and the small power that was within to oppose them: but their
arrival in so fortunate a time, caused the Souldan to loose his Design, and
made him retreat, as we have before told you, with the loss of one hundred
thousand men, and many valiant Knights and Giants. But however he was resolved
not to leave the City walls, till he had not only taken it, but also destroyed
it and razed it to the ground, in revenge of the Injuries he had received of
Duke Alfiron and his Companions. But here we will leave him without the City,
and return to our Champions within, who little feared him and all his Forces.

The Princess Aurora being informed of the return of Don Brianel, sent for him
to give her an account of his Adventures in Antioch, and it was not long ere
he, accompanied with his two Companions, Don Clarineo and Don Lucidamore, came
into her presence, and falling on his knees to kiss her hand, she refused to
grant it, but raised him and his Companions from the ground with much freedom
and joy; he being somewhat emboldened by her freedom, did arise and salute her,
which she courteously received: and then she seating her self in her Chair,
caused other seats to be brought for Don Brianel and his Companions: where they
being seated, and Don Brianel knowing for what cause he was sent for,
immediately declared unto her the good success of his Embassy, and how that by
the assistance of those two Knights there present, and of their brother Don
Bellianis, as also by the advice and help of Palineo and Damartino, he had
slain the Usurping King Tramolcano and the Count Garino, and reduced the
Kingdom to her obedience; and that there was nothing now wanting but her
presence to make her subjects happy, and that they were all ready to obey her
in every thing, and in the mean time till she could come thither, they had
sworn Oaths of Allegiance to Damartino, according to her orders and command.

This news greatly contented the Princess, and she returned many thanks to Don
Brianel and his companions, after which they departed from her presence, and
went to the place where the Emperor, his Son, and Duke Alfiron, with the rest
of the Commanders, were in Council about what was necessary to be done, as well
for the defense of themselves, as for the offending of their enemies, and there
it was concluded to send Don Clarineo to Persepolis, to attend the landing of
two hundred thousand men, who were come from Greece with the Emperor, and gave
him orders that he should conduct those Forces directly t^ Persepolis to
assault it, that thereby the Souldan hearing thereof, might be enforced to
withdraw his Forces to aid that City and so they should be left free. This
determination was immediately put in execution, and Don Clarineo in company of
fifty Knights, presently departed, and traveled so long that night, that the
next morning they arrived within two leagues of Persepolis, and then they took
another way, and went somewhat about, that they might travel undiscovered, and
so they did till they arrived at the Seaside, where they immediately embarked
themselves, and ranging about the Sea for some time, they at last discovered
the Navy, and approaching to them, went aboard the Admiral, and immediately
causing the principal of the Captains and other Commanders to come aboard, he
declared the will of the Emperor; to which they all promised ready obedience,
and thereupon they presently set sail for Persepolis: and they had not sailed
six hours before they discovered the shore, where they landed without any
interruption, and leaving a sufficient company to guard the Navy, they
immediately marched on to Persepolis, where they arriving, endeavored to enter,
but were strongly repulsed by the Souldans Forces, and the place being very
well fortified, they were forced to retire, and fortify themselves in Trenches
near the City, till they had further orders from the Emperor.

The City of Persepolis being thus assaulted, some of the Forces went
immediately to the Souldans Camp before Bollera, to certify him thereof, where
they arrived one morning early just as the Souldan and his Son with all their
Forces, were going to assault the City: but they were much astonished with this
news, and did greatly wonder from whence all those Forces should arrive,
however commanding the Messengers to silence, they resolved to give the Onset
to the City before they departed, and thereupon went forwards with all their
accoutrements of War. Perianeo Knight of the Images being extraordinarily
enraged, immediately got a Ladder and mounted the wall, where he soon either
cut in pieces, or tumbled down all such as were placed there to oppose him, and
was ready to have descended the wall and entered the City, when the Emperor
himself, and several other valiant Knights in his company, came and resisted
him: Many fierce and hardy blows were given and received on both sides, for
they had both an implacable hatred to each other, and the Emperor knowing that
if he could vanquish that enemy, he should easily force the rest to retire,
laid mighty strokes on the Knight of the Images, so that in the end he put him
quite out of breath, and enforced him to retire from the wall in despite of
all the resistance he could possibly make: all this while the rest of the
Knights and Giants on both sides, were not idle, but did their uttermost
endeavors, the one to possess, and the other to defend the wall, which indeed
was so well guarded by so many valiant and magnanimous Knights, that indeed the
flower of all Chivalry was there present, and therefore the Moat which
encompassed the City, was in a manner filled with the blood and dead bodies of
the assaylants; which the Souldan perceiving, and knowing that his presence was
required, and indeed more necessary in another place, he caused his Forces to
retreat, which he could hardly effect, in regard of the desperateness of the
Fight in all places, at last he withdrew his Forces, and finding that he had
gained nothing, but that this Onset had cost him the lose of fifty thousand
men, he resolved to depart that night, and retire to Persepolis.

Those in the City seeing their enemies withdrawn, in good order returned to
their several Quarters, where they greatly rejoiced in their good fortune: The
Emperor and his Son with all the rest of those courageous Knights, resolving
the next day to issue out of the City, and set upon their enemies in the open
field: but when the next morning was come, and they were ready to put this
their resolution in execution, they found that all their enemies were departed,
having taken the benefit of the night for that purpose, wherefore they went and
disarmed themselves, and then went again to counsel, where they resolved to do
as follows.

CHAP. III.
How Don Bellaneo the Emperor, and the rest of the Knights and Forces followed
the Souldan to Persepolis, and that which happened there.



THe Emperor Don Bellaneo, and the rest of the Knights being entered into
council, it was concluded that every one should provide himself to depart from
that City, and follow the Souldan: They very well knowing that the Forces of
the Emperor, under the command of Don Clarineo, being arrived at Persepolis,
and the Souldan being informed thereof, was the cause of his so sudden
departure, wherefore Don Alfiron, the Emperor, Don Bellianis, and the rest of
the Knights, went immediately to put their Forces in readiness; which when they
had done, they came to the Court to the Ladies, to take their farewell of them.

The Princess Persiana was much troubled and perplexed, that she should so soon
leave her husband the Duke, and was greatly discontented that all this war was
occasioned thorough her Marriage with the Duke, whereby the lives of so many
brave Knights were put into continual jeopardy, wherefore she besought the Duke
her Husband, Don Bellaneo, and his son Don Bellianis, to use their uttermost
endeavors to reconcile this difference between her husband and her Father,
without the effusion of any more blood, which they promised to endeavor.

The Princess Aurora was likewise much troubled that her affairs was thus
hindered by these Wars, but her discontent was the greater in that Don Brianel
and she must part; wherefore she applied her self to Don Bellianis, and calling
him Her Deliverer, desired him to make all the haste he could possible in his
return thither, that he might put her in possession of her Kingdom; which he
promised to do, but she not satisfied with this, desired that some one of his
companions might be left in that City for the guard thereof. He thereupon
res^lved to give her all the pleasure he could, told her that he would so order
it, that Don Brianel should be left behind for that purpose, at the naming of
whom she blushed, and returned him thanks therefore. So he took his leave of
her, and of the two Damsels that belonged to the Princess Florisbella, and
departed to his Father, and the rest of the Knights, telling them what he had
promised to the Princess Aurora, and that it was necessary to leave Don Brianel
for guard of the City, which was accordingly done. Thus these brave Warriors
left the City in guard of Don Brianel and ten thousand men, and marched onward
to Persepolis with sixty thousand men.

The Emperor and his company with easy matches, at length arrived near
Persepolis, where they found Don Clarineo with all his Forces ready to receive
them, who informed them that the night before, the Souldan and his Son, with
all the rest of the Army arrived there, and with the loss of many men had
entered the City.

Thus these Forces being united, made a very considerable Army, and therefore
Duke Alfiron did not question but he should in short time compel the Souldan
his Father in Law to consent to his Marriage, and therefore he desired that the
rest of the Knights would give him leave to write to the Souldan, to know his
mind whether he would be for peace or war: To which they consented, and he
writ to him accordingly, and sent it by one of his Knights, who coming to the
gates of the City, was questioned what he was, and what he would have? Who
replied, That he came to speak with the Souldan from his Lord the Duke Alfiron,
and the rest of the Knights in his company; whereupon the Souldan being
advertised hereof, commanded that he should be brought before him, which was
done accordingly, and he coming unto the great Hall of the Souldans Palace,
made his due reverence to him, and to his Son the Knight of the Images, and the
rest of those high Personages there assembled, and delivered his Letter to the
Souldan; who gave the same to his Secretary, who opening the Seal, found
therein written as follows.

The Letter of the Duke of Alfiron, to the Souldan of Persia.
MOst Mighty Sir, it is not unknown to your Highness, the great love and
affection that I have for a long time bore to the most incomparable Princess
Persiana your Daughter, and how that I have always been ready to do all
reasonable things to testify to her my Love, and to your self my service: but
so it is, that your Highness being blinded with revenge on Don Belleano the
Emperor of Greece, did decree, That whosoever should vanquish and kill the said
Emperor, should not only have your Highnesses Daughter to wife, but half your
Highness Dominions with her, which was proudly and indiscreetly undertaken by
Don Gallaneo of Antioch, who though he attempted it, could never bring the same
to pass, but was forced to return to your Court, and there falsely reported that
he had effected your Commands, which though it was altogether untrue; yet he
expected your Daughter as a Guerdon of his merit: accordingly your Highness
(though much against the good will, and liking of your said Daughter) caused
them to be Married; but he for his other wicked doings was justly slain, and
the Knight of the Golden Image and his companions, vindicated her credit and
mine, as to your Highness is fully known: but such was the continual anger of
your Highness, that contrary to the word of so great a Personage, you kept me
in prison till both my self, and your Daughter were released by means of the
Kings of Armenia and Tessifanty, and many other Knights, who with your
Daughters free consent caused us to be lawfully Married, as in justice we
ought, whereupon your Highness has since still followed us, with all the
violence possible, endeavoring to destroy us (but the Gods be praised) we have
hitherto valiantly defended our selves from all your Forces, and question not
still to do. But however our inclination to peace is such, that we humbly and
heartily desire it, and that you will give us your Royal word for the same, in
expectation of which, or of such other Answer, as you shall send, I rest

Your Son and Subject, Duke Alfiron.


This Letter being read, the Souldan was much perplexed, that any one should in
so open a manner declare his unjust actions, and charge him with unjustice;
told the messenger that he might depart, and the next day he would send an
Answer by a messenger of his own.

The Knight being gone, the Souldan and his Son entered into consultation, what
was necessary to be done, and the Knight of the Images knowing that the Emperor
of Greece, and his Son Don Bellianis, and many of their kindred, were in the
Camp of Duke Alfiron, for they had learned so much by some prisoners they had
taken of the Emperors Army, they therefore resolved to be revenged of all their
wrongs in general, and that they might the more easily bring their
determination to pass, they concluded that the Knight of the Images, the two
brothers Caroliano and Boraldo, and Gramalis of Thrace, should enter in Combat
with the Emperor of Greece, his Son Don Bellianis, Duke Alfiron, and any other
Knight of their Army: and in order to this their resolution, the Souldan writ a
Letter, and sent it to the Camp according as he had promised.

The messenger that carried the Answer of the Souldan arriving at the Camp, was
conducted to the Tent of the Emperor, where he and the rest of the Commanders
being assembled, he delivered the Cartel to Duke Alfiron, who immediately
causing the same to be opened, they read as follows.

The Letter of the Souldan, to Duke Alfiron and his Companions.
I Know not what reason thou had to contradict or hinder our will in the
marriage of our Daughter to Don Gallaneo, or any other to whom it was our
pleasure to bestow her, but that thou would show thy self false to our
Imperial Crown and Dignity, in taking part with our greatest enemies, and those
whom we have the greatest cause to hate, such as is the Emperor of Greece and
his Son, and many of the Knights of their lineage, by whose help and assistance
thou have falsely stolen away our Daughter, and do still unjustly detain her,
and with whose help thou endeavorest to destroy this our Empire, contrary to
thy Allegiance; Therefore we let thee to understand that our pleasure is, that
thou either presently send us our daughter, and assist us in the destruction of
those Christians our mortal enemies, or prepare thy self to be chastised
according to thy demerits: but if thou thy self, and they are still so hardy to
resist us, we have given leave to our noble Son Perianeo, our Cousins Caroliana
and Boraldo, and Gramalis of Thrace, to meet thee and the said Emperor and his
Son, and any other Knight you shall choose to mortal Combat, promising that our
Army shall not, during the Combat hinder you, and we expect your performance of
the same conditions. This, if you will do, we shall be ready to perform
tomorrow before our City gates, this is all at present from.

Your Lord, the Souldan.


Great was the amazement of the Duke Alfiron, and the Kings of Armenia and
Tessifanty, and the rest of the Pagan Knights, when they understood that the
Emperor of Greece, and his Son and kinsmen, were those who they had so long
entertained amongst them, but they were soon satisfied when the Emperor Don
Bellaneo arose from his seat, and spoke as follows.

KIngs of Armenia and Tessifanty, and Duke Alfiron, with all the rest of your
Companions, it cannot be unknown to you how unjustly the Souldan your Master,
has endeavored oftentimes to take away my life, as the undertaking of Don
Gallaneo does sufficiently testify, and I do not conceive but any of you being
so wronged, would use his utmost endeavors to revenge himself: in order to
which I came from Constantinople, accompanied with these Forces, but they have
done little yet in prosecution of my revenge. As for my Son, he came not hither
to injure the Souldan, but to do justice to the Princess of Aurora (who is
truly Princess of Antioch) and to destroy that Usurper Don Gallaneo, who
usurped the same. Since our arrival, many occasions have presented themselves,
whereby we have lost much blood in your Cause, and have wronged none of you,
and do resolve still to continue constant to you, till we shall cause the
Emperor to do you justice, and that shall be our satisfaction; therefore
resolve your selves what Answer to return him, for I and my Son will undertake
the Combat.


After the Emperor had finished his Speech, the Kings of Armenia and Tessifanty
thanked him, and his Son, and the rest of the Knights, for what they had said
and done, and resolved, that since the cause at present was but to bring the
Souldan to do Justice, that they would still continue with them and force him
to do it, or venture their lives and fortunes in the compelling him thereto.
And Duke Alfiron, who was one of the persons that was challenged, answered,
That he was of the same opinion with them, and thanked the Emperor, his Don,
and the rest, for the assistance they had given him, and told them that he was
willing to accept the Combat propounded, whereupon Contumeliano Prince of
Phenicia desired that he might be the other Combatant, which was granted; and
the Messenger was sent to the Souldan to signify the same accordingly.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Combat between the Eight Knights, and of the end thereof.



NO sooner had the Golden Charioteer of Heaven set forward on his daily
Journey, to illuminate the world with the refulgent Beams of his Countenance,
but all our Combatants prepared themselves for the Combat. Don Bellianis of
Greece, in whose heart was not only revenge but jealousy, desired that he
might combat with his Rival Perianeo Knight of the Images. The good Emperor his
Father resolved to try the Valor of Gramalis of Thrace, and Duke Alfiron and
Contumeliano desired to undertake the two Brothers Caroliano and Boraldo.

Thus every one having made choice with whom to fight, resolved to overcome or
die in the place, and they only expected the coming of the Challengers out of
the City. About ten of the Clock before Noon, the Souldan with a Guard of Forty
thousand Knights issued out of one of the Gates with the Champions, ready for
the Combat. The Souldan being seated in a place appointed for that purpose, and
the Guard placed without one side of the Lists, the Challengers with the sound
of Drums and Trumpets entered the same, where they had not long continued, but
the Defendants likewise entered, and the Guard on their side being placed on
another side of the Lists: the Souldan commanded the Signal of the Fight to be
given by the Trumpets, at whose sound the Knights with armed fury made against
each other in such sort, that they rather seemed so many sudden flashes of
Lightning, breaking through the airy passage of the Heaven, than men and horse
met in the midst of the field with so mighty encounters, as if so many pieces
of Ordnance had been discharged. Don Bellianis thinking himself concerned more
than ordinary, encountered the Knight of the Images so violently, that he caused
him to lay hold on his horse neck to save himself from falling, and with the
shock that he received, be lost both his stirrops: but they both soon recovered
themselves, and turning about, with a brave grace and courage drew their
Swords, and gave one another such strong and mighty blows, that their pure
cutting Sw^rds soon made the blood to appear through their Armor.

The Emperor and Gramalis of Thrace encountered each other so furiously, that
the Emperor threw Gramalis on the ground, and disabled his horse, and received
so great a shock himself that he lost both his stirrops, but he recovered
himself, and drawing his Sword went to meet his Adversary, who was coming to
him on foot; which he seeing, likewise dismounted himself, and came on foot
likewise valiantly to meet him: but Gramalis being more ready than the Emperor,
gave him so mighty a blow on the Helmet, that it astonished him, which made his
rage to kindle in his breast, that the very fire sparkled in his eyes, and like
a hot chafed Boar or hungry Lion bent to his prey, wounded Gramalis that had
struck him with so puissant a blow on the Helmet, that he cut it in two as if
it had been of Paste-board, s^rely wounding his head, resting so astonished,
that he knew not whether he was alive or dead Gramalis in short time recovered
himself, and seeing what danger he was in by reason of one blow received from
his enemy, was greatly abashed, so that covering himself with his Shield, he
gave the Emperor many wounds; which he feeling, and resolving to be revenged
of, gave his enemy so great a blow on the Shield, that he cut it in two pieces,
and wounded him so sorely on the head and arm, that be in short time fell to
the ground: which the Emperor seeing he left him, and went to Duke Alfiron who
wanted his assistance.

Alfiron and Contumeliano encountering the two Brothers, gave to each other so
mavelous encounters, that they all measured their lengths on the earth: but
like valiant Knights they soon got on their feet and began an excellent Combat,
which continued a long time without any great advantage; but in the end
Caroliano, with whom Alfiron fought, gave him so great a blow on the head, that
he cut the Laces of his Helmet, and somewhat wounded his head; but Alfiron
resolving to revenge himself, gave Caroliano so mighty a blow on the Helmet,
that it much astonished him, and passing from thence wounded his shoulder very
sorely: but the blow having found so great resistance, his Sword brake in two
pieces; whereupon Caroliano though sorely wounded, seeing his Adversary without
Helmet or Sword, went forward with a resolution that one blow should put an end
to the Combat: but just as he went to perform what be intended, the Emperor met
him and rescued Alfiron, who seeing the desperateness of his condition, being
without a sword, espied that of Gramalis lying by him, suddenly took it up, and
went to receive his enemy, who was now fighting with the Emperor. Contumeliano
and his enemy were not idle, but did their utmost devoirs like good Knights, to
endanger each other, so that the ground where they stood was dyed with the
blood that came from the great number of wounds they received.

This Battle had continued eight hours, and neither of the two Knights, Don
Bellianis nor Perianeo, showed any kind of weariness; and though they were
much wounded, yet continued they as vigorous and strong as at the beginning.
Don Bellianis being much enraged hereat, did his utmost endeavor to put his
enemy out of breath, which he did perform by his quickness and multitude of
strokes which he gave him, so that in the end his enemy could not hurt him, and
did nothing but defend himself. But Perianeo being enraged that he was so
likely to be overcome, resolved to put all his strength to one blow, which he
did in such sort, that striking Don Bellianis on the Helmet, he put him out of
all remembrance, and his horse being somewhat wounded, ran about the field with
him. So soon as he came to himself, and found in what condition he was, and
that his enemy pursued him to take away his life, he caught hold on his Sword
which hung to his Wrist with a Chain, and being enraged far more than any Bull
or Lion, he lifted up his Sword and gave his enemy so great a blow on the
thigh, that he cut him to the hard bone, from which wound issued much blood;
and redoubled his stroke in such manner on his Adversaries Helm, that he beat
him quite from his horse without any sense or understanding: and looking about
him, saw the Duke Alfiron likewise on the ground with one blow he had received
from Caroliano on the head, where he had nothing to defend it: But the Emperor
soon revenged this wrong, for he gave Caroliano so mighty a blow on the head,
that he laid him on the earth. Contumeliano and his adversary Boraldo were both
grown very faint, and Contumeliano was at last forced to retire. Don Bellianis
perceiving how the day was likely to be their own, dismounted from his horse
with a resolution to kill Don Perianeo, if he were not dead already: but on an
instant there happened a great flash of Lightning and Thunder, and there issued
from a Cloud a Chariot of Fire drawn by six Griffi^ns, and in the Chariot
there was an old man, who with the help of a Dwarf, took up the bodies of
Perianeo and Gramalis of Thrace, and placing them in the Chariot mounted
therein himself, immediately ascended the Skies, leaving behind him a great
fire and smoke; which being gone, there appeared a Pillar of Marble, on which
was engraven in brass these words following:

Souldan, it is necessary for the preservation of the life of thy dear Son, and
his Companion, to carry them to such a place as I have provided: but assure thy
self that they shall be both healed of their wounds, and the young Siconian
Lion shall make large amends for the loss of his Father, delivering thee and
him from the Paw of the Grecian Whelp: in the mean time rest contented, for
when thou art in the greatest danger of thy life, thou shall be delivered.

This Pillar and the Prophecy thereon, was beheld and read by many: and Don
Bellianis and his Father went to Duke Alfiron, and took him, he being in a
swoond and sorely wounded, and delivered him to some who carried him to a Tent:
and both the Knights Contumeliano and Boraldo with weakness and loss of blood
having long wrestled together, fell down in a Trance; but Caroliano was quite
killed with the blow he received from the Emperor. The field being thus cleared
of the dead and wounded, the Souldan came from his Seat to see what was
engraven on the Pillar; which when he had read, it immediately vanished away.

Thus this Combat being finished, the Souldan with all his Guard returned to
the City in great sorrow, carrying with them Boraldo much wounded, and the dead
body of Caroliano: and the Emperor and his Son returned to their Tents with the
wounded body of Contumeliano, Alfiron being sent before.

CHAP. V.
How the Souldan of Persia and the Emperor of Greece concluded on a Peace, and
that which happened afterward.

THe Souldan of Persia was extremely discontented for the loss of his Son and
Gramalis of Thrace, but the Inscription on the Marble Pillar somewhat satisfied
him: but when he had considered the end of the Combat, the death of Caroliano,
and the desperate estate of Boraldo, and how that all the Knights on the other
part were alive, and but two of them any thing hurt with their wounds, he
resolved with himself on Peace, considering that he knew not what was become of
his Son, and therefore it was very necessary for him to take care of the
welfare of his Daughter.

Duke Alfiron and Contumeliano being carried into their Tents in the Camp, were
looked to so diligently, that in short time they were cured of their wounds.
And one day they being all together in the Tent of the Emperor, to consult of
what was most fitting to be done, there arrived a Messenger from the Souldan,
who being admitted before them, gave a Letter unto Duke Alfiron, which he
according to his usual manner, delivered unto the Secretary to read, who
opening the same, read as follows.

The Letter of the Souldan of Persia, to Duke Alfiron.
DUKE, We greet thee well: For as much as the lives of many valiant Knights
have been lost in the late Controversy between Me and Thee, which has been
great grief of heart to me for the loss of so many of our Subjects, whose lives
we ought to conserve; And to the end that a period may be put to this bloody
War, we advise thee forthwith to send our Daughter Persiana to our presence,
that we may understand from her own mouth, whether she be contented to receive
thee for her Husband; which if we find she be willing to do, we promise thee
upon our Imperial Word to give her to thee accordingly, and with her such a
sufficient Dower, as thou thy self shall be well contented. And likewise we on
our Royal Word promise, that so soon as the Emperor of Greece will send away
his Forces, that we will Disband ours, and make such Peace with him as shall be
thought convenient. And we do further promise, that we will not only forgive
thee and the Kings of Armenia and Tessifanty all the wrong thou and they have
done us by this late Rebellion, but also give such Writing signifying the same
under our Hand and Seal, as shall be thought fitting; Therefore fail not
forthwith to send us our Daughter, that we may put and end to this unhappy
Difference.

Signed, The SOULDAN.


After these great Personages had heard the Determination of the Souldan, there
was none of them that rested discontented, for these Wars had held them a long
time from prosecuting their other Adventures. And therefore Don Bellianis being
more than ordinary desirous of Peace, that he might once more go visit his
incomparable Lady the Princess Florisbella, arose and spoke as follows.

Most Renowned Knights, I see no cause why we should not all conclude with
Peace, since the Souldan has sent us such fair Propositions, wherefore my
opinion is, that the Princess Persiana be forthwith sent for, that the Souldan
may receive the satisfaction he desires, which I am confident she will give
him: And since the Souldan is so reasonable, I am fully satisfied; for my only
business was to restore the Princess Aurora to her kingdom of Antioch, which
was usurped by Don Galleneo, who since he is dead, we have gotten possession of
it. I am confident we shall persuade the Souldan to confirm her in the
possession of the same, and that he will give us all the satisfaction we shall
desire.


After this Speech was ended, there was not one of the company but rested
contented, and thereupon a party of five thousand Horse was immediately
dispatched away under the Conduct of Don Gorion, Brother to Duke Alfiron, to
conduct the Princess thither: and the Messenger of the Souldan was sent back
with another Knight of the Duke Alfirons part, to signify to the Souldan, that
all that he desired on behalf of his Master, and the rest of the Kings and
Princes, should be performed to his own satisfaction; which Message being
delivered to the Souldan, greatly contented him.

CHAP. VI.
How Don Gorion arriving at the City of Bollera, delivered his Message to Don
Brianel, and how the Princesses Persiana and Aurora left the City to travel to
the Camp.



DOn Gorion and those who went in his company, made so much haste, that in a
short time they arrived at the City of Bollera, where they were soon admitted
to enter, and arriving at the Palace were quickly permitted to come into the
presence of Don Brianel, who in the absence of the Duke was Governor of the
City. Don Gorion then in short gave an Account to Don Brianel of the success of
the War, and how at last they had received a Letter from the Souldan, wherein
he signified his desire of Peace, and that there was nothing wanting for the
consummation thereof, but the presence of the Princess Persiana.

Don Brianel was very well satisfied with this Message, and went immediately to
the two Princesses to certify them thereof; which when they heard, they were
both very well contented: the Princess Persiana, in that her mind was wholly
accomplished; and the Princess Aurora, in that she now hoped ere long to be
fully settled in her Kingdom: wherefore they both prepared themselves to depart
the next morning, and accordingly commanded their Damsels to get all things
ready.

Don Brianel this evening sought for an opportunity to discourse with his Lady
the Princess Aurora, and thereupon coming into her Lodging to know what
Commands she would give him against the next day, he found her all alone,
wherefore resolving not to let stip this opportunity, he began to her as
follows.

Madam, It is now many months since I had the happiness first to see you, ever
since which time I have had a desire to serve you, and my actions in hazarding
my life for the recovering of your Kingdom, has given you some testimony
thereof: And Madam, were I capable of Reducing all the Kingdoms in the world to
my Obedience, I should willingly surrender them with my self, to be disposed of
by you; therefore Dear Madam, since my love is so great, I beseech you
vouchsafe me yours, whereby I may be eternally blessed.


When he had finished this Speech, fetching a great sigh, he held his peace:
and she who as earnestly loved him as he did her, replied to him: Sir Knight, I
have understood your love to me, and therefore have formerly reposed so much
trust to you, as I never did to any other; for to you alone I committed the
disposal of my Kingdom, and for the good you did me there, I heartily thank
you. Assure your self that so soon as I shall be peaceably settled therein, I
shall dispose my Affairs in such order, that I shall do all things to your
content and liking: and assure your self, that none other living shall enjoy my
person and kingdom but your self.




At the ending of this Speeth, she blushed extremely that she had been so free
in discovering the thoughts of her heart: but Don Brianel was extremely
satisfied herewith, and not being able to speak with the excess of joy that he
was in, he fell on his knees, and straightly embracing her legs, he very
amorously kissed her fair hands, and there at her desire he arose and gave her
many amorous kisses and kind embraces, promising for ever to be her true
Knight: and she promised no less to him, that she would not fail to be always
his, and in token of her love, she gave him a Scarf embroidered with Gold,
where in Letters of Gold was her Name; which he thankfully received, and
promised never to leave off wearing the same, till he had the free enjoyment of
her person in marriage. And hereupon they brake off their friendly and amorous
Discourse, taking a farewell of each other, he returning to put all things in
readiness for the next days Expedition and she retiring her self into her
Closet, to contemplate what she had done.

Thus every body employed themselves in somewhat for the next days Journey,
till it was time to go to rest: but the two Lovers Don Brianel and Aurora could
sleep but little that night for the content they had received in the evenings
Conference, and therefore they were the first that did rise, by whose example
all the rest soon rise and made themselves ready. Don Gorion and Don Brianel
summoned the Knights and Magistrates of the City together, to whom they
declared the will of their (...) Alfiron. And leaving a sufficient Guard in the
City, (...) went to the Palace, where they found the Princesses (...) diness
to depart. Charriots being brought for them, they ^ly mounted therein, and so
accompanied with several Da^^^ and a Guard of ten thousand Knights, they
departed from the City, and took the right way for Persepolis.

CHAP. VII.
How Don Brianel and Don Gorion arrived at the Camp of the Emperor of Greece,
and how the Duke Alfiron and the Princess Persiana presented themselves before
the Souldan.



WIth much joy and pleasure traveled this company, especially the Ladies, the
one being in company of her most beloved Lord, and the other going to her
loving Husband: but the joy of Don Brianel was extraordinary, for the favors he
had received at the hands of the Princess, and as a testimony of his joy he
wore the Scarf which she had given him on his arm.

Thus traveled they with much content, till at length they met some of the
Knights of the Emperors Army, who were come on purpose to meet them: and then
some were sent back to signify to the Emperor and the rest of the Princes, the
Approach of those Princesses; which they no sooner understood, but they went
out to meet them. Two leagues from the Camp they were met by the Emperor, Don
Bellianis, the Duke Alfiron, the Kings of Armenia and Tessifanty, and all those
other most Renowned Princes and States, who coming near them, dismounted from
their horses to salute them. The Princesses seeing that, descended from their
Chariots and kindly received them: Then two stately Palfreys were brought
whereon the two Princesses were mounted, and Don Bellianis took hold of the
Reins of the Princess Aurora's Palfrey, and the Emperor himself did the same
for Persiana.

Don Bellianis during the remainder of their Journey, asked the Princess Aurora
whether she had received any content in the company of Don Brianel? For, says
he, I see by his countenance that he is very much pleased, and he shows very
gloriously with the Favor that he has tied to his arm, and therefore I desire
to know what Mistress he has gotten since our departure. To which Discourse
the Princess replied: Sir Knight, the content that I have received in his
company cannot choose but be much, in respect of the service that he has
already done me, in helping to restore me to my Kingdom, and therefore in token
of my gratitude, I have given him that Scarf as a small Token of my Favor to
him.

In such like communication spent they their time, till they arrived at the
Camp, where they alighted and were received with great Joy, signified by the
s^und of Drums, Trumpets, and Clarions: The Princesses Persiana and Aurora were
conducted to a Tent for that purpose provided, where they both lodged together:
the Duke Alfiron being contented not to lie with his beloved Princess, till she
should be given him by her Father, which he hoped would be done the next
morning. Night being come, every one repaired to their several Lodgings, and
there took their ordinary repose, only Don Bellianis was much troubled that he
was still kept there, and hindered from visiting his Princess Florisbella, and
besides he knew not how to go to her, for his Father expected upon the
Conclusion of the Peace, that he would return with him to Constantinople.

In these meditations he spent most part of the night, and when morning came he
arose and dispatched a Messenger into the City, to certify the Souldan of his
Daughters Arrival, and to know his pleasure what should be done. To which the
Souldan returned answer, That he expected her and the Duke to come to his
presence that day, in company of what other Knights they pleased.

The Duke and Princess being certified hereof, prepared themselves for that
purpose, and about Noon, only accompanied with the Princess Aurora, Don
Bellianis, and Don Brianel, they entered the City, and came into the presence of
the Souldan, who was seated on a Throne, and his great Lords about him. The
Princess Persiana and the Duke humbled themselves on their knees, and she
humbly desired her Father to forgive her rashness, for it was only true love
that caused her to do the same, and promised him that if he would deign to
pardon that great fault, she would in all things continue his obedient Daughter
during life, and concluding her Speech, she shed many tears: To which the
Souldan replied, That her disobedience to his Commands, had occasioned the loss
of the lives of many of his Subjects, and that therefore she might expect the
Gods to be continually angered with all her undertakings; but as for his part,
seeing she had made so free a Confession of her fault, he did freely forgive
her, and then arising from his Throne, he came down and took her by the hand,
and raised her from the ground, and then caused the Duke Alfiron to arise, to
whom he gave her, wishing the Gods to bless them.

Thus this being done to the content of all that were present, the Souldan
commanded the Tables to be covered, and desired the strangers to sit down to
Dinner, promising in the Afternoon to give them satisfaction in order to a
general Peace.

CHAP. VIII.
How the Wars were ended between the Souldan and the Emperor, and a Peace
concluded for ten years.

NO sooner was Dinner ended, but the Souldan entering into his Council Chamber,
sent for Don Bellianis and Don Brianel, and told them, that since he was
satisfied in his Daughters Marriage, which had been the greatest cause of these
Wars, it should be at their own dispose whether they would have Peace or War.

To which Don Bellianis replied, That his coming thither was for no other end
but to assist the Princess Aurora in recovering the Kingdom of Antioch from the
hands of Don Gallaneo, who had wrongfully possessed himself of the same, as it
could not be unknown to the Souldan: and that now Don Gallaneo being dead, as
also the King who had lately usurped the same, and all her Subjects being
desirous to come under her obedience, he humbly desired that His Highness would
do her that justice, as to let her peaceably enjoy the same.

The Souldan having understood formerly of the Affairs of that Kingdom, and
that it was now in the possession of her Deputies, granted the Request of Don
Bellianis, on condition that She and her Heirs would for the future pay the
accustomed Tribute, the which she on her part promised to perform. The next
thing that was propounded, was Peace between the Emperor and the Souldan, which
the Souldan consented to hold firmly for ten years. And to conclude all,
promised a free Pardon to the Kings of Armenia and Tessifanty, who were his
Tributaries. Whereupon Don Bellianis and Don Brianel departed from the Souldan
to carry this News to the Camp, where the Chief being assembled joyfully
received the News, and for that night made continual Bone-fires, so that both
in the City and Camp it was all night as light as day.

The next morning early a Messenger arrived in the Camp, to give an Invitation
to the Emperor and the rest of those great Lords, to come into the City to dine
with the Souldan: which Invitation was accepted of, and accordingly about
Eleven of the Clock they all set forwards and so entered the City, being
attended with great Ceremonies and Pomp by many of the Souldans Knights. As
soon as they came near the Palace, the Souldan had notice thereof and came to
receive them, and although till now they had been the greatest enemies in all
the world, yet the Souldan and the Emperor embraced one another with much
freedom and amity: And thus the Souldan received all the rest of the principal
Knights, and so conducted them into the Great Hall of the Palace, where all
things were provided for Dinner in most sumptuous manner: which being ended,
the Souldan and Emperor ratified and confirmed the Peace which had been before
concluded on: And to signify his love to Duke Alfiron, he then gave unto him
the Kingdom of Shyraz, which was a place under his subjection and belonged to
his Empire, and then the Duke Alfiron and the Princess Persiana his wife were
immediately owned by all for King and Queen of Shyraz: Nothing was now wanting
in the Court of Persia to give it its full luster, but the presence of the
Prince Perianeo, whose absence much discontented the Souldan.

All things being thus fortunately concluded, the Souldan disbanded his Army,
and the Emperor sent his away by Sea, under the command of Sabian of Trebanto,
who accordingly embarked himself, and within ten days departed: there was
nothing now wanting, but to put the two Princesses in possession of their
Kingdoms, the Princess Aurora into her Kingdom of Antioch, and the Princess
Persiana and her husband into possession of the Kingdom of Shyraz, for which
purpose he writ Letters to the present Governor to give them possession
thereof; the Princess Aurora desired the company of some Knights to go with
her; the first that offered his service was Don Brianel, and then Don Clarineo
of Spain, and Don Lucidamore of Thessaly, because they had formerly been there,
desired to attend her, and so did Contumeliano Prince of Phenicia, and
Florispiano of Swevia his Cousin, these all chose to attend the Princess
Aurora: On the other side Don Bellianis desired his Father to permit him to
attend the Princess Persiana and her Husband to Shyraz, and he chose rather to
go thither, because it was nearest to Babylon, where his beloved Princess did
remain, and to which place he intended to go. His Father intending to carry him
home with him, hardly consented to this separation, but at length at the
entreaty of the Princess and her Husband, he was content, provided his Son
engaged to return home again in six months, which he consented to do. They
that accompanied the Princess besides, were the Kings of Armenia and
Tessifanty, so that there was not any left to accompany the Emperor home, but
Arsileo Prince of Hungary, and Don Gorino was sent back to the City of Bollera,
to signify the conclusion of the Peace. Thus all were appointed to travel,
only Boraldo, Don Fermosel, and Crisalaneo who stayed with the Souldan. Things
being thus concluded, every person after they had taken leave of the Souldan,
within two days after departed.

CHAP. IX.
How the Princess Aurora and Don Brianel, with the rest of their Company,
arrived at Antioch, and what happened to them there.

SO long traveled the Princess Aurora and the Princes and Knights that
accompanied her, that at last they arrived in the Kingdom of Antioch, without
happening on any considerable Adventure: and when they were come near the City,
Damartino the Governor, and Count Garino, with several others of the Nobility,
being advertised of their coming, went out to meet them. So soon as they
approached near to the Princess, they dismounted from their horses, and on
their knees bid her welcome: but she likewise dismounted, and entered a Tent
that was prepared and set up for that purpose, where she permitted her hands to
be kissed by several of the Nobility. Great thanks was returned to Don Brianel
and his Companions, not only for the good they had done them in recovering the
Kingdom, and in that restoring their Liberties which were formerly lost by the
usurpation of the late Tyrants, but also for their making them so happy in the
sight of their dear Princess, whom they had now brought home to them. After a
short repast which was provided in the Tent was ended, they all mounted again
with a resolution to enter the City: the place where they had stayed was a
league from the City, yet all the fields and places during their passage was
beset with multitudes of people, who cried with continual noise, The Gods
preserve our Royal Queen Aurora. Being thus accompanied, they entered the City,
and in good order arrived at the Palace, where by reason it was night, the
Princess dismissed the multitude with thanks, and so every one being much
wearied with this days journey, went to take their ordinary repose. The next
day they were no sooner up, but the cry continued, and great was the
acclamations that were made by the multitude.

That which the Queen took first into her consideration, was the ordering of
her household, and the first Officer she made was the Controller thereof, which
Office she gave to Don Brianel, intending ere long to make him Controller of
her person. This joy continued many days, and many were the Iousts and
Tournaments that were exercised to delight the queen, in which exercise the
Knights that accompanied her thither, still bore away the prize, however the
Count Gariano demeaned himself like a valliant and hardy knight, maintaining
the Iousts for one day against all Knights-adventurers, in which time he
dismounted above twenty Knights.

The Queen understanding one day that Don Clarineo, and Don Lucidamore, Don
Contumeliano, and Fliorispiano, intended to leave her Court, and to go seek out
adventures else where, resolved before their departure to consummate her
marriage with Don Brianel, to whom she communicated the matter, and he had
demeaned himself so courteously, that he questioned not but that it would be to
the general satisfaction of her Nobility, and therefore knowing the mind of
the Princess, he discovered it to Damartino, and Gariano, and several others of
the Nobility, and the next day the Queen being in Counsel, one of her Nobility
propounded a husband to her, which proposition was no sooner made, but the
general debate of the Counsel was of that matter, and after several
propositions, Don Brianel was by several of his friends propounded, and indeed
for the restoration of the Princess, was so far had into consideration, that he
was by common consent propounded for a fit Husband for their Queen; who no
sooner had the proposition made her, but she willingly assented thereto, and
presently orders were given for the solemnization of the Marriage, which was
intended to be kept within a fortnight after. This news gave great satisfaction
and content to Don Clarineo, and Don Lucidamore, that their Cousin had so great
good fortune, to be wedded to so virtuous a Princess, and therefore
notwithstanding their former resolutions to depart, they and Contumeliano and
Fliorispiano resolved to stay, and assist at the Solemnization of those
Ceremonies, where we will leave them in great content, to treat of other
matters.

CHAP. X.
How the Princes Perianeo of Persia, and Gramalis of Thrace, were carried into
the Desert of Death, and of that which happened to them there.

THe Sage Fristone made such haste thorough the air with the wounded bodies of
Perianeo and Gramalis, that in short time they arrived at the end of their
journey, where being arrived, the Sage Fristone caused them (who were all this
while in a Trance) to be taken out of the Chariot, and placed in beds in two
several Rooms, and then commanded several Damsels to attend the end of their
fainting, which they accordingly did: the Prince Perianeo was the first that
came to himself, when opening his eyes and looking about him, he fetched a
great groan, the Damsel who were left to attend him, hearing thereof, presently
came to him, and seeing his eyes open, they presently gave him something to
drink out of a Vial, which he took, and then with a weak voice asked them in
what place he was? They desired him to rest satisfied for the present, and he
should know more of that hereafter, and in the mean time they desired him to
permit them to dress his wounds, to which he consented, and they presently
being very skilful in that mystery, applied such Remedies that they assured him
that in few days he should be able to walk about his Chamber; and they further
desired him for the present to dispose himself for rest, which he did
accordingly, and they departed to inform the Sage Fristone thereof, who was
marvellously well satisfied in what they had done.

Gramalis continued in his swooning fit twelve hours longer then Perianeo, but
so soon as he had recovered any sense, he cried out, By the Gods I will soon be
revenged of this blow, and therewith endeavored to rise from his bed, but could
not through loss of blood, but fell down again: whereupon they who were left to
attend him, gave him a Cordial, and then dressed his wounds without any
speaking to him. Perianeo after he had taken a sleep of about six hours awaked,
and seeing no body near him, he drew one of the Curtains of his bed, and
perceived a Candle, by the light of which he deemed that he was in a large
Chamber all hung with black, and that the Bed and Furniture was all of black,
and that there was no other light in the Room, but what that one Candle
afforded, wherefore finding his wounds to be b^und up, and remembering that he
had had some company, endeavored to arise, but through faintness could not;
then he called to mind the Battle in which he was lately engaged, and
remembered that he had well nigh overcome his adversary, but remembered nothing
of the two last blows that he had received which had brought him into this
condition. Thus lay he musing and wondering with himself what place he was in,
sometime believing all that he saw to be only fancy, and another while
supposing himself to be in his Fathers Court laid out for dead in some Chamber
there: and this he was persuaded to by reason of the blackness of every thing
about him.

At length two Damsels entered the Room at a door placed in a corner thereof,
they were both habited in black, the one carried a Candle in her hand, and the
other followed her with a Box wherein were Ointments and Plasters: coming to
the Bedside they found him awake, and in pretty good condition. He seeing them
continue their silence, began thus to them: Ladies, I have received one
kindness from you already, for which I render you thanks, and desire you to
bind me to you for another, which is, that you will tell me in what place I
am, and how I came hither

The Ladies hearing him speak with so great moderation, gave him this Answer:
Sir Knight, how you came hither we know not, but yesterday you were brought in
hither by the Lord of this place, whose name is Fristone, and delivered to our
keeping, telling us that we must apply these Medicines to your wounds, showing
us likewise that you were such a person as was very well able to requite what
kindness we should afford you: As for the name of this place we cannot tell
you, for it is not long since we were brought hither by an adventure, of which
we shall tell you more hereafter.

Thus after they had ended their discourse, they desired him to permit them to
search his wounds, which he consented to, and they, after they had applied
remedies to his wounds, departed, leaving him somewhat better satisfied than he
was.

Thus these two Knights continued in this place several days, till at length
they were so well recovered of their wounds, that they could walk about their
Chambers. All this while was Fristone in his study, turning over many Books to
find out what should be the fortune of the Prince Perianeo, and finding that
when ever he should meet with Don Bellianis, his life would be much endangered:
and well knowing that the Prince would endeavor to go to Babylon, if he were
out of his possession, and that there he would meet with Don Bellianis, he
res^lved to prevent that Meeting: wherefore one day as Perianeo was walking in
his Chamber, the sage Fristone entered to him, and told him that he was very
glad of his so sudden amendment in his health, to which Perianeo knowing him,
replied:

Reverend Father, many have been the obligations wherein you have bound your
poor Knight, but this last has been the most considerable, in that you have
given help and assistance to me when I was not capable of helping my self: and
good father, I have now but one request to you which I pray you to grant me,
which is that you will tell me by what adventure I came hither, and what was
the issue of the Combat.

To which discourse Fristone thus answered, Sir Knight, it was not of a long
time unknown to me of the Battle that you and your friends should undertake
against the Emperor of Greece, his son, and friends, and of the danger that you
should undergo therein, which I endeavored to prevent by my Art, but your enemy
Don Bellianis by reason of a Sword and Armor which he has lately won, cannot
be hindered from the performance of any adventure, notwithstanding all the art
of incantations that I can use, wherefore finding it in vain to attempt any
thing by art to hurt him, I therefore applied my self to help you when there
should be occasion, and understanding that your life, and that of two of your
friends would be in great danger, and knowing that by my art I should be able
to help your self and one other of your friends, I therefore provided me a
Chariot, in which I mounted the air at such time as you and your friends were
entered the Combat, and arrived at the place of your fight, just as it had like
to have been unfortunately finished; for Don Bellianis was just then about to
deprive you of your precious life, and then he recounted to him, how he found
him in the field in a Trance, and how that Gramalis of Thrace, and Caroliano
being in as desperate a condition as himself, he chose Gramalis and left the
other, and brought both himself and Gramalis to that his habitation, where he
had ordered the matter so well, that they were in pretty good condition.

Perianeo much wondering at this adventure, said: But good father, how will the
Souldan my Father be satisfied with my condition? Then Fristone told him of the
Pillar he left there, and the inscription thereon, which had given satisfaction
to him, and therefore advised him to rest contented; and so taking him by the
hand he led him out of that Chamber into another adjoining, which was as dark
as his own, and there they found Gramalis of Thrace walking about: Perianeo was
not so much amazed to see him, as Gramalis was surprised to see the Prince
enter his Chamber, for he knew not in the least where he was; for his wounds
being somewhat more desperate then Perianeo's, Fristone had commanded those
that attended him, not to use any discourse with him, lest that should
prejudice his health. They being thus met, kindly saluted each other, and then
Perianeo recounted to Gramalis the manner how they were brought thither, the
danger they had been in, and the care of which Fristone had taken of their
healths, for which they both kindly returned him thanks. Thus these two friends
being together, Fristone left them in loving communication, and went to take
order about his other affairs.

They had not long walked together, but the two Damsels that had attended them
in their sickness, came in to them, and brought with them several Comfits and
preserved Fruits and Wines, wherewith they covered a Table and caused the two
Knights to sit down to ear, which they did, and then the Table being removed,
Perianeo taking one of the Damsels by the hand, led her to the Bedside where
he thus spoke to her.

Lady, my condition has been so low of late, that I have been very much
obliged to your care and pains, that I am now in so good a plight, for which
your great care I render you all humble and hearty thanks, assuring you that
when ever you have occasion to use me, you shall find that there shall be
nothing so difficult, but I will be ready to undertake it with exceeding great
pleasure, so that I may serve you therein, and therefore Lady I beseech you
inform me of your condition, and the place where I now remain. The Damsel
perceiving that he had concluded, thus answered him: Sir Knight, I humbly thank
you for your acceptance of my mean and weak endeavors, and am glad that any
thing that I can do will give you any pleasure, and to the end that I may
satisfy your desires, know Sir, that I belong to an honorable Princess called
Merediana sole daughter and heir to the valiant King Gorgiana of Sotia, who
living at home with her father, was taken out of her Court one day by the Sage
Fristone, who desired her father to spare her, to put an end to an Adventure
that could not be finished without her presence: her father well knowing the
Sage Fristone to be his friend, consented to her departure, and so she taking
six of her Damsels with her, whereof I and my companion are two, we traveled
toward Babylon, where when we arrived, the sage Fristone told us that his
design was to get the beauteous Princess Florisbella into his custody, whereby
he might pleasure a Knight his very good friend; which adventure he had
accomplished, but that there arrived at that instant a Knight armed with a rich
armor, beset with Basilisks, who hindered our attempt: then told she the Prince
the whole manner of his adventure, as it is at large set down in the 42 Chapter
of the first part of this History, and then she thus proceeded: We being thus
hindered from finishing this adventure, were immediately carried through the air
till we arrived at an Island, where when we came down, we found it to be the
most pleasant place in the whole world, for it was adorned with a most
delightsome Palace, and all manner of Gardens and Walks so delicious, that we
having been there above six months, are not sensible of my inclemency in the
air, but it still continues as pleasant if it were the month of May, and it is
now about a fortnight since the sage Fristone coming thither, requested our
Mistress to give us leave to go with him for a few days, promising that she
should receive much satisfaction in our journey, and that we should speedily
return: and as for the place where now we are, we know other of it but that it
is called the Desert of Death, and indeed it may properly enough be termed so,
for I never was in any place so dolesome and melancholy as this is, there
being no other light coming into this place but what a candle produeth, and the
fields, which are but few, look as if no Grass nor any other Herb had ever
grown there, and there are no trees but Yew grow here. This Sir Knight, is all
that I can tell you of this adventure.

Gramalis of Thrace had likewise been attentive to this discourse, and they did
both much marvel at the strangeness of the Damsels recital, but Perianeo asked
the Damsel how far off it was to that pleasant Island where her Lady remained,
and what company was with her? To which she answered, That it could not be very
far to that Island, for they were but three hours in coming from thence, and
that their Princess was only accompanied with a Lady named Altea, who they
found there, and which was very fair and beautiful, and the four Giants who
kept the Palace as a guard, besides the Damsels who waited on the two Ladies,
and two old women who provided all manner of provision Thus these two Damsels
having finished their discourse, they took their leaves of the two Knights and
departed.

CHAP. XI.
How the two Princes Perianeo of Persia, and Gramalis of Thrace, being
thoroughly cured of their wounds, and walking in the Desert of Death, came to
the water side, and finding a Barque went into her, which carried them
immediately to the Pleasant Island, and of that which happened to them there.

THese two Knights being thus cured of their wounds, and being desirous to
depart, besought the sage Fristone to let them have their Armor, and furnish
them with Horses that they might be gone: but he knowing the danger that
Perianeo would undergo if he went away, resolved to prevent it, and therefore
would not consent, telling them that in short time an Adventure would happen
wherein they would, if they performed it, reap great benefit and content. This
was all the satisfaction they could receive from him, wherefore they getting
them Swords and Hunting-Iavelins, spent their time in that Desert in hunting
the wild Boar, and such like exercises. One day as they were hunting together,
they went so far in pursuit of a Bear, that they came to the waterside, and
presently the beast took the water and quickly swam out of their sight; at
which they being much troubled, sought for a Boat or some Barque to follow
their Game, when suddenly looking about them, they espied a small Barque coming
toward them; which being come on shore, they stepped into it, and looking
about for Oars, they were immediately carried from land, and carried a great
way into the Sea, but on an instant the Sun shined so bright, and the waters
were as calm, and the air so sereen and clear, that they much wondered, being
come from a place that was dismal and cold. Thus the Barque went forwards
without either Sail or Oars till in the end they discovered Land, and saw that
the Barque made speed thither; at which they rested contented, and in short
time after they went ashore, not knowing where they were, but going to take
hold of the Barque to fasten it to somewhat against they should have occasion
to use it, it suddenly vanishe, at which they were much troubled: thus seeing
there was no way to go back, they were resolved to go forwards, and only armed
with their Swords and Spears they set forwards: they traveled two hours in the
pleasantest walks and fields in the world, without meeting with any thing, and
hearing no noise only the continual mellody of the Birds gave them singular
contentment, at length they espied a great Castle situated in a pleasant
meadow, and encompassed with all manner of fruit trees, upon one of those trees
there was a tablet whereon was inscribed:

If thou art so valiant as to undertake the entrance into this Castle, blow
this horn, and prepare thy self to be received.



This Inscription they had no sooner read, but they resolved to try the
adventure, and therefore they cast lots who should first begin: The lot sell
upon Gramalis, and therefore Perianeo going somewhat out of the way, left
Gramalis to undertake the adventure. He had no sooner blown the horn which hung
by the Tablet, but two gates opened, and there issued out from thence a huge
and monstrous Giant, armed at all points, with a great Iron Mace in his hand,
who seeing the Knight before him, said: Presumptuous villain, how dare thou
unarmed undertake so great an enterprise, as to disturb the quiet of this place?

To which Gramalis answered, Trouble not thy self at my being unarmed, but if I
must combat thee before I gain my entrance, prepare thy self to the Battle, and
defend thy self: at which words the Giant lifted up the Mace, and came forward
thinking with one blow to end the Battle, but Gramalis quickly avoiding the
stroke of the Mace with his Hunting-spear, wounded the Giant in the Thigh, and
at the next stroke gave him so great a blow on the arm, that he could not draw
out his spear, but was forced to leave it sticking there: whilst the Giant drew
the Spear from his arm, Don Gramalis drew his Sword, and went to finish the
combat: but the enraged Giant did hit the Knight so great a blow on the
shoulder, that he sorely bruised him, whereat Gramalis being greatly enraged,
gave the Giant so great a blow on the other arm, that he let fall his Mace and
roared like a Bull, and with the quantity of blood he lost, fell down: at which
a Dwarf that was placed on the top of the Tower, blew a horn, and immediately
another Giant came forth, more deformed and horrible then the first, who
resolved to revenge the wrong of his fellow and therefore soon made up to
Gramalis and assaulted him most fiercely, giving him many wounds, so that in
the end Gramalis through the want of blood, and the pain he felt in his side,
fainted and fell down. At which the Giant went forwards to kill him, but
Perianeo soon prevented him, assaulting him in such mavelous manner, that he
made him keep company with his fellow on the ground; at which the Dwarf once
more sounded his horn, and then there issued two Giants of a very great size,
who carried great Maces on their shoulders, and cutting Faulchions at their
sides, and without any discourse they both fell upon the Prince, and gave him
many weighty blows, which he received on his Spear; but in the end that being
broken he drew his sword, and valiantly defended himself, still avoiding their
blows, and dammaging his adversaries, so that they seeing that they only beat
the air, or the ground, were much enraged and came near to him to destroy him,
but he nimbly slepping within them, made them loss their blows, and he hit one
of them on the leg so great a blow, that he made a great wound, and the Giant
not being able to stand, fell on the earth, whereupon the other Giant his
companion seeing that if he continued that manner of fighting, he should remain
vanquished as well as his companions, he threw away his Mace, and ran with
great eagerness on the Knight, thinking to catch him in his arms, and there to
squeeze him in pieces: but he being very strong, sorely wounded the Giant
before he got within him, and then wrestled so with him, that they both fell to
the earth, the Giant holding Perianeo close in his arms; but he remembering
that he had a dagger in his pocket, quickly drew the same and stabbed him in
three or four places in such manner, that he let go his hold, whereat Perianeo
got on his feet, though sorely wounded, and approached to the Gates of the
Castle, which being open he entered, and walking thorough a great Hall he went
into a Parlor, the most beautiful in the world, where he saw two Ladies who
were placed above the rest, and about twelve Damsels attending on them, to whom
he said:

Divine Beauties, for no less can I esteem of you, Providence having brought me
on shore on this land, I made hold, arriving at this Castle to enter therein,
but I was hindered by several whom I suppose were left to guard the same, whom I
have so ordered in combat, that I remain the victor, and therefore I make bold
to approach your presence, humbly craving your pardon, and desiring to know of
you whether there be any thing further to be done whereby I may do you any
service, and whither what I have already done be not prejudicial to you.

To which speech one of the Ladies replied, That indeed the Giants were placed
there as Guardians of that place, but since by his invincible valor they were
subdued, he was as welcome as themselves, and all things there was free to his
disposal: at which speech he rested satisfied, only he desired that he wounded
might be taken care of, and more especially a Knight who was wounded, and a
friend of his: At which discourse several of the Damsels went out with him,
where they found the Giants and the Knight still lying on the ground, wherefore
he helped to convey them to Beds, and the Damsels applied such Plasters and
Medicines to their wounds, that in short time they were cured of the same.

Being cured, the Giants and Knights remained loving friends, resolving to
assist each other, and the Knights had no desire to go from that place, for the
Ladies whom they saw were the two Princesses Meridiana and Altea, who took very
great good liking to the two Knights Perianeo and Gramalis, who loved them as
well, so that in the end their friendship arrived to that height, that they
resolved never to leave one another all days of their lives: and the Prince
Perianeo was so amorous of the Princess Meridiana, that he quite forget the
Princess Florisbella, and she no less loved him, so that at length he enjoyed
the Princess as fully as if she had been his Wife, and she permitted him to
crop that Maiden-flower, and enter that Virgin Zone, which had cost the lives
of many valorous Knights.

On the other side Gramalis of Thrace and the Princess Altea loved each other
with as sond an affection, and she permitted him to be Lord of her body, and to
take such fruit from thence as pleased him best.

Thus these two Ladies and Knights lived together in all manner of delight, and
the two Knights plied themselves so well in their Nocturnal Embraces, that both
the Princesses were with Child, which was great joy and content to them all:
in which pleasure we shall leave them, and return to give you an account of
other Adventures.

CHAP. XII.
How the Princess Persiana and her Husband Duke Alfiron were conducted to
Shyraz by Don Bellianis of Greece, and the Kings of Armenia and Tessifanty,
where by the way they met with an Adventure.



THus having left these two Princes and Ladies in all content and pleasure, let
us return to the Princess Persiana and the Company that attended on her, who
traveled many days without happening on any Adventure: at length Don Bellianis
being very pensive, traveled one day before the rest of the company, and being
very melancholy for the thought of his dear Mistress the Princess Florisbella,
on a sudden he heard a voice call to him, saying, Sir Knight, I beseech you
tell me where is the next City, that I may go quickly to it and procure some
aid to some persons of great quality that stand in need of help. Don Bellianis
giving attention to this discourse, and seeing it was a Lady that spoke to him,
he thus replied: Fair Lady, if you be not in extreme great haste, I beseech you
relate to me the occasion of your travel, it is possible that I may furnish you
with that assistance you expect. Ah Sir Knight, replied the Lady, it is not in
the power of any one particular Knight to effect that which must be done;
therefore good Sir either answer me the question, or permit me to go forwards.
Lady, said Don Bellianis, not far from hence there is much company coming who
will be with us presently, therefore I pray relate to me your business while
they come to us, and then I shall furnish you with such help as shall be
needful. The Lady understanding that he spoke nothing but reason, thus replied:
Know then, Sir Knight, that I belong to the virtuous Princess Mattarosa,
Daughter to the King of Numidia, and Niece to the Souldan of Babylon: this
Princess has for many years lived at the Court of the Souldan her Uncle, in
the company of the Princess Florisbella her Cousin, but of late her Father
being grown old, and desirous to dispose of her in marriage before he died,
sent her Brother Baltasano to the Court of the Souldan to bring his Sister to
him: Baltasano after he had continued some time in the Court of the Souldan,
desired leave to depart with his Sister to her Father that expected them; to
which it was a long time ere he could get the Souldans consent, in regard of
the great love that has been between her and his daughter Florisbella. About
two months since there was great Iousts and Tournaments held at the Souldans
Court in honor of his Coronation Day: at which time many strange Knights and
Giants repaired thither to do their utmost devoirs, amongst the rest that came,
there was one Giant called Altifer the Proud, Lord of an Island in the Sea, and
his two Brothers, and forty Knights. This Giant beholding my Mistress the
Princess Mattarosa, began to affect her, and performed some things for her
honor, hoping thereby to get her good will: but she who always hated him, as
well for the deformity of his mind as body, would by no means consent to come
into his company, much less to receive him as a Servant, and he having desired
her of her Uncle the Souldan, and her Brother, who both refused him, went away
with all his company in much discontent, resolving to put in practice some
treasonable action that he might obtain her.

Our Princess and her Brother, who suspected no such treason, some time after
he was gone, having taken leave of the Souldan and the Prindess Florisbella,
departed in the company of twenty Knights for their Guard: but we had not
traveled above two days when this Traitor Altifer with all his company set
upon us, slew many of our Knights, and took the Princess and her Brother
prisoners. I seeing that they were taken, fled from them, and have followed
them these three days to see still where they lodged at night, and endeavoring
to find some help to relieve them, and Sir Knight, this is the last day before
they will embarque themselves for the Island whereof he is Chief, and then all
the means that I can use, will be ineffectual for their Release. This Sir
Knight, is the substance of my Message, and therefore pray fail not to give me
the best directions you can.

Don Bellianis having heard this Discourse, and considering that in relieving
the Princess Mattarosa, he should do his Princess her Cousin a considerable
service, resolved to undertake it, and therefore the Company being now come up
to him, he went to the Princess Persiana and her Husband, and recounted to them
the Damsels discourse, and told them that he must beg leave of them to go and
relieve the Princess and her Brother, promising them to return with all speed
possible, as soon as he had effected his Enterprise.

They not only consented to his departure, but also gave him leave to take
what company of Knights he desired: but he choosing only twenty of the most
hardy, left the rest to conduct them to Shyraz, and so he took his leave and
departed with the Damsel, who seeing her Journey turn to so good account, was
very thankful, and rode on apace to assist her Princess.

CHAP. XIII.
How Don Bellianis went with the Damsel of the Princess Mattarosa, to relieve
her out of the hands of the Giant Altifer and his Company: And how he and his
Company overcame the Giant and his two Brethren and Company, and Released the
Princess and her Brother Baltasano: And how she knew him to be the Knight of
the Golden Image, and how she and her Brother left him, to depart toward
Babylon.



IT was yet but early in the morning when Don Bellianis and his Company parted,
and therefore we will leave them in their Journey toward Shyraz, to tell you
what befell Don Bellianis, who traveled so long with the Damsel that at last
they arrived in sight of a Castle seated on a Rock, which when the Damsel
espied, she said, Sir Knight, this is the Castle where the Giants and the other
company lodged this night, and I believe they are not as yet come out of it,
because he that is Lord of this Castle is of kindred to the Giant Altifer, and
therefore I pray let us attend herefor their coming forth. Don Bellianis
therefore advising with himself, left two of his knights to attend there,
whilst he and the rest traveled on the way the Giants were to take, and there
they hid themselves in a thicket of Trees.

It was not fully an hour before the two Knights came galloping a main to Don
Bellianis, informing him that the Giants and their company were come out of the
Castle, and were coming thither-wards with the prisoners. The Prince Baltasano
they tied on a horse with his hands behind him, and so they did to about
twelve Knights more that were prisoners, and the Princess Mattarosa and several
of her Damsels, were carried before certain Knights on horseback, and did make
great lamentation.

The Knights did likewise advise Don Bellianis not to set on the Giants and
their company as yet, for that the Giant of the Castle where they lay was come
out with them, with above twenty Knights to bear them company a little way, and
therefore it was best to forbear setting on them till they were gone: To this
advise Don Bellianis could hardly be persuaded, so earnest was his desire to do
some signal Service for his Lady the Princess Florisbella; but in the end he
was overruled by the Damsel, and promised to attend their parting for an hour
or two, and if they did not by that time leave one another, that he would set
upon them all. And in this resolution he marched forwards, commanding the two
Knights to go back and give him notice of what should happen, which was done
aecordingly. Thus did Don Bellianis march on for one hour in great expectation,
till at length the two Knights came to him to inform him that now was the time,
for the Giants kinsman was departed, and there was not above thirty five
Knights and three Giants, and ten of the Knights were employed in guarding of
the prisoners that were with them.

Never was Don Bellianis so well pleased in all his life as he was at this
instant, and therefore commanding all his Knights to be in a readiness, he
turned back his horse, and went to meet the Giants and their Company. Don
Bellianis had not rid far before he met with them, the two Giants brothers to
Altifer, riding before the rest on great Horses, and with Iron Maces hanging at
their Sadle-bows. Our Knights went straight up to them, and some of the
Princesses Damsels making a lamentation, Don Bellianis enquired what was the
cause why they forced Ladies to go with them against their wills? To which one
of the Giants proudly answered, It were best for you, Sir Knight, to keep on
your way, and not to meddle with the affairs of others, not being called
thereto. To which he answered, That he and all other Knights were bound to
enquire into the affairs of distressed Ladies, and to relieve them to their
power Whereupon one of the Giants laid hold on his Mace, thinking to dash him
to pieces, but he turning his horse on one side, couched his lance and run so
fiercely on the other Giant, that he forced him to measure his length on the
earth, at whose example all the rest of the company did the like, and they
performed their parts so well, that sixteen Knights and two Giants were
dismounted, and six were slain out right.

The Giant Altifer seeing himself so beset, presently couched his lance and did
some mischief: But Don Bellianis soon hindered him from proceeding, for he
reached him such a stroke that he made his horse bend his knees to the ground,
and his Master catch hold of his horse neck to keep himself from falling, and
then crying Florisbella, and Victory, he gave two such mighty strokes to two
Knights that stood in his way, that he sent them tumbling to the earth, and
then coming to the Prince Baltasano, be immediately unbound him, and gave him a
Sword, by whose example the rest of his Knights released the rest of the
prisoners, and then began the fight to be most bloody.

The Giant Altifer, and his two brothers seeing the valor of that one Knight,
resolved to set upon him, and so they all three came with the same resolution,
but he quickly seeing the danger he was likely to run into, if he did not
dispatch, gave one of them so powerful a blow, that he cut off his Arm, and
forced him to let his Mace fall to the ground.

The two brothers seeing this, came with both their Maces at once, intending to
beat him to pieces; but Baltasano who he had unbound having gotten a Sword,
Buckler and Helmet, received one of them, and gave him in return so puissant a
stroke, that he cut off one of his arms and wounded him in the shoulder: the
enraged Giants did all they could to revenge the wounds they had received, and
Altifer himself seeing that he was likely to loss his Mistress, left the
combat, and coming to the Knight that had the Princess in guard before him, and
took her and set her on his own horse before him, and did ride away with all
the speed possible: at which action the Damsels gave a great screetch, which
Don Bellianis hearing much wondered, and leaving the fight, turned himself
about: but he had no sooner perceived the cause, but like lightning he made
haste after him, and being very well mounted, he soon overtook him, which the
Giant seeing, he let fall the Lady, and turned about to encounter Don
Bellianis, being glad that he had gotten him alone, and Don Bellianis was no
less glad then he, not only for that, but also in regard that he had let go
the Princess, fearing much that if he had held her still she might have been
hurt in the combat. Thus these two Combatants equally resolved, assaulted each
other, and gave and received many wounds; but Don Bellianis whose valor was not
to be equalled by any Giant or Knight, resolving now in the presence of his
Ladies kinswoman to show the utmost effects thereof, gave the Giant two such
mighty blows, that with the one he cut off his leg, and with the other he quite
killed him.

The Princess all this while beholding the combat, and seeing the mighty blows
Don Bellianis gave the Giant, could not imagine who it should be, and that so
much worth and strength should remain in one single Knight, but well viewing
his arms, she remembered him to be the Knight of the Basilisks, who had done
such brave acts at Babylon for the relief of her Cousin the Princess
Florisbella, and viewing her Picture on his shield, she immediately cried out,
Ah worthy Knight! pattern of all true Valor and Magnanimity, much am I bound to
you for your great aid and assistance, and many thanks have I cause to render
you for this so mighty deliverance in this my most extreme necessity: Having
thus said, she came near him to kiss his hands, but he refused that and kindly
embracing her, said: Madam, it is time for us to return back to see in what
condition the Prince your brother is, and if occasion be to lend him my
assistance: wherefore he caused her to mount on the Giants horse, and he
mounting on his own, set forwards toward the place of the combat; in which
time she again thanked him for the aid he had afforded her, promising him to do
him all the affairs of love or friendship that she could, if he would please to
come to the Souldan of Babylons Paace as he had formerly promised, telling him
that she was now resolved to return back thither, and assuring him that the
Princess Florisbella her Cousin had an extraordinary esteem for him, and
expected his coming: and she assured him, that she would endeavor to increase
her good affection toward him.

Much joyed was Don Bellianis at this discourse, and thus they arrived at the
place of combat, where the two Giants and all their Knights were either slain
or vanquished: Thus was this fight happily ended to the eternal honor of Don
Bellianis.

The Damsels of the Princess presently applied some remedies to the wounds of
Don Bellianis his Knights, and then every one mounting his horse, they rid on:
the Prince Baltasano was very thankful for this assistance, and promised Don
Bellianis an eternal friendship; thus they rode on together sometime, till at
length the Princess her brother were resolved not to proceed in their journey
with so slight a guard, but to go back to Babylon, to which place they invited
Don Bellianis, who made his excuses for the present, promising them that within
a month he would not fail to wait upon them there: and thus after many several
discourses, they coming to a way that went toward Babylon, they took their
leaves of Don Bellianis, and parted thither-wards, leaving him and his Knights
to travel to the City of Shyraz to meet with the Princess Persiana, and Duke
Alfiron.

CHAP. XIV.
How Don Bellianis and his Knights overtook the Princess Persiana, Duke
Alfiron, and the rest of the Company, and how they all entered into the City of
Shyraz.

DOn Bellianis and his Knights traveled so fast, that within three hours after
they overtook their company, for the Princess and her Husband made but easy
marches, and had stayed at a Town not far off to dinner: When Don Bellianis
came before the Duke and the Princess, they asked him how he had sped in his
Enterprise? whereupon he gave them such an account, that they rested very well
satisfied: they were now come within two leagues of Shyraz, and many of the
Nobility had already come to them to give them the welcome, which they
thankfully received.



After they had passed the Tapyrian Mountains, they came to a great River
called Bradamir, which waters the City, and afterward falls into the
Persian Gulf with twenty miles circling about on the land: when they came near
the City, it was the pleasantest thing in the world to behold, so stately a
Building, twenty stately Temples appeared at one time, and the Palace with its
lofty Towers made an extraordinary splendour in the eyes of the spectators.
Infinite was the resort of the Plebeans that came out to behold their New King
and Queen, and when they were a mile off from the City, the Chief Magistrates
came out to do their homage to the King and Queen, and in this manner they
entered the City, which is one of most ancient and famous throughout all that
part of the World. Here Art Magic was first hatched. Here Nimrod, after the
Confusion of Babel, lived and was buried. Here Cyrus the most excellent of
Heathen Princes was born, and all but his head intombed. Here the Great
Alexander glutted his ambition and drunkenness. Here the first Sybilla sung our
Saviors Incarnation. Hence the Magi are thought to set forth toward Bethelem,
and here many Kings have swayed their Scepters: in fine, it is a place defended
by nature, inricht by trade, by art made lovely, the Vineyards, Gardens,
Cypresses, and Temples, ravish the eye, and smell in every part sweet and
delightful.

These excellent persons were received into this most delightsome place, with a
great deal of solemnity and joy, and in all the principal places of that City,
and all other places of the nation, they were immediately Proclaimed King and
Queen of Shyra z, Lar, and Jaarown, Lord and Lady of Ormis, Maqueroon, Kermoen,
Chusestam, Sigestan, and Farsestan, Prince and Princess of the Gulf of Persia,
and of the Isles there. These were the titles, and great was the joy and
acclamations of all that vast kingdom, which reaches above six hundred miles
round about. If I should recite to you the many shows, pageants, and triumphant
arches that were built, and the several congratulatory Speeches that were that
day made to their new King and Queen, I should as much weary you with the
reading, and my self with the writing thereof, as they were that day wearied
with the hearing of them, and indeed they were so tedious, that although they
came to the City by two of the clock afternoon, yet was it nine of the clock at
night before they came to the palace: whither they being arrived, they
dismissed most of their subjects, and being much wearied they went to take
their ordinary repose, which thorough weariness every one enjoyed, except Don
Bellianis whose desires were wholly fixed on the incomparable Florisbella, from
whose presence he had been so long absent, that he was in great doubt of his
reception into her service, but the promise that day made him by the Princess
Mattarosa, did somewhat consolate his disturbed fancy. Thus spent he the whole
night in continued contemplations till day appearing, he rose and went to
salute the King and Queen, and humbly besought them since he had seen them
safely received into their kingdom, they would be pleased to give him leave to
depart about his more weighty affairs. This discourse much troubled them,
hoping that they should enjoy his company for a longer season, but since he was
so desire us to be gone, they prayed him that he would do them so much honor as
to stay ten days longer, in which time they intended to be Crowned.

Don Bellianis not well knowing how to deny any thing to persons so, bliging,
consented to this Request, provided that as soon as the Solemnity was ended,
they would no longer desire to detain him from his other Adventures: To which
they both engaged themselves, and thereupon that day the King issued forth his
Commands to all persons concerned to repair to the Court on that day
seven-night, to assist at the Ceremonies which were accustomed at the
Coronation, with free liberty for all Knights, as well Christians as Pagans, to
go and come at the same time, and during their stay to show their Valor and
Manhood in Tilting, Iousting, and all other Knighty Exercises. This
Proclamation being sent abroad occasioned many knights to resort to the Court,
so that by the time prefixed for the Triumph, as well the fields adjoining to
the City, as the City it self, was filled with Knights, so that it was a most
delectable sight to behold, and most delicious to hear the sound of so many
Warlike Instruments as was at that time heard. And the King caused certain
Earls to be made on the outside of the City, within which the Knights were to
Tilt and perform their Deeds of Knighthood, and caused a Throne to be placed
there for himself and his Queen, and Seats for the rest of the Nobility, where
they might sit and see the Tournaments: and he further ordained twenty Knights
of his own, who were commanded by one Don Lorino Son to his Brother Don Gorino,
a young and hardy Knight, to resist all strange Knights.

These things being thus ordained, all people waited with a great deal of
impatience, till the appointed day for the Solemnity of the Conoration was
come; which day being now come, there happened that which shall be declared in
the chapter following.

CHAP. XV.
How the Day of the Coronation being come, there entered into the Court a
Knight, who termed himself to be The Knight of the Island of Pearls, and
demanded the Kingdom of Shyraz as his right, and offered to defend his Title in
single Combat against any one Knight; which Combat Don Bellianis undertook,
and vanquished him, and of his departure for Babylon.



THe Kingdom of Shyraz, whereof the Duke Alfiron and the Princess Persiana were
now in possession, had for many years belonged to the Souldan of Persia, Father
to the Princess, who had given the same to his Daughter, as has already been
declared: but we have not yet told you how the Souldan of Persia came by the
same.

So it was, that the Father of this Souldan only had tribute for the same of
one Gozmin, a valiant Knight, but the said Gozmin for some traiterous
enterprise was disp^ssessed of the same: He being executed, and his sons for
ever disenabled to possess the same, for a just reward of their fathers
treason, and then the Souldan took the same into his own possession, and ever
after that took the immediate Profits thereof to his own use, only appointing
a Governor there, whom he placed and displaced as often as he thought fit, and
in this condition he left it to his Son when he died, who (as I told you) gave
it freely to his Son in Law Duke Alfiron, as a Portion with his Daughter. Now
this Gozmin left two Sons behind him, both valiant and stout Knights, the
eldest whereof lived in an Island in the Persian Gulf, called The Island of
Pearls.

The day being come wherein this great Ceremony of Crowning the King and Queen
was to be performed, every one arose early either to assist at, or behold the
Ceremony: The King and Queen being ready, mounted in a Triumphant Chariot, and
by four Unicorns were drawn to the great Temple, where they being arrived
mounted on a Scaffold prepared to that purpose, and then the Chief Flamin of
the City, after the ordinary Ceremonies, placed two Crowns of Gold, enriched
with many precious Stones of inestimable value on their heads, praying to the
Gods to bless them with perpetual blessings, and blessing all their friends,
and true and loyal Subjects, and cursing all such as were, or should be their
enemies. This Ceremony being performed, they both descended from their Thrones,
and walking through the Temple remounted their Chariot, riding therein through
the City with their Crowns on to the Court, where they were no sooner arrived,
but the Tables were spread with all manner of delicious Viands that the
Country could afford, many Healths going round the Table for the prosperity of
the King and Queen. After Dinner was ended, before any person did arise from
Table, the Herald at Arms (according to custom did, after the sound of an
innumerable company of Trumpets) again proclaim the said Duke and Princess to
be King and Queen of Shyraz, Larr and Jaarown, Lord and Lady of Ormus,
Maqueroone, Kermoen, Chusestan, Sigestan and Farfestan, Prince and Princess of
the Gulf of Persia, and of the Isles there.

These words he pronounced twice, and at the end of every such Proclamation he
said, if any one had any right to the same, or any part thereof, he bid them
come forth and declare the same. This had been done twice, and the Herald was
about to begin the third time, when a Knight armed in an azure Armor, commanded
him to hold his peace; which he obeyed, and then the Knight going up to the
place, where the King and Queen sat, spoke as follows.

Duke Alfiron, for by no other name shall I own you: It is not unknown to most
of the people here present, that my Title to this Crown of Shyraz, and all the
Territories thereto belonging, is just and good, when they shall know that I am
Son to the famous Gozmin, sometimes King of this place, I had long since
expected that the Souldan would have restored me to my undoubted right, but
since I see that he has been so unjust as to give it away, I am to tell thee,
that if thou will enjoy it, I must first be dead; and therefore I will thee
presently to appoint at thy Champion to defend thy Title, and to enter into the
Lists with me immediately, not questioning but the Gods will so far do me
justice, that I shall be enabled to destroy thy Champion.

Having thus said, he held his peace: This Speech gave a wonderful astonishment
to all the persons there present, and gave the King and Queen a sensible
trouble to be thus interrupted in the midst of their Solemnity. The King
answered, That he was so well satisfied in the Justice of the Quarrel, that he
was ready himself to enter the Field to vindicate his Right, but the Queen
diswaded him therefrom, not questioning but that they should find some other
Champion.

Many Knights presently arose, and desired the King and Queen that they might
have the Honor of the Combat, but the King was resolved not to venture his
Title in the hands of any, but such a one as he should be very confident of his
worth. Don Bellianis thinking himself obliged to do somewhat, was resolved to
undertake the Combat, and therefore arising from his seat, desired the King
and Queen to admit him to be their Champion, and to put the trial of their
Cause into his hands. The King would willingly have excused it, by reason of
the many Obligations which he had already received from him: but Don Bellianis
who was resolved not to be denied, pressed them so hard, that at length they
condescended. Whereupon he desired that the Combat might presently be
performed. To which the other Knight willingly consented, and the place
intended for the Iousts, was the place appointed for the Combat; to which
place every one presently repaired, much wondering at the presumption of the
Knight of the Island of Pearls, for so he was called, and was known to be the
best Knight in all that Country.

Don Bellianis having Armed himself, presently repaired to the place appointed
for the Combat, where when he came, be found the Knight of the Island of
Pearls, and the King and Queen, and most of the Nobility seated near the Lists,
to behold this Combat. Both the Combatants were armed with very good Armor.
Don Bellianis being armed with that famous Armor enriched with Basilisks, and
his Shield whereon was the Picture of the Princess Florisbella, and mounted on
an excellent Horse. The other Knight was as well armed and mounted, when taking
each of them a Lance, at the sound of the Trumpets they c^uched their Lances,
and Don Bellianis with the great desire he had to hit his enemy, missed his
encounter: but the other Knight did not so, but hit his enemy so firmly on the
Shield, that Don Bellianis lost both his Stirrops; whereat he was so extremely
enraged, that throwing away his Lance without making any use thereof, he drew
his Sword, which his enemy likewise did, and gave Don Bellianis a mighty blow
on the Helm.

The Knight of the Island of Pearls having given his enemy two such notable
strokes without receiving any, did certainly assure himself of the better of
the Combat: but was quickly of another mind, when Don Bellianis being
thoroughly enraged, lifting up his Sword, gave the Knight so mighty a blow, that
he tumbled him down from his Horse: But he soon recovered his Legs and Sword,
and went on to kill the horse of his enemy; which Don Bellianis seeing, he
quickly dismounted and assaulted his enemy with many strokes, which were
returned with great strength. During the time of this Combat with the Knights,
their Horses began a fierce Combat, for they ran violently against one
another, and lifting up their fore feet wounded each other, and what that could
not do, they performed with their teeth, biting one another in mavelous
manner, to the great astonishment of the Beholders. Thus continued they a good
while, but in the end Don Bellianis his Horse caused the other to run away,
which was taken notice of to be a good Omen to his Master, who in the mean time
was not idle: But resolving so soon as this Combat was finished to be gone,
therefore he did his utmost endeavor to vanquish his enemy, whom he had so
wounded in several places, that it was impossible for him to continue much
longer. But Don Bellianis being much vexed at the rediousness of the Fight,
lifting his Sword very high, gave the Knight so great a stroke on the Helm,
that he cut it in pieces, and wounded his head in such manner that he fell to
the earth, when presently setting the point of his Sword to his Breast, be
asked him if he would acknowledge the King and Queen to be his lawful
Sovereigns? To which the Knight replied, He would never consent to any such
thing during his life. Whereupon Don Bellianis without any more ado,
immediately cut off his Head, and then he went to the Herald, and commanded
him to go forward with his Proclamation, which he accordingly did in open
field, with the general acclamations of many thousands of people who were there
present.

Thus this Combat being ended, Don Bellianis went to the King and Queen, and
desired them to give him leave to depart immediately, which they were very
unwilling to do, but he telling them that he was confident that they would have
no further service to employ him in, and that he would ere long return and
visit them, they consented to his departure: but the King was very desirous for
him to take some number of knights along with him, which he wholly refused: But
the Queen offered him a Dwarf which she brought with her from her Fathers
Court, whose service for the Queens sake he accepted, and so he presently
departed on his Journey, in company of his own Dwarf and that which the Queen
gave him, and they attended with all their Train, retired to the Palace.

CHAP. XVI.
How Don Bellianis traveling to Babylon, met with a Damsel that was sent to
find him; and how he returned with her to the Souldans Palace.



WIth great Joy and Content traveled the worthy Don Bel^ianis toward Babylon,
being very earnestly desirous to arrive in the presence of his Lady, and in
this manner he traveled two days without happening on any Adventure. The third
day being mounted on Horseback early in the morning, he had not rid above an
hour, contemplating on the divine Perfections of his most excellent Lady, and
ruminating in his thoughts what service he should do that he might pretend to
somewhat of her favor, and wishing for some extraordinary Adventure, that he
might show forth his worth, at length he met with a Lady attended with two
Knights, who came riding on amain: They no sooner saw him, but the Lady (who
knew Don Bellianis by his Armor and Shield) immediately with excess of Joy
eryed out, Oh most fortunate I that have so soon finished my Journey, by
meeting with the most Magnanim us and Valiant Knight that ever drew Sword, and
that at such a time when there is the greatest need in the world!

At which words the Knight of the Golden Image much wondered, not knowing how he
should be discovered in so strange a Country: But the Lady soon satisfied him
of that doubt, by telling him that she belonged to the Princess Mattarosa, and
was one of those that was with her Mistress released from the power of the
Giant Altifer and his Companions, by the strength and power of his invincible
arm.

Don Bellianis much wondering to see her, courteously asked her in what health
her Lady was, and the cause of her travel? To this, Sir Knight, replied she, I
shall give you an answer, on condition that you forthwith go along with me to
Babylon, and there present your self to my Mistress and the Princess
Florisbella, and there receive such Orders from them as they shall give, to
which Request he readily consented; wherefore they setting forwards on their
Journey, the Lady began her Discourse as follows.

Know then most valiant and redoubted Knight, that never since the Walls of
Babylon was built by the brave Semiramis, was greater sorrow within that City
than there is now, and never was there greater cause of mourning; for it is not
a week since one of the greatest pieces of Treachery was committed that ever
was heard of.

One day the Souldan, our Dread Lord, accompanied by his Emperess Silviana, the
Princess Florisbella, the Princess Mattarosa my Mistress, and many other great
Personages, having been a Hunting, were met by a grave old Man and two Damsels,
they were all three drawn in a Chariot, and coming near our company, they all
made the most pitiful complaint in the world: The Souldan taking compassion on
them, demanded what was the cause of their so great Complaint: To which speech
the old man replied, that he being traveling to Babylon with those two Damsels
and his Daughter, two Knights seeing his Daughter of admirable beauty, desired
her company to abuse her, which she not consenting to, they endeavored to force
her, and in the end notwithstanding all the resistance they could make, they
drew her out of the Chariot, intending to execute their lusts upon her: but
she resolving rather to die than lose her honor, so long resisted them, that
one of them must inhumanely drew his Sword, and gave her so great a wound on
the head, that she immediately fell as dead to the ground; which they seeing,
immediately mounted their horses and departed, leaving my poor daughter
stretched along the grass struggling for life: In this manner we all remained,
making exceeding lamentations, when an old matron coming by, and being told the
occasion of our complaint, commanded us to bind up the wound, and lay her in
the Chariot, telling us that she was not to be cured, but by one single touch
of the fairest hand in the world, now sir, we are going to Babylon, to see if
we can find the person that shall cure this Lady.

The Souldan and his Daughter having heard this discourse, and seeing the Lady
lie stretched along in the Chariot, presently were desirous to see where the
wound was given, for which cause they both entered the Chariot, at which time
the old man whipped his horses to make them go on, but they stirred not one
jot; at which he much wondered, and the Princess coming to the body of the
extended Lady, and touching her wound, she presently lifted up her head, and
opening her eyes heartily thanked the Princess for her cure, for by her
touching the wound she was immediately cured. Much did the old man wonder, that
notwithstanding all he could do to the horses that drew the Chariot, he could
not get them to move one foot, but they stood as if their feet had been fixed
to the ground: and as much was the Princess, and the rest of the company
pleased with the finishing of that adventure, and therefore the Princess seeing
there was nothing else to be done, descended from the Chariot, which she had
no sooner done, but the horses that drew it immediately fell a running in a
very violent manner, not giving the Emperor leave to come out; which the Ladies
and Knights seeing, were greatly abashed thereat, and the Empress commanded
many of the Knights who were best mounted, to f^llow the Charri^t and bring
back the Souldan, but all their haste availed them nothing, for the horses that
drew the Chariot, ran with incredible swiftness, till they who pursued them
quite lost sight thereof. Great was the lamentations and sorrow of the Empress,
the Princess her Daughter, and all the rest of the spectators, not knowing what
was become of the Souldan, but they still hoped that some of the Knights would
overtake the Chariot, but though all the company stayed there six hours, and
all the Knights were returned, yet no news was brought of the Souldan, only
that the Chariot was gone out of their sight.

Great was the sorrow of the Empress and her Daughter, and all the rest of the
company, but it growing late they were forced to go back to the City in much
dolor; by the way as they went a Damsel came, and meeting the Empress gave her
a Letter, and immediately departed, which she greatly wondering at, caused the
same to be immediately broken open, wherein was read as follows.

The Letter of Bellona to the Empress Silviana.
MAdam, although it has for many years been my greatest study and care to do
all that I might for the preservation of you and your family, yet this late
adventure could not be helped by me, and had not your Daughter been possessed
of the Ring, which she sometime since received at the hands of the Knight of
the Basilisks, she had fallen into greater danger of her person, then is now be
fallen her Father, who is carried to such a place that it is impossible to
release him, but by the best Knight in the world. Therefore Madam, rest your
self contented, and be assured that he who gave your Daughter the Ring, is most
capable of finishing this adventure. It will not be long before he arrives at
your Court, and then if he travels to the Caspian Sea, he may give you and
himself the satisfaction you desire.

Subscribed, Bellona.


Much content and satisfaction did this Letter give to the Empress, and much
more to her Daughter, considering the good she had received by your means,
when she accepted of the King; and in this satisfaction they entered the City,
and went to the Palace, where they presently fell into consultation about what
was necessary to be done: Some were of advice to expect your coming to the
Court, according to the tenor of the Letter from Bellona, but the Empress and
her Daughter were too impatient to attend your coming, and therefore the
Princess Mattarosa having sometime before that given them an account how you
had rescued her, they were very desirous to know which way you took when you
parted from her: To which question she quickly answered, that you were then
gone to Shyraz, but intended not to stay there long, wherefore they immediately
hearing that I knew you by your Armor, commanded me, in company of these two
Knights, to seek you out: and this Sir Knight, was the occasion of my journey.

Don Bellianis rested much perplexed and amazed at the discourse he had heard;
perplexed, that his Lady was in so great sorrow, but withal he was very glad
that fortune still pointed out something for him to do, whereby he might in
part express the zealous love and affection which he had toward his Princess,
not esteeming any thing that he could do, though with the extremest hazard of
his life, a sufficient merit for the least favor that he should receive at the
hands of his Lady. This discourse had held them a good part of the way, and
they being come near Babylon, they resolved to reach thither that night,
wherefore they made the greatest haste they could, so that before Sunset they
arrived in the City, and rode presently to the Court, where they were received
by the Empress and her Daughter, and other great personages, as shall be
related to you in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XVII.
How Don Bellianis arrived at the Souldan of Babylons Palace, and how he was
received by the Empress and Ladies, and of his discourse with the Princess
Florisbella and Mattarosa.



BEfore I tell you how Don Bellianis was entertained at the Palace, it will be
necessary to tell you what was become of the Souldan. The sage Fristone, friend
to Perianeo, and enemy to Don Bellianis, being desirous to use the utmost of
his Art to pleasure Perianeo, and knowing of the great love that he bore to the
Princess Florisbella, did, as was related to you in the first Book of this
History, endeavor by means of the enchanted Tent, to get her into his
possession, but hindered of his purposes by the sudden arrival of Don Bellianis,
who by means of the Enchanted Sword and Armor that he had on, finished that
Adventure to the disgrace and trouble of Fristone, he being himself wounded,
his Tent vanishing away, and the Princess Florisbella saved: This misfortune
vexed him so much, that he endeavored all that he could to be revenged, and
therefore knowing that Don Bellianis would about this time come to Babylon, and
be very likely to win the Princess, resolved to prevent him, and therefore
caused that Chariot to be provided, and all the other things which met the
Souldan, as is declared in the foregoing chapter, hoping to get her into the
Chariot, and then assuring himself that when he lashed the horses, they would
run so fast, that he needed not fear to be overtaken: Being thus furnished, he
arrived near Babylon, as is related in the foregoing chapter, and having by
his piteous discourse induced the Souldan and his Daughter to come into the
Chariot, he was very joyful, but when he thought himself most sure he failed
of his enterprise, by means of the King which Don Bellianis gave her, which had
the power over all Enchantments; but so soon as she was descended from the
Chariot, his Enchantments had their full power, and by that means he carried
away the Souldan, as is already declared.

So long did they travel that at last they arrived at a riverside, and such
power had Fristone with his spells, that the Souldan remained all this while in
a Trance, whose body they took out of the Chariot and placed in a barque which
lay there ready, and so having embarked themselves, they presently set sail
and sailed so long that they arrived in the Caspian Sea, which they crossed,
and on the north part thereof landed in an Island, whither being come, they
conveyed the body of the Souldan into a most strong Castle, and there Fristone
put so strong a Guard upon him, that he thought it invincible in which place we
must leave the Souldan to return to his Court at Babylon.

Don Bellianis being arrived there, as I have told you, he, accompanied with
the Lady that conducted him, entered into the presence of the Empress, who was
at that time accompanied with her fair Daughter the Princess Florisbella, the
Princess Mattarosa, the Prince of Numidia her Brother, and many other great
personages. The Princess Florisbella was at that time attired in Purple Velvet
beset with many Oriental Pearls, and a Crown of Gold and Jewels of mighty valu^
on her head; but all her habit, though it was of an inestimable value, was but
a foyl to set forth her rare personage: her eyes shining far brighter then all
her Jewels, and indeed nothing did so well resemble them, as the pure light of
the Sun, there came so many radiant beams from them, that Don Bellianis being
approached the presence, and having pulled off his Helmet, was so blinded with
the pure light that issued from them, that he was in a manner dazzled: and all
her other parts were so perfectly rare, that Venus her self had she been there,
would have blushed to have seen her self out-gone in beauty.

The Princess on the other side, having never till now seen the face of Don
Bellianis, was so surprised with his manly beauty, that she concluded him to be
only Paragon in the world, and that all beauty and valor was worthily in that
one person concentred.

The Lady who conducted him thither, seeing that he continued silent, thus
began: May it please your Excellent Highness, to behold an end of my Journey,
for by the help of our Gods here is before you the person that shall so far
content you, that you may certainly expect the deliverance of my Lord the
Souldan, in short time to be accomplished.

Don Bellianis being very sensible of the error he had run into by his silence,
said to the company: Most excellent Princesses, what ever my mean labor can
accomplish either in releasing the Souldan, or in any other Affair, assure your
selves I shall be most willing to undertake it, and shall thank my good fortune
if any thing I can do to the utmost hazard of my life, shall give you any
pleasure; and therefore most illustrious Empress, give me the honor to be
commanded by you, and I shall run to the accomplishment thereof, though it be
to my certain death, and shall think that part of my life best bestowed,
wherein I can in any manner please or content you.

The Empress having heard and beheld him, replied: Noble Knight, your presence
at this time is most acceptable, and we are so far obliged to you for your last
company, and the hazard that you then underwent for the deliverance of our
Daughter, that I cannot with modesty tell how to desire you to hazard your
person any more for us: but since the Gods are pleased to place all their
virtues within your bosom, and so to decree it that none but your self was born
to assist us, I shall be thankful to the Gods for so providing a person, who
may be rightly termed The deliverer of the House of Babylon, for without your
help we should infallibly perish, and therefore good Sir Knight, repose your
self for a few days, and then take such help for the accomplishment of this
adventure as you shall think fit, and which the whole Empire will afford, that
you may once more restore a Husband to me a sorrowful wife, a Father to an
afflicted daughter, and a Prince to his most loving subjects.

Having thus said, she descended from her Throne, and came to the place where
Don Bellianis was kneeling, and raising him from the ground, he humbly kissed
her hands, and then went to the place where the Princess Mattarosa sat, not
daring as yet to go to the Princess Florisbella, and humbling himself on his
knee he kissed the hand of the Princess Mattarosa, saying to her: Madam, when I
last left you, I gave you my word that I would ere long wait upon you at this
place, to obey your commands, and in order thereunto I was coming hither, when
the Lady met me, and related to me the misfortune of the Souldan, which has
given me a very sensible affliction to see that any thing should give a trouble
to such divine personages as are here present: But Madam, assure your self,
that I will employ all the remaining part of my life in finishing this
adventure, but I will give you the contentment you expect and desire in the
presence of the Souldan. Mattarosa, who was sensible of the love and affection
that the Princess her Cousin had for the valiant Don Bellianis, and being
resolved to pleasure her, said: Dear Cousin, you need not question the
performance of this adventure, since it is put into the hands of such a Knight,
of whose worth I am very well satisfied, and without whose aid I had e're this
time been in my grave; for I would certaintly have given my self a violent
death, rather then have consented to the lubidinous desire of that monstrous
Giant who had me in his possession. The Princess Florisbella now thought it fit
for her to speak, and therefore she said, I am so well satisfied in the worth
of this Knight, that I question not the performance of any thing be will
undertake, and I have had so sufficient proofs both of his judgment and valor,
that I have found the effects to be such, that I am much engaged to him
therefore, and I my self had either been a prisoner or worse twice ere this but
for him; for which two remarkable Services I am still bound to him, and shall
always acknowledge my self his debtor, both for the service he did me, and for
the precious token he left with me, without which I had now been in company of
my Father, and therefore none has more cause to esteem of his virtues then my
self: and then turning her self toward him, she said: Assure your self, Sir
Knight, that I esteem my self more bound to you then to all men living, and
shall always acknowledge it, and next unto my parents I shall be always ready
to be disposed of by your commands.

She having thus finished her discourse, Don Bellianis was almost ravished with
delight, and humbly kissing her fair hand, and fetching a great sigh, he
replied: Ah dear Madam, all that I have yet done for you, or shall be able to
perform the remaining part of my life, is already sufficiently recompensed by
this immense favor you have so prodigally bestowed in the humblest of your
servants. He would have proceeded, but that the Prince of Numidia came then to
him, and humbly thanking him for the aid he had lent him in releasing him and
his Sister from the Giant Altifer, and so he led him from the Ladies, into the
company of several Knights that were there present, who much honored him for
the worth they understood him to be endued withal.

Thus he spent some time in this company till it was time to disarm himself,
which when he had done, the Princess Mattarosa sent him a rich Mantle, and by
the messenger that brought it, she desired that he would not fail to let her
have the happiness of his company some time that evening: To which message he
returned answer, That he would not fail to wait on her. Most of the evening he
spent in complementing the Knights of the Court, and they in showing him the
rarities and novelties thereof, and there he with great wonder and amazement
beheld the pleasant Gardens and Fountains there; having spent much time in
walking, he at length desired the the Prince of Numidia to show him his
lodging, which he did accordingly, and as he walked thither the Prince told him
which was the Souldans, and which was his Sisters, and which was the Princess
Florisbellas. Now the Princess Mattarosas, and the Princess Florisbellas were
adjoining together, and his lodging was not far from either of them, at which
he was very well pleased: Having thus spent much time he again went into the
Presence, where was the Empress, her Daughter, and Kinswoman, and many other
Ladies; and thus they spent much of that evening in several discourses, at last
every one withdrew to their several appartments. Don Bellianis remembering the
Message he had received from the Princess Mattarosa, appointed his Dwarf Ordino
to attend her going to her Lodging, and to take notice of some one of her
Damsels, which the Dwarf performed, and his Master being retired into his
chamber and alone, he came to him and told him that the Princess was now in her
Chamber with no other company but two of her Damsels: Don Bellianis therefore
commanded the Dwarf to go thither and tell one of her Damsels that he desired
to speak with her Lady, and when he should come into her presence to present
his service to her, and let her know that he waited her commands. The Dwarf
soon executed his message, and returned to his Master, and told him that the
Princess expected his coming to her Lodging, he therefore immediately left his
own Chamber and went to her, where she received him with a great deal of
freedom, and causing him to sit down by her, she thus began.

Sir Knight, the great favor you did me in releasing me from the power of the
Giant, is so deeply engraven in my breast, that all that I can do for you
thorough the whole course of my life, I shall esteem too little for a
recompense: and if you remember when I then parted from you, I desired your
company here, that it might be in my power to do somewhat to gratify you, if
therefore you know any thing wherein I may pleasure you, speak boldly and
freely, and let me know it, for the time you have to stay here being not long,
an opportunity of doing you service may soon be overslipt. Don Bellianis having
attentively listened to this discourse, did much marvel thereat, wondering what
the issue thereof would be: but while supposing that his fortune might so fall
out, that she her self might be in love with him, at which he would have been
much discontented; and then an other while supposing that she might do him some
great kindness in his love to her Cousin, he was therefore resolved try her
mind, and after some silence he thus began:

Madam, if I have done you any service, it was no more then I was bound to do
by the Order of Knighthood, besides it has been already sufficiently
recompensed by this your acknowledgement, therefore you rest no longer indebted
to me for that: but there is one thing Madam, wherein you may greatly pleasure
and oblige me of new to be your humble Servant. It is now Madam, some years
since I received the Order of Knighthood, and with it a Suit of Armor which I
have since lost, only I have preserved the Shield that belonged thereto, not
for any extraordinary worth therein, but only for the sake of a Picture that
is therein pourtrayed, I do believe that you have seen it, and may remember
that it has some small resemblance with the Princess your Cousin, and indeed
for her sake alone have I kept it, and under the Name of The Knight of the
Golden Image have I gone ever since, and have won many Combats thereby, so
that what ever Act I have done worthy of remembrance may be wholly attributed
to her Virtue: this has caused me now twice to come to this Court, not as yet
daring to give her any notice of my desires, now therefore if you are pleased
to do me any further friendship, let it be this, to desire her to be pleased to
admit me to be her Knight, and then I question not but I shall be sufficiently
able to perform any Enterprise, though never so difficult and perilous.

Don Bellianis having thus finished his Discourse, the Princess was fully
satisfied that in doing him a courtesy, she should likewise pleasure her
Cousin, whose mind she knew very well, but like a discreet virtuous Lady, she
was resolved to know what Parentage he was of, and whether that dis-proportion
would not hinder that which they so much desired, and therefore she thus
replied:

Noble Sir, I give you many thanks for your freeness with me, and assure your
self that in this matter I shall execute your will that you shall have your
desires, provided that you engage me in nothing that may be a blemish to the
Honor of my Fair Cousin, and therefore Sir, I pray tell me who gave you the
Honor of Knighthood, that if I be demanded that Question by my Cousin, I may be
provided with an Answer. To this he soon replied, He who gave me the Order of
Knighthood was as then unknown to me, and so was I then to him, but since I
knew him to be the Emperor of Greece. Then Sir, quoth the Lady, I question not
but he was satisfied that by birth you were worthy of it. Ah Madam, said he, he
was then told that I was of Noble Lineage by a Lady that was present: but since
he has known me, and I him better, for indeed he is my Father. Then recounted
he to her the manner of his first Adventures, and how he was Knighted by his
Father, and how afterward did fight with him, as it is at large set down in
the First Part of this excellent History.

This Discourse so well satisfied the Princess, that she told him that since he
had been so free to her, as to tell her his greatest secrets, she would in
recompense thereof tell him somewhat that should give him equal content, and
thereupon she said: Six Knight, I do now assure you that you may account your
self happy in your love, for the Princess Florisbella my Cousin is altogether
as amorous of you as you are of her, and has been as desirous to discover the
same, as you your self; and therefore so carry your self in this business, that
what ever you do may redound to the honor of you both, and to the end that you
may receive the same satisfaction from her own mouth, I will immediately go
into her Chamber and bring her hither: At which words Don Bellianis fell on his
knees to the ground, and straightly embracing her legs, he said: Ah dear Madam,
what thanks, what services, what returns shall I make for this extraordinary
favor? But she knowing that a little time would be soon lost, got from him, and
leaving him in this Ecstasy, went into the Chamber of her Cousin, where she had
not stayed long but she returned with her Cousin in her company, who now being
undressed, was attired in a Mantle of Crimson-Velvet, and such other Garments,
that Juno in all her Bravery did not appear half so stately, nor Venus when she
courted Adonis was not half so lovely: When they came into the Chamber, they
found the Knight on his knees, his ecstasy of Joy had been so great, wherefore
the Princess Mattarosa taking her Cousin by the hand, led her to him, saying:
Behold here, Madam, the best Knight in the world prostrate on his knees,
expecting from your lips the gracious favor of your admitting him to be your
Knight. Arise most noble Prince, answered the Princess, for so my Cousin
informs me you are, and indeed it could not be expected that so great
Perfecti^ns of Valor, Magnanimity and true Virtue, should abide in the breast
of any one but the greatest Prince in the world.

At these words Don Bellianis humbly kissing her hand arose, and then the
Princess Mattarosa caused them both to sit down: when they were sat, the
Princess Florisbella demanded of him how he performed the Adventure of selling
her Cousin Aurora in possession of her Kingdom; for, said she, I hear that she
is bound to you for that favor? Then he recounted to her all that happened in
that Adventure, how he killed her usurping Enemy Don Gallaneo, and the many
hazards he ran thorough when he went disguised in the Apparel of one of her
Damsels, and how at last he procured the Souldan of Persia to Confirm her in
her Kingdom, and then said he, Madam, I had gone along with her to have seen
her settled therein, but that the remembrance of your divine Beauty, was as
attractive to my heart as the Loadstone to the Needle, which caused me to leave
that Charge to two of my Brethren, and some other of my Friends, to apply my
self hither to wait upon my Commands. And said the Princess Mattarosa, it, was
most happy for us both that you went not thither; for I had ere this perished
without the assistance you brought me, and the Princess my Cousin had still
wanted one to undertake the Redemption of her Father.

Ah most noble Lady, replied he, I see now that Fortune and my good Stars have
brought me some sweet with much of bitter I have hitherto run thorough, in that
they have given me some opportunity of testifying to you my service, in which
point I wish my Destinies will still continue me to my lives end, for it will
be the greatest good that can come to me, to spend the remainder of my life in
the service of so Divine Personages, and therewith he took the fair Hand of his
Mistress, and amorously kissed it. In these terms continued these Lovers for
two or three hours, and then they gave to each other such assured Testimonies
of their loves, that it endured for ever.

The Princess signified much sorrow that he was to depart in so short time, to
hazard his person in so great perils, but he assured her, that since she
thought him worthy of being hers, he did not question but to overcome all
difficulties, and in short time return with her Father. Then she desired him to
take some company with him, that he might be the better enabled to perform his
Enterprise: but he refused that, dersiring to perform it himself, that the
Souldan her Father might be obliged to none for his Deliverance but to him
only, that thereby he might have the more cause to grant him what he should
afterward desire of him.

But the Princess Mattarosa knowing that her Brother the Prince of Numidia
intended to accompany him in this Adventure, persuaded him that since the
Journey was long, and that he was to travel on the Caspian Sea to some
uncertain place there, that he would not refuse his company, which he at last
assented to. Thus having spent much of the night in these Discourses, after the
two Lovers had given each other new Obligations of Promises of an everlasting
Love and Friendship, they every one with great silence departed to their
several Lodgings.

CHAP. XVIII.
How Don Bellianis had a second Conference with the Princess Florisbella and
her Cousin Mattarosa, and how he, after he had taken his leave of the Ladies,
departed in quest of the Souldan, accompanied with Baltasano Prince of Numidia.

THe satisfaction the two Lovers received in the Evenings Conference,
occasioned them to take but little rest that night: never was Don Bellianis so
contented as now, all his Travels, Combats, Conflicts and bloody Fights, he
accounted as nothing, and that they were all more than fully recompensed by the
kind and loving Discourse he had received that evening from his Princess.
These thoughts accompanied him all night so that he slept not at all, but still
ruminated in his mind how he should contrive his good fortune, and how he
should give so good a satisfaction to the Souldan, that he might be willing to
accept of him for his Son in Law: These thoughts took up all the night, so that
morning coming, the Prince of Numidia came to his Chamber to give him the Good
morrow, whereupon he presently arose, and very lovingly received him.

After he had apparelled himself, he left his Chamber, and walked with the
Prince in the Garden, where the Prince told him that he had one Boon to beg of
him, and therefore prayed that he might not be denied. Don Bellianis answered,
that he might freely ask any thing of him, for he took it as an honor if be
could pleasure him in any thing. Then the Numidian Prince told him that the
Request he was to make was this, That he would be pleased to permit him to have
the honor to attend him in his intended Expedition; for, says he, I cannot but
acquire much honor and renown in being in the presence and company of so brave
and worthy a Knight.

Don Bellianis who had already promised his Sister that he would permit him to
go with him, told him, that he could not acquire any fame in his company, but
however if he would give himself that trouble, he should be glad of his good
company. The Numidian being very glad that he had granted his Request, gave him
many thanks, and told him he should esteem his life happy so long as he had the
enjoyment of his good society, and said he hoped, that having so good a Pattern
both of Chivalry and Virtue, he did not question but he should profit himself
very much thereby

In these Discourses they continued some time till all the Court was risen, but
it was somewhat late before the two Princesses arose, they having sat up so
late the night before, that it was Noon before they came into the Presence
Chamber, being come, the Tables were covered, and every one sat down to
Dinner: Don Bellianis could eat but little for observing the rare Perfections
of his Divine Princess who was seated just against him, who attired her self in
most sumptuous manner, that her Clothes might give some luster to her Beauty:
but although she was habited in an extraordinary manner, yet her face and
person appeared like the Sun, and they like clouds that obscured her other
beauties. She often cast amorous glances at her Knight, and seeing his eye
still fixed on her, she was often moved to blush.

Dinner being ended and every one risen, the Empress taking Don Bellianis by
the hand, said to him: Sir Knight, I am very sorry that so unfortunate occasion
has happened that will suddenly cause us to loose your good company, but I
hope that with the Assistance of the Gods, your incomparable Valor, and the
continual good fortune that still accompanies you, will put an end to all our
troubles; and therefore that you may go provided with all things necessary for
so hazardous an Expedition, I have ordered the Council to fit this Afternoon,
to know of you what you shall think necessary, that it may be provided
accordingly. To which he replied, All that I desire, Madam, is only the
company of the Prince of Numidia, and I question not but my good fortune will
soon bring me to the place where I shall be enabled to serve you: But she
desired to confer with the Council of this matter, in order to which that
Afternoon he went to them, and they propounding to raise a great Army, and a
Navy of Ships proportionable to receive them, and so with this power under his
Command, to search all the Caspian Sea: but he utterly refused that Offer, and
only desired that one Ship might be ready at the Seaside to receive him
against his coming, and he told them he intended to be going within three
days. They not willing to contradict his reasons, and much less to offend him,
answered, that his will should in every thing be performed, and so they took
order accordingly.

Thus did he spend two days in the greatest content and satisfaction in the
world, still accompanied by the Prince of Numidia, and by that means he had the
opportunity with him of courting the Princess his Cousin with the greater
freedom, sometimes they walked in the pleasant Walks and Gardens of the
Palace, and at other times they went abroad in the Fields to divert
themselves; in all which time he endeavored by his most ordinary actions, to
let her see the esteem he had of her Virtues. The night before he was to depart
he took the opportunity to speak to the Princess Mattarosa, humbly desiring her
that since his time was so short that he was to depart the next day, she would
do him the favor to speak to the Princess Florisbella to give him the happiness
of her Company in her Chamber, that he might take his farewell of her, to which
his Request she soon consented.

So Evening being come, and every one retired to their several Lodgings, he
attended not long before one of the Princesses Damsels came to his Chamber, to
advertise him that the two Princesses were together and expected him; He
thereupon very joyfully went to the Chamber where they were, and prostrating
himself on his knee, he humbly kissed her hand, but she not permitting it
caused him to arise, and seating her self by him, said unto him: Worthy Sir,
Since it has pleased the Heavens to put so great a cross upon us, as so soon
to part us, I beseech you by the friendship and love that you have so zealously
professed to me, that you will not only make all the expedition you can in
returning back from this Adventure, but also do the best you can to secure your
person, not thrusting your self into any unnecessary hazard; for know Sir, that
since you are become my Knight, I resolve to keep such a strict power over you,
that I shall not be won to consent that you shall do any thing to endanger your
person: and were it not on so necessary an occasion, I should not give you
leave to depart.




Having said thus, she hung down her head and fetched a deep sigh, expressing
by that the sorrow she took for his departure, wherefore he thus replied to
her: Gracious Madam, Since it has pleased you to give your self so much
trouble to have some care of my unworthy person, I shall endeavor in this, as
well as in all other things, to obey your Commands, assuring you that this
Adventure being finished, I shall immediately return back, and shall not
hereafter undertake any Adventure without your leave first obtained, not
questioning but I shall be able to perform whatsoever I shall begin, through
the mighty assistance I have received by being under your protection.




Thus did these two Lovers discourse with one another, sometimes embracing each
other: and Don Bellianis knowing that he was to be gone the next day, took more
freedom than ordinary, and ravished from her lips many amorous Kisses, which to
him were more pleasant than Nectar and Ambrosia, or the food of the Gods. Thus
spent they much time, and would have continued their amorous discourses longer,
but that the Princess Mattarosa caused them to break off and depart, which they
at last very unwillingly consented to: Thus at length they retired to their
several Lodgings and went to Bed, taking their ordinary repose.

The morning being come, Don Bellianis arose early to put all things in order
for his departure, but he had not been long up before the Prince of Numidia and
two of his Kinsmen came to wait on him in his Lodging, but not finding him
there they walked into the Garden where they found him, and there the Prince of
Numidia told him that he was ready to go with him whenever he should appoint
him, but told him that he humbly begged him to permit those two Knights to go
in their company. Don Bellianis who was unwilling to deny him any thing he
should ask, at length at the entreaty of the two knights themselves consented;
and thereupon he bid them be ready, for that Afternoon he intended to set
forward on his Journey, they resting very well satisfied, and prepared all
things accordingly.

Thus Noon being come and Dinner ended, he took his farewell of the Empress, the
Princess Florisbella, and the Princess Mattarosa, and all the rest of the
Court. The Princess Florisbella gave him a new Shield, wherein was her own
Picture drawn to the Life, and richly gilded, whereby he went by the Name of
the Knight of the Golden Image. The Prince of Numidia was armed in an Azure
Armor, and in his Shield he had a Boars-head, he having formerly killed a
monstrous Boar, and therefore he was called The Knight of the Boar. The other
two Knights were armed in white Armor, they being new Knights: the one, who was
amorous of the Princess Mattarosa, had Hope painted in his Shield, and the
Princess gave him a Scarf as a Favor from her: and the other had a flaming
Sword painted on his Shield, because when he was knighted it was with a Sword
that resembled a Flame.

Being thus most richly armed and bravely mounted, after several Complemental
expressions had passed between many of the Souldans Knights and Don Bellianis
and his Companions, wishing them a prosperous success in their intended
Adventure, they took their leave of all the fair Ladies, and only attended by
Don Bellianis his two Dwarfs, they left Babylon and journeyed toward the
Caspian Sea.

CHAP. XIX.
How Don Bellianis and his Companions traveled to the Caspian Sea, and how
there they embarked themselves in quest of the Souldan of Babylon.



THree days traveled Don Bellianis and his Companions without meeting with any
Adventure, and indeed he was not at all discontented thereat; for he was
resolved to obey the Commands of his Princess, and avoid all things that might
hinder his Journey: wherefore they traveled very hard, till within one days
Journey of the Caspian Sea, they saw before them several Knights and Ladies
journeying together, but he being very desirous to avoid all company, rode on
without saluting them; whereupon a Damsel riding after him, said, I am come
from one of those Ladies yonder, who say that he who gave you the Order of
Knighthood did not do well, in that he did not instruct you in your duty to
Ladies when you meet them, and therefore desires if you be not in great haste
that you, or some of your company, would break a Lance with some of her
Knights, to the end she may know whether you are better furnished with valor
than with courtesy.

Don Bellianis being somewhat troubled at this Message, replied, That his haste
would not permit him to give her that satisfaction which she desired, but the
Knight of the flaming Sword who was in his company, desired him to permit him
to break a Lance with one of the Knights, to which Don Bellianis at last
consented, so that after that they should not be enjoined to any further stay,
to which the Damsel consenting, departed. She was no sooner come to her Lady
and delivered her Message, but one of her Knights advanced toward them, which
the Knight of the flaming Sword seeing, took a Lance and went to meet him. They
soon couched their Lances and met each other with so much vigor, that they both
lost their Stirrops and broke their Lances, when taking new ones, at the next
encounter the Ladies Knight measured his length on the earth, and the Knight of
the flaming Sword was forced to get hold of his Horses neck to save himself
from falling.

No sooner was this done, but out came another Knight, and desired since the
Knight of the flaming Sword was well nigh down, that the Knight of Hope would
try his fortune with him: To which he consented, and thereupon they both
couching their Lances, the Knight of Hope performed so well that the Ladies
Knight measured his length on the earth, and so he served two more, but at last
when he was running with the fourth Knight his Horse tumbled, and they both
fell on the earth.

Then the Knight of the Boar stepping forwards, ran against the Knight who had
dismounted the Knight of Hope, and turned him off from his Horse: and of ten
Knights there remained four who had not tried their valor, but he running
against them dismounted them also.

Don Bellianis seeing there was no more to be done, sent his Dwarf to the Lady
to present his service to her, and bid him tell her, that the next time she
expected to compel Knights to Courtesy, she must provide her self with more
valiant Defendants, which the Dwarf having done, they all departed.

Thus did they travel on their way all that day, till they came near to the Sea
side, where they took up their Lodgings for that night on the shore. No sooner
was the Sun gotten up into the Firmament, but our Knights all arose, and Arming
themselves went to the Sea side, where they met with their Ship, and presently
they embarked themselves and horses, and having a fair wind they set sail and
departed.



Long time sailed they about this Sea, coasting the Country, and landing in
several places to enquire after news of the Souldan, but all was in vain. One
day a great Calmness happening, they sailing very slowly, descried a Ship from
afar off sailing thitherwards, wherefore command was given to the Mariners to
bear up to them, which was done with all the expedition they could; when they
came near the Ship they heard the voice of a woman who made great lamentation:
At which noise Don Bellianis wondering, caused them to call aboard to them, when
presently two great Giants armed at all points but their heads, demanded what
they required? The Numidian answered, That they desired to know the cause of
the lamentation that they heard. The Giants seeming very angry at his demand,
replied, That they might meddle with their own affairs, for that did in no wise
concern them.

Don Bellianis hearing these proud speeches, commanded the Ship to go nearer to
the other and grapple with her, which was done accordingly, and the Giants
clapping on their Helmets, drew their mighty Symetars to hinder the entrance of
the Knights, who by the example of Don Bellianis, were all provided to assail
the Giants in their own Ship: but our Knights so laid about them, that one of
the Giants was soon laid along the Ship. At this noise ten well-armed Knights
who were below, came up, and drawing their Swords went to assail our Knights,
who defended themselves very bravely, and Don Bellian^s so stoutly laid about
him, that he soon dispatched four of them, and threw their bodies into the Sea;
which the Giant seeing made up to him, and gave him so fierce a blow on the
Helmet, that he was astonished, and forced to lay both his hands on the side of
the Ship to raise himself up: but he was no sooner got on his feet but he
quickly revenged that blow, and gave the Giant such a return, that lighting on
his head he cut his Helmet quite in two pieces, and also his Head was cleaved
down to the Iaws.

Thus this Giant being dispatched, he turned him about to help his Companions,
but he saw they had behaved themselves so well, that they had either killed or
vanquished all the Giants Knights, wherefore he putting up his Sword, commanded
the Mariners to conduct him to the place from whence they heard the noise,
which they did accordingly: and being come thither, saw a Damsel who made great
lamentation, but he demanding of her the cause of her Complaint, she arose, and
seeing him knew him by his Armor, when falling on her knees, she said: Ah most
courteous Knight! I now know that I am released from the slavery and bondage I
was going to, having met with you. Don Bellianis knew not the Damsel, wherefore
raising her from the ground, he demanded of her how she knew him? To which she
replied, I am confident Sir Knight, that I am not mistaken in my knowledge of
you, for without doubt you must needs be the valiant Prince Don Bellianis of
Greece, of whose prowess and virtue I am sufficiently acquainted; wherefore
know Sir, that I belong to the sage Bellona your very good Friend, who
understanding of the Enterprise that you were going about to release the
Emperor, and knowing that all the skill and art that your Mariners could use
would not be to any purpose, for it is impossible to find out the place where
he is kept without her help, she therefore sent me to conduct you thither: and
commanding me to go toward the Court of the Souldan of Babylon to meet you, I
being on my way thither, was met by these two Giants and Knights, whom you have
happily dispatched, who seeing me alone forced me to go aboard with them, and
whither they would have carried me I am uncertain, but thanks to your valor I
am released from that peril.

Don Bellianis having heard this Relation, was very glad that he should now be
able to find the place whither he was to go, and therefore thanked the Damsel
very kindly for the pains and peril she had undertaken for his sake: and
thereupon he caused her to go out of that Ship into his own, where she was no
sooner come, but she espying the Numidian Prince, began to renew her
lamentations; at which they all wondering, asked her the cause of her sudden
sorrow? To which she replied, Ah, Sir Knight, when I came from my Mistress she
gave into my custody a Sword, which she commanded me to present to her Cousin
Baltasano, which she told me he would ere long stand in need of, for it had so
hidden a virtue that it would make its way through any Armor, though it were
enchanted, and told me that next to the Sword which you had it was the best in
the world, and these two Giants when they took me, forced the Sword from me,
and what they have done with it I know not.

The Numidian Prince hearing of this was much troubled, fearing lest it should
be lost or thrown into the Sea with some of the dead Knights, wherefore he and
the Damsel immediately went into the Ship to search for it: so after a little
search they found it in one of the Cabins of the Giants, at which he was very
glad; and so returning into the Ship of Don Bellianis, they showed it to him,
and the Sword was very plain, only the Hilt was made of entire Emerald.

This being done, they desired the Damsel to direct them to the place where the
Souldan remained: but she told them that if they would take her directions,
they must first sail to the Mouth of the River Araxis, and being there she then
knew how to conduct them. They having heard this, commanded the Mariners to
obey her Command, which they forthwith did, and set sail for the River Araxis.
In few hours they came thither, and having informed the Damsel thereof, she
advised with the Master of the Vessel, and told him that he must sail cross the
Sea directly northwards, which he accordingly did: thus they leaving the Giants
Ship behind them, sailed cross that great Sea.

Don Bellianis being very impatient of their delays, thinking that every day he
had bin absent from his Princess to be a year, and therefore he discoursed with
the Damsel of many matters during the Voyage, that he might pass away the time
the better: And she told him that her Mistress had given her no account of the
particular dangers that he was to undergo in that Adventure, but said that it
was the most perilous that he ever undertook; for the sage Fristone who had
placed the Souldan there, had used his utmost skill in his Enchantments, that
he might still continue him there a prisoner: but she said that you with the
help of the Numidian Prince, should be able by your great skill and valor, to
put an end to all the Enchantments, and deliver the Souldan.

CHAP. XX.
How Don Bellianis and the Knights his Companions, landed on an Island in the
Caspian Sea, where the Souldan was kept prisoner by Enchantment: and how Don
Bellianis and the Prince of Numidia, after they had fought with many monstrous
Giants and Serpents, ended the Enchantment.

LOng had they not sailed before they descried Land, and coming near they found
that there were close by several small Islands, in one of which they saw a fair
Castle, wherefore Don Bellianis supposing that to be the place where the
Souldan was, as indeed it was, he caused them to make to shore: but as they
were approaching the shore, they saw several Sea Monsters with much fierceness
approach the Vessel, and made a hideous noise: The two young Knights with their
Swords in their hands, went down out of the Ship into the Shallop to get to
shore, but these Monsters so laid about them that they soon over-turned the
Boat, and had not the Mariners immediately thrown out Ropes the two Knights had
been drowned.

Don Bellianis seeing this, and that these Monsters would endeavor to hinder
his landing, and seeing that the shore was so shelving, that it was impossible
for the Ship to come so near it as to land him, taking his Sword in his hand he
threw himself into the Sea, where he was assaulted by these Monsters who came
all about him, but he being well skilled in swimming, did so bravely behave
himself that in despite of them he got to land, killing one of them with every
stroke he struck By his Example the Numidian Prince followed him, but with very
great peril of his life, for he was marvellously assaulted, but at last having
killed many of them with his sword, he got to shore.

The Knight of Hope seeing this, resolved to do the like, but he failed in his
Enterprise; for many of these Monsters came about him, and in despite of him
bit him in many places, and notwithstanding he struck at them with his sword,
yet it did no more execution upon them than if he had struck upon an Anvile,
for his Sword had not the virtue in it to withstand Enchantments; wherefore by
the advice of the Damsel he came back again to the Ship, where he and all the
rest were forced to stay, not being able to land.

Thus these two Knights by the help of their pure-cutting Swords got on shore,
but they were unarmed, wherefore they caused them in the Ship to throw their
Arms out as far as they could toward the shore, where they went and took them
up and armed themselves: But there was no way how they could get their Horses
on shore, at which they were much troubled: But Don Bellianis seeing that the
Castle was not far off, hoped he should have no great occasion of them;
wherefore commanding them in the Ship to wait their coming thither again, they
departed, and marched right on to the Castle: When they came near it, they saw
that it was mavelous strong, being seated on a Rock, and though they walked
round about it, they could not find any way to enter into it. At last they
espied a ^abe, but the entrance into it was like a Well, for it was downright,
and they supposed it to be a Well, but that there was no water in it: Hereat
thinking that that was the way into the Castle, they cut down one of the
tallest Trees thereabouts, and Don Bellianis causing the Numidian to hold the
one end of it, was let down into the Cave, but it reached not to the bottom,
wherefore he was forced to take a great leap, and so he fell to the ground sore
bruised with the fall, and before he could well get up he was assaulted by two
great and hideous Serpents, who ran upon him and trampled him under their feet,
but he soon arose, and wounded them most piteously; whereupon they again came
upon him, and gave him such lashes with their monstrous tayls that it cracked
his Armor: but he waiting his opportunity cut off their tayls, so that they
could not offend him that way, and they making a hideous noise, coming on him
to be revenged, he cut off both their Heads at one blow. After he had done
this, he walked on, and perceiving some light went further, and saw before him
a C^urt-yard, and in it a Fountain, at the foot whereof were two mighty
Dragons, who no sooner saw him approaching, but they ran to assault him: He
taking his Buckler in his hand, and fast grasping his Sword, cut the wing of
one of them, which caused him to make a hideous noise, and the beast finding
himself wounded, ran upon Don Bellianis and catching hold on him drew him on
the ground, and with his Tallons grasped him so hand, that he was very much
wounded; and the other likewise caught hold on him with his teeth, and bit him
by the thigh: at which he finding himself in great peril, arose from the
ground, and thrust his sword down the throat of one of these Monsters, cleaving
his heart in twain so that he fell down dead. The other Dragon was now got upon
the back of our Knight, and pulled him down backwards, but he nimbly got from
the ground, and being extremely enraged with the smart of his wounds, gave the
Dragon such a blow that he cleaved his Head in two.

When he had done this he sat down, being so faint with the loss of blood that
he could hardly stand: after he had taken the air a little he walked about the
Courtyard, and there he found a Basket and a long Rope tied to it, wherefore
pondering with himself what use that should be for, he believed that with it he
might draw the Numidian Prince up into the Castle, and so walking about he saw
a Pair of Stairs which went up to the Battlements of the outward Wall of the
Castle, where he being come saw the Prince walking about the Green, prying
whither he might find any place to get into the Castle: Don Bellianis seeing
this called to him, and told him if that he would come in to him, he would help
him up by that Rope and Basket, to which he readily assented, and so letting of
it down, he drew him up accordingly.

When they were come down into the Courtyard, he perceived that Don Bellianis
had not been idle, for he saw the two Dragons that were stain, at which they
much admired, and so they passed forwards, when coming to a great Gate they saw
a small Horn, which one of them having sounded, the Gates flew immediately
open: but as they went to enter, there was two mighty Giants opposed themselves
to forbid them, and taking up their mighty Battel-Axes, laid many strokes on
the two Knights, but they who were undaunted repaid them with many weighty
blows: and Don Bellianis being angered that as yet he could not see to what end
all this would come, with one blow cut off the Giants leg, and so he fell to
the ground, at which he went to him and cut off his Head.

Having so done he went to assist the Numidian, but he saw that he had likewise
killed the other Giant; for being fresh, he laid about him so that he had slain
him without receiving any wound, but one in the arm.

Thus these two friends having finished this Combat, went forwards and entered
into a brave Hall paved with Marble, and supported with several Pillars of
Jasper: walking about here they saw a Door that led them into a Garden where
were many pleasant Walks, among the rest one led them to a Vault, at the door
of which they saw an Inscription thus written:

They who shall have so great prowess as to kill all the Guards, and pass
hither, shall yet fail in their expectations, unless the Fire that is here
preserved be put out; which being done, this Enchantment shall end.

The Knights having read this, were somewhat satisfied that they knew what
would put an end to this Adventure, and therefore they resolved to use their
utmost power to accomplish it: but they knew not how to enter this Cave, the
door being very strong, searching further they saw another door belonging to
the same Cave, and a Bell hanging thereto, which they rung and then the door
opened, and there they saw a small Fire in the middle of the Cave: As soon as
they were entered they were assaulted in mavelous manner, but they could not
see by whom; they felt many mighty strokes, so that sometimes they were driven
to fall down on their knees, but they could not see any body that gave them,
and it was in vain to use their Swords, for they cut nothing but the Air, at
which they both marvelled. And the Numidian Prince understanding by the
Inscription that they had read, that the quenching of that Fire gave an end to
the Enchantment, he left Don Bellianis and went out of the Cave to the Fountain
which they had seen in the Courtyard, and taking off his Helmet, intended to
fetch some water from thence, but when he was come near the Fountain, and went
to dip his Helmet therein for water, there issued out of the water a fierce
Crocodile, and flying in his face wounded his head, so that he bled
exceedingly: at which being amazed, he drew his Sword and had a great Combat
with the Crocodile, but in the end the Crocodile remained dead, and he dipped
his Helmet into the Fountain and took some water from thence and hasted to the
Cave, where he found Don Bellianis still in battle with those Fantasms: he gave
many blows, but could not hear any sound of them, but he himself was so beaten
that he was well nigh out of breath. Thus the Numidian arrived in the Cave, and
following close to his friend, crying, Courage Sir, proceed to the Fire, for I
have gotten that which will put it out: At which words Don Bellianis went
forwards, and the Numidian followed so cl^se, that at last approaching to the
Fire he threw the water therein; which he had no sooner done, but there
happened much Lightning and Thunder, and immediately they found themselves in
the plain Fields, no sign of any Cave or Garden, only the Castle remained. At
which they believing the Enchantment to be ended, went toward the Castle,
where when they came the doors of the Castle were opened; and they walking into
the Hall saw another door which conducted them into another Room, where they
met the Souldan walking in great haste to see what was the occasion of that
great noise: but when he came down and saw the two Knights, he greatly
marvelled, not yet thinking the Enchantment to be ended: but they putting their
knees to the ground told him, that if as hitherto he had been a prisoner, he
was now by the bounty of Heaven free; and thereupon the Prince of Numidian
pulled off his Helmet, which the Souldan seeing ran to him, knowing him, and
said, Ah good Cousin Baltasano, how much am I indebted to you for this great
travel that you have undertaken for my Delivery! But Baltasano answering,
replied, Good Uncle, all my endeavors had been fruitless, had you not been
assisted by this good Knight, to whom you are much beholden, and so is your
Daughter, or else she had kept you company.

The Souldan hearing this, went to Don Bellianis, and lifting him from the
ground, said: Indeed good Knight, he who brought me hither, told me that if I
would not consent that he should dispose of my Daughter, he would ere long
force her to keep me company, and we should end our wretched lives together,
but I resolved rather to suffer any torment than to consent to so great an evil
as the delivery of my Daughter to him, trusting that the Heavens would be so
good to her as to preserve her out of his hands, and rather choosing to have
perpetual imprisonment, than that she should be given into the power of any
person: If I would have consented to this, I had long ere this been delivered,
but thanks be returned to Heaven in that they have been so courteous, as to
send you to deliver me without such hard conditions: and thereupon he asked
them how his Daughter did, and his Emperess, and all the rest of the Court?
asking them how far he was off from his Court, he not knowing thereof; for he
had continued in a Trance all the way coming thither both by Land and by Sea,
and did not come to himself till he was placed within the Castle.

To which questions he was answered, how that it was many days Journey from
Babylon, but if he was ready to go with them, they had brought a Ship of his
own to carry him into his own Country: At which he was glad, and therefore
they having looked round about the Castle, departed therefrom: and as they
were walking to the water side, they perceived the two New Knights coming
toward them, who when they had heard the great Thunder and Lightning which was
at the ending of the Enchantment, they supposing some such thing attempted once
more to land, which they did with great ease; for all those Monsters that had
formerly opposed them, were at the end of the Enchantment vanished away, at
which they much marvelled, and so coming on land, went directly toward the
Castle, but when they saw the Souldan in company of the two Knights, they were
amazed, and falling on their knees they humbly kissed his hands, and then
Baltasano telling him who they were, he greatly rejoiced. Thus they returned
and went to the Seaside where they soon embarquing themselves, set sail and
departed on their way to Babylon.

CHAP. XXI.
How the Souldan of Babylon in company of the Knight of the Golden Image, the
Knight of the Boar, the Knight of Hope, and the Knight of the Flaming Sword,
traveling toward Babylon, met with an Adventure, whereby they understood of
the danger of the Princess Florisbella, and how they arrived in Babylon.



SO long sailed these great Personages on the Sea, that in the end they all
came to shore, and landed in the Kingdom of Armenia, where providing themselves
of Necessaries to travel, they set forwards for Babylon. They traveled through
all the Kingdom of Armenia without any Adventure, and came into some part of
the Empire of Trebizond, when one day several Troops of Knights overtook them,
Don Bellianis being desirous of novelty, put forward from his company, and
joining himself with them, desired to know whither they were going: To which
question, the Knight looking on Don Bellianis, said: Sir Knight, I had thought
you could not be ignorant of the Wars that our Emperor intends to make against
Babylon.

Don Bellianis hearing of this, was wondrous desirous to know the truth of
this matter, and therefore he thus replied: Truly Sir Knight, I am a stranger
in this Country, being but lately come into these parts, therefore I pray you
give your self the trouble to give me a particular account of this matter. Know
then Sir Knight, quoth the other, that you are now in the Country of the
Emperor of Trebizond, which is now governed by an Emperor called Morello, who
has not long ruled the same, for it is not yet above six months since his
Father died, and till his Father died he spent the greatest part of his time in
travel, in seeking out strange Adventures to get honor and renown, and under
the Name of The Black Knight, be brought to pass many a hazardous Adventure: At
the time of the decease of his Father, he was in the Court of the Souldan of
Babylon, and there under that title, though unknown, he exercised many deeds of
Knighthood, and thereby got great fame; but bearing of the death of his Father,
he left that Court and returned home, where he was received by all his Subjects
with much content and j^y: but during his being at Babylon, he beholding the
matchless Beauty of the Princess Florisbella, Daughter to the Souldan, he fell
deeply in love with her, but durst not discover the same because there has
been much Wars between their two Fathers, but after he was come home, and had
been some time Crowned, he opened his mind to some of his Nobility, they liked
well thereof, and knowing that the said Princess is sole Heir to the Crown, did
well approve of the Match whereby these two Empires might be joined, be
therefore resolved in his mind to send Ambassadors to ask the said Princess in
Marriage of her Father, which was done accordingly; but when they arrived at
the Souldans Court, they found that the Souldan was absent, having been lost
some time before, and the Court was in great sorrow for his absence, however
the Ambassadors delivered their Embassy to the Emperess and her Council, who
returned Answer, That they could not by any means dispose of their Princess
without the consent of her Father. But they importuned the business further,
and the Princess her self being asked the question, she made the same excuses
at first, but the Ambassadors in the end importuned her for her absolute
Answer, which she gave them to their small content; for she very boldly told
them, that though her Father were returned, yet should she always continue in
this opinion, that she would never accept their Master for her Husband: with
which Answer they at last returned, being very sorry that their Embassy turned
to no better effect.

Arriving at Trebizond, and returning this Answer to their Master, he was at
first much troubled, but in the end understanding of the absence of the
Souldan, he resolved to make use of the present opportunity to be revenged, as
well for the old wrongs his Empire had sustained by the Souldan, as for the new
affront so lately put upon him, and thereupon he immediately commanded that a
great Army should be levied, and sent Commissioners into all parts of his
Empire to raise all the Force he could suddenly, intending forthwith to travel
toward Babylon, and spoil the Dominions of the Souldan. And this, Sir Knight,
is the occasion of these Troops so sudden marching, for we are going to the
General Rendezvous at Trebizond.

The Knight having given this Declaration to Don Bellianis, left him and went
forwards, and he stayed behind in a very deep melancholy, considering the
estate of his fair Princess: but however he was somewhat joyful that he had
this occasion of serving her, hoping to do such acts for the defense of the
Empire, that the Souldan would be thereby induced to bestow his Daughter upon
him. In this consideration he was, when the Souldan and the rest of the company
overtaking him, asked him what was the occasion of his leaving them, and what
was his large Discourse with the Knight? To which he soon replied, and
recounting the whole matter to the Souldan, gave him the greatest amazement in
the world.

In much trouble did they ride the rest of the Journey, being all disturbed at
the late news: but the Souldan was somewhat pleased in that he was freed
himself from his late bondage, that he might in person be able to resist his
enemies, and defend his Country, resolving that he would lose his whole
Empire, rather then co^nset to the Marriage of his Daughter without her own
assent. This gave Don Bellianis some satisfaction, in that he knew if the
Princess had the liberty to dispose of her self, that he should be ascertained
to have her.

And therefore he desired the Souldan to trouble his mind as little as he
could, for, said he, as I have been instrumental in restoring you your liberty,
so I shall not fail to do all that lies in my power to rid you of your enemies,
and I have so good friends in the world, that if occasion serves I shall be
able to raise such a power, as shall easily overthrow the designs of your
enemies to their confusion, and your own honor. In these discourses spent they
the most of their time that they traveled, and the Souldan was forced to
disguise himself, till he came into his own country, lest he being known by any
of his enemies, should be taken and kept prisoner: but it was not long ere he
arrived in his own dominions, and then he traveled the more boldly, but he as
yet saw no preparations for war, at which he much wondered: but the Emperor of
Trebizond had been so sudden, that News of his Expedition was hardly yet
arrived to the Court: when they came within one days journey of the Court, they
saw some preparations for the war, and the Souldan met with many of his
Knights, who knowing him were exceeding glad for his deliverance, and that at
such at time when as there was most need for him. Thus the nearer he approached
the court, the more company he gathered, so that by that time he came to
Babylon, he had above forty thousand Knights in his company, which gave him
much content and joy: but that was not half so pleasant to him, as the fight of
his own City, where he was no sooner entered but the Inhabitants had notice
thereof, some running to inform the Empress hereof, and others running to meet
him, still enquiring which was the Knight that delivered him, and having known
him, great was the praises they gave him. In this manner they rode thorough the
City, and arriving at the Palace they were met by the Empress, her Daughter
the Princess Florisbella, the Princess Mattarosa, and many other Ladies, and
great Personages, and so great was the content of the Empress and her Daughter,
at the return of the Souldan his company, that they wept exceedingly for joy.
The Souldan alighting from his horse, went first and embraced the Empress most
lovingly, and then the Princess his Daughter; who received him on her knees,
but he raising her up kindly saluted her. Don Bellianis was now on his knees
before the Empress, humbly desiring to kiss her hand, but she knowing how much
she was engaged to him would not permit that, but raising him from the ground
most lovingly saluted him, giving him many thanks for the great pains he had
taken for her, calling him the Restorer of Babylon, and bestowed many thanks
upon him; when he had received his welcome from the Empress, he went to the
Princess her Daughter, and falling on his knees, humbly kissed her hands, but
she soon raised him from the ground reitterating all the thanks that her Mother
had already given him: To which discourse he replied, and said: That since she
had been pleased to admit him to the honor of being her Servant, he questioned
not but he should be able to overcome any Enterprise how difficult soever, and
since there was an occasion given him of expressing his duteous service to her,
he was resolved to do such acts as might render him worthy of the esteem she
had of him, or in the prosecution of them, loss his life as testimony of the
duty he owed her.

Thus he discoursed with her, and then he went to the Princess Mattarosa to
receive those Welcomes that she had prepared for him, which were in effect the
same he had received before of the Empress and her Daughter: and thus taking
her by the hand, the Souldan doing the same to the Empress, and the Numidian
Prince to the Princess Florisbella, they walked into the great Hall of the
Palace, where being come the Ladies helped to disarm them, which when they had
done, and had clothed themselves in rich Mantles, they sat them down to repose
themselves: many of the Nobility came into the Presence to congratulate the
return of their Sovereign, and to kiss his hands, and thank the Knight of the
Golden Image for the great good he had done them, in restoring their Prince to
them in such time when they most stood in need of his presence.

But Don Bellianis returning them thanks, told them that without the assistance
of the Prince of Numidia he had not been able to have performed that
Enterprise; but however what power he had he should willingly at all times
employ in defense of the Souldan and his country: they were glad to hear these
expressions from him, doubting that now he had performed this adventure, he
would depart; but understanding that he was resolved to stay and assist them in
the wars, they humbly supplicated the Souldan that he would be pleased to order
Don Bellianis to be General of such Forces as should be raised to go against
Trebizond: To which the Souldan soon consented, but he would not accept of so
great a charge except the Prince of Numidia might be joined in Commission with
him: To which they all at last consented, and it was ordered as soon as a
sufficient Force should be ready, he should advance toward the enemies
countries, and the Numidian Prince should stay at the Court to guard the City,
and obey such further orders as should be necessary. In these consultations
they continued most of that evening, till it was time for every one to go to
rest: at which time he commanded his Dwarf to give him notice of the departure
of the Princesses to their Lodging, because he was very desirous to have some
conference with them; which the Dwarf did so effectually, that he brought word
that the Princesses were both together in the Lodging of the Princess
Florisbella, wherefore he sent him to the Princess Mattarosa, to know whither
he should give them the trouble of a visit in that place; she acquainting the
Princess her Cousin therewith, they so ordered it, that she dismissed all her
Damsels but one who was acquainted with her Love, and so telling the Dwarf that
his Master might come when he pleased, the Dwarf returned with this answer to
his Master, who being glad thereof departed out of his own Lodging to go into
that of the Princess, which he accordingly did, as shall be declared to you in
the next Chapter.

CHAP. XXII.
How Don Bellianis went to the Chamber of the Princess Florisbella, and of the
discourse they had there, and how the next day he departed toward Trebizond
with fifty thousand men.



THe Dwarf had no sooner delivered his message, but Don Bellianis repaired to
the Chamber of the Princess Florisbella; whither when he was come he kindly
sasaluted her and the Princess Mattarosa her Cousin; which having done they all
seated themselves, and the Princess his Mistress thus began to him:

Sir Knight, since I have admitted you to be mine, it is necessary that you
give me ordinary satisfaction of telling me the order of your proceedings in
this adventure, and since I have not yet heard the particulars thereof, I pray
let me have the knowledge of them from your own mouth.

Madam, replied Don Bellianis, the actions that I have done in this occasion
are so inconsiderable, that it is not fit that your ears should be troubled
with matters of so small moment; but since it is your desire to give your self
so much trouble, I shall give you a small relation of them.

Then did he begin to tell her all the passages of that adventure, beginning
from the time that they took shipping, the happy meeting with the Sage Bellonas
Damsel, the rescuing her from the Giants, his desperate attempt in throwing
himself into the Sea to get to shore, his killing of those Monsters, his
descending the Cave, fighting with the Serpents and Dragons, and all those
other actions which he and the Numidian Prince performed for the releasing of
the Souldan: At which recital she was so sensibly afflicted when he related any
thing wherein he was in any peril, that the christaline tears ran from her fair
eyes down her cheeks in great abundance, which made him leave off his
discourse, and say to her:

Madam, the trouble that I thought I should put you to in recounting these
adventures, made me desire to be excused in discoursing them to you, but if I
had thought they would have given you so sensible a displeasure, I should for
once have so far disobeyed your commands, as not to have given you an account
of these past actions.

She hearing that he had done, wiping her fair face, said: Sir Knight, the many
difficulties that you have run thorough for my sake, could not choose but make
me accompany you in tears, but praised be the Gods who have delivered you from
these dangers, and I hope these wars once ended, there will be no further
occasion for you to endanger your person. Ah Madam, said he, if my discourse
has given you any sense of sorrow, assure your self I was much more afflicted
when I had first the relation of your misfortunes about the Emperor of
Trebizond, and although I did not question your Loyalty, yet I knew not what
you might be compelled unto by a fearful Mother and a Nobility without a head:
but I am to render you infinite thanks for your so resolute answer to his
Ambassadors, not questioning but some considerations of me the meanest of your
servants, occasioned you to return that answer.

Sir, said she, I never had any inclination for that Prince, for his person
does not please me, and besides that there is such an antipithy in my nature to
any one of the family of Trebizond, though never so well accomplished, that I
should have refused him; but were there presented to me the most accomplished
person for virtues and magnanimity, and were be likewise sole Potentate of the
whole earth set in competition to you, Sir, and were you but a bare
Knight Errant, my choice should quickly testify that the love I have promised
to you, is not counterfeit but absolutely real. He hearing her in these terms
fell down on his knees, and strictly embracing hers, cried out, Ah Madam, how
do you undo your creature with heaping so much blessings upon him, which in all
his life, though spent in your service, can never merit? The Princess Mattarosa
seeing them in these terms commanded him to arise, and leave off these
impertinent protestations: for, says she, I am confident you are both so well
satisfied of each other affections, that these words are impertinent, and must
needs give you both some sensible trouble. They very well knowing that she
spoke a great deal of reason, fell from this discourse to some other, as what
order he intended to take in his Expedition: To which he replied, That he
intended the next day to be upon the march with those Forces that were already
raised, and go and meet the enemy, if possible, in his own quarters, and so
hinder him from hurting the country: To which the Princess was somewhat
unwilling to give him leave to depart so soon, but he telling her that the
sooner he went, it was most probable he should return the sooner, and that
during his absence, he would send his trusty Dwarf with Letters to the Princess
Mattarosa to be delivered to her, and under that pretense Answers might be sent
without any suspicion: These things being concluded of, and he taking his
hearty farewell both of her and her cousin, after many amo^ous salutes, he
departed to his own Lodging, and so went to take his ordinary repose.

The next day he was up early in the morning, and the two Knights of Hope, and
the Flaming Sword, desired that they might be admitted to wait on him in this
Expedition: to which request he being sufficiently satisfied of their valor,
assented, and gave them both sufficient Commands under him, which when he had
done, he sent for the Prince of Numidia, and they after some Conference
together, resolved immediately to muster all the Forces that was then in the
City; which they having done, found that there was eighty thousand men. And Don
Bellianis resolving to be gone, divided the Forces into two parts, and took
under his Command fifty thousand men, knowing that the Forces of his Companion
would increase daily: and therefore commanding them all to be in readiness that
Afternoon, he repaired to the Souldan and desired his leave to depart, telling
him that old Maxim in War, That the least delay,
Spreads Palms, and scatters Roses in Rebellions way.


The Souldan after he had heard his reasons, gave consent, giving him a large
Commission to raise Forces all the way he should go, and promising to send him
more Aid with all the expedition that might be.

Thus this brave Martiallist taking his leave of the Souldan and Ladies,
departed from that great City, and that evering marching ten miles to a little
Town, where for that night he took up his Quarters.

CHAP. XXIII.
How Don Bellianis marching toward Trebizond, and increasing his Army, arrived
at last near to his Enemies Camp.

EArly the next morning did Don Bellianis arise, and caused the Drums,
Trumpets, and all other Warlike Instruments to sound a March; which Command
being accordingly obeyed, they advanced forwards, but he was much hindered in
his marches, by reason of the great quantity of Forces that still came in to
him, so that before he had marched one hundred and fifty miles, his Army was
one hundred thousand men complete, at which he was very joyful; and therefore
he made all the expedition possible to meet the Enemy before he should be come
out of his own Kingdom. But the Emperor of Trebizond having carried on his
business with great privacy, had gotten his Forces together, and mustring two
hundred thousand men, besides many fierce and strong Giants, he was advanced
with his Army very far, and was come into part of the Dominions of the Souldan
of Babylon, before he heard the News of the Souldans being returned, which did
somewhat trouble him, but however he resolved to go on, and not leave his
Enterprise unattempted.



Wherefore hearing of the approaches of his Enemies Forces, he sent to see what
number they were, and who had the Commanding of them. The Messenger returning
to him, told him that the Souldans Forces consisted of one hundred thousand
men, and that they were conducted by a famous Knight, called The Knight of the
Golden Image.

Hearing this news, he was somewhat discontented thereat, for he had been in
the Wars between the Souldan of Persia and the Duke Alfiron, and there he had
both heard and seen the valiant Acts of the Knight of the Golden Image: but
however he resolved to persist in his Enterprise, and like a good and hardy
Knight to go forward, and endeavor to give his Enemy battle before he should
increase his Forces, not questioning but through the magnanimity of his own
valor, and that of his Knights and Giants under his Command, he should be able
to encounter his Enemy with good advantage, and considering he had double his
number he might vanquish and overcome his Forces before Aid came to him:
wherefore he hearing that he was within a days march of his Enemy, caused his
Army the next morning to march forwards, intending that if his Enemy continued
his march to join Battle with him. Don Bellianis likewise hearing that his
Enemy came forwards, advanced apace, being resolved as well as he to give him
battle that day, if it were possible: but when they approached near to one
another, their men were so wearied with that days travel, that before they
could put them in any good order, and bring up the Rear of their Armies, the
Evening came on, so that they were both forced to alter their Resolutions; and
therefore they both encamped themselves in fight of one another, and all that
night both Armies made great Fires, so that it was an artificial day, now and
then running into one another Camp in small parties, and doing some harm: but
the morning approaching they let the Fires go out, and Don Bellianis caused
them all to prepare themselves for the Battle, and so they did, encouraging one
another in the best sort that might be, resolving to loss all their lives ere
they would permit themselves to be overcome by their enemies. Don Bellianis
knowing what was necessary to be done by a good General, having been in many
other battles ordered his Army, and divided his Squadrons, as shall be showed
you in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XXIIII.
How Don Bellianis ordered his Forces, and of the cruel bloody Battle between
the Emperor of Trebizond and his Army, and the Forces under the command of Don
Bellianis.

THe morning being come wherein this great Battle was to be fought, Don
Bellianis arose early, and dividing his Army into three Squadrons, took forty
thousand men under his own command, twenty thousand men he ordered to be
commanded by the Knight of Hope, and twenty thousand men under the command of
the Knight of the Flaming Sword, and twenty thousand men more he ordered to be
under the command of the Prince of Mesapotamia, and not to stir to the Battle,
until there should be an absolute necessity, or that he should be commanded by
himself.



Thus having ordered his Battalions, he commanded the Heads of every Troop to
come to the Front of the Army, where he encouraged them by this following
discourse: Gentlemen, and fellow Soldiers, the cause of this war I shall not
need to inform you of, you being already satisfied in that particular, the
courages of your enemies you likewise are acquainted with, having by often
experience found that never any of your nation was overcome by them, but that
you still marched away conquerors, giving laws to them rather then obeying any
of their commands.

Their presumption that your King was absent, was the chief occasion of this
boldness in them, or else they would not have been so hardy as to enter your
Land, and now being ashamed after all this provision to turn back again without
abiding the hazard of a Battle, they with much unwillingness expect you; their
intention was to force your Princess, command your Estates, dispose of your
persons, and to make all the Inhabitants of this kingdom their Vassals, hoping
to have found you in disorder and without a Head, but thanks be to heaven you
have not only a Head to rule over you, in that your gracious Sovereign is
restored, but also a General who will hazard his person to the utmost with you,
and therefore I question not but you will have hearts to follow my example, and
if you see any thing of courage in me to imitate me therein and follow my
example, and assure your selves that I resolve to conquer or die: thus hoping
you have all the same courage and resolution, let us bravely fall on our
enemies.

This speech being ended, caused a great shout throughout the whole Army, and
presently every one repairing to his own command, they marched on to assault
their enemies; who all this while were not idle, but the Emperor not forgetting
what was necessary to be done, did likewise order his Battle, and divided them
into four parts, one of fifty thousand men he commanded himself, the Prince of
Albania commanded the like number, and two mighty Giants of his kindred,
commanded the other two Squadrons.

Thus having divided his Forces, and ordered his Battle, he was likewise about
to make an Oration to his Soldiers, but the noise which his enemies made in
their approaches diverted him, and therefore causing his Trumpets and Drums,
and all manner of millitary Instruments to sound, he being armed at all points
in the Front of the Army, went forwards to receive the Babylonians. Don
Bellianis being likewise in the Front of his Army, seeing his enemy approach,
and believing it to be the Emperor, because he had on his accustomed black
Armor, in which he had gotten great renown, anger and jealousy so incensed
him, that taking a strong Lance, and couching the same, he ran full against
him: and the other being also provided did the same in such brave manner that
their Lances shivered into pieces, and their horses meeting, had like to have
overthrown one another: but these two brave Warriors soon recovering
themselves, and drawing their Swords, assaulted one another with incredible
fury: Long did their Combat endure together, so that both Armies joined, and
as well the Soldiers as the Commanders performed wonders, making an incredible
slaughter: at length one of the Giants, Cousin to the Emperor, advancing with
his Troop, arrived at the place where the two Generals were in Combat, and
resolving to dispatch Don Bellianis, cowardly came behind him, and gave him so
weighty a blow on the Helmet, that he fell backwards on his horse, and he going
to redouble the same had certainly killed him at the second blow, had not the
horse of Don Bellianis run away with his Master, who soon coming again to
himself, and being extraordinarily enraged, perceived that it was the Giant
that had used him so hardly, for he still pursued him to take away his life;
which he seeing, being more enraged than any Numidian Lioness bereaved of her
whelps, the fire sparkling from his eyes, let fall his Target, and taking his
Sword in both hands, laid so puissant a blow on the Giant, that he did cleave
him down from the head to the middle. The Black Knight seeing this, cried out,
Oh ye Gods! with how much force and valor have you endued one single Knight?

Don Bellianis having done this execution, spurred on his beast, and more
furiously than a baited Bull entered the Army of his Enemy, where he did kill
and slay all that came within the reach of his Sword. The Black Knight did the
like, till at length he was encountered with by the Knight of Hope, who in
despite of his resolution to go forwards, made him stay and bravely received
him: but the Black Knight being of admirable force and dexterity, so handled
him that in short time he left him without sense or motion, and so he departed
and went forwards, killing and slaying all that had the valor to oppose him.
Thus continued he a long time, till one came to him, and told him that his
presence would be very necessary in his own Army, for that the Knight of the
Golden Image, and those who followed him, had put one of the Squadrons of his
Army to the rout, which he hearing presently departed: and coming to the place
where Don Bellianis was, he saw him perform things incredible, for he was in
pursuit of many Knights, none of them having so much resolution as to turn
their faces toward him, for if they did they certainly met with their deaths.

The Emperor seeing this, was forced for the safety of his own men, to engage
himself once more in Combat with him, which Don Bellianis was not at all
discontented at, but renewing his forces, he likewise renewed the Fight with
him. These two valiant Champions continued long in fight together, and gave to
each other such violent blows, that those Forces that were there stood still
and forbore fighting, to behold them: But Don Bellianis whose match was not to
be found throughout the whole Universe, being angered that the Fight continued
so long, gave the Emperor so mighty a blow on the arm that he wounded him so
mightily, that his Sword fell out of his hand; which Don Bellianis seeing, and
intending to redouble his blow, was prevented: for many valiant Knights who had
till then stood still, seeing their Prince in so great danger, went and
succored him, and in despite of Don Bellianis carried him away to his Tent,
where when his wound was dressed, be would have entered the Fight again, but his
Surgeons would not in any wise permit it.

Thus the absence of the Emperor caused Don Bellianis and his party to prevail:
but although he behaved himself with great valor, and killed many Knights and
Giants, yet their great numbers still freshly coming on, in the end tired him,
so that when the night approached (he having continued the Battle all that day)
he withdrew his men, and contented himself with what he had done; for the next
morning having taken an account of the numbers that he had lost, be found that
he wanted but Fifteen thousandsmen, when on the enemies part were slain at
least fifty thousand men.

That day the Knights of Hope, and of the Flaming Sword did perform bravely,
and not having ever been in any Battle before, they by the example of their
General performed excellently both in commanding and executing, and the Prince
of Mesapotamia though a most valiant Knight, and much against his will, this
day performed nothing, for he remained where his General had commanded him, and
there was no occasion to use that force that was under his Command till it was
night, and then they retreated in good order to the place were he was placed,
and there taking up their quarters expected the approach of the next mornings
sun to renew their fight. News was soon carried every where of the good fortune
of the Knight of the Golden Image, and the Forces under his command, and how
that in single Combat he had so wounded the Emperor of Trebizond in the arm,
that he was forced to leave the fight, and of those other advantages that he
had gotten, which caused many more of the Souldan of Babylons Subjects to come
in unto him, and the next day there arrived a fresh supply of fifty thousand
men from the Prince of Numidia; with promise and assurance that he himself
would within few days be with him in the Head of one hundred thousand men, and
then they did not question but they should be able to expel their enemies out
of the Country.

But Don Bellianis believing that he had Forces enough already to perform that
without any new Additions, resolved to try the fortune of another day with his
whole Army, resolving to die or drive his enemies out of the field. In this
resolution be continued, and therefore gave order that all should be in
readiness to fall upon their enemies, whenever he should command them.

On the other side the Emperor of Trebizond was much discontented at the wound
he had received, but he resolved that should not hinder him from fighting in
his own person in the next Battle which he intended should be within two days,
for by that time he expected a recruit of fifty thousand men which were already
raised, and only staid behind to expect his Command for them to advance: which
Forces he sent for with this resolution, that as soon as they were come to him
he would again hazard another Field-battel, but he was hindered of his purpose,
for Don Bellianis according to his resolution he had already taken, did engage
him and all his Forces in another Field-battel, before the arrival of his other
Forces, as shall be showed you at large in the Chapter following:

CHAP. XXV.
How Don Bellianie fought another B^ttel with the Emperor of Trebizond, and how
he forced him to leave the Field; and how he followed him into his own Country.



TWo hours before day the next morning did Don Bellianis, without any noise of
Trumpets, or other Warlike Instruments, leave his own Camp, and with his whole
Forces marched to assault his Enemies, who having kept a strict Watch took the
Alarm, but before they could put themselves in a readiness, Don Bellianis and
his Forces had sacrificed the lives of above twenty thousand men.

The Emperor of Trebizond being enraged at this surprisal, soon called for his
Armor, and having armed himself therewith, and being mounted on a lusty
Courser, soon revenged himself of some of his Enemies, for before be brake his
Lance he dismounted above twenty Knights, and being accompanied with twenty
fierce Giants (who were appointed for his Guard by reason of the last days
misfortune) they with their broad and sharp cutting Cymetars and Battel-axes
made a woeful destruction, to what place soever they came present death followed
to those that resisted them: at length they met with the Prince of Mesapotamia,
who having been idle all the last Battle, was resolved to make amends in this
days Combat, and went with a Guard of one hundred Knights, killing and forcing
their ways through the enemies Camp: Him and his Knights did the Emperor and his
Giants assail, and between them happened a bloody Conflict; for the Giants
being of the best in the whole Army, had presently slain twenty of his Knights,
which so enraged the Mesapotamian, that maugre all their resistance, he sent
two of their black souls immediately to accompany his Knights, and fiercely
breaking thorough the midst of them, he ran against the Emperor with great
advantage, for he well nigh dismounted him from his horse: for he not being
provided for the encounter, was forced to catch hold of his horse neck to save
himself from falling. At which assault he recovering himself, and being
enraged, with his Sword gave his adversary so mighty a blow on the helmet, that
he bent his head to the horses neck, and would have soon dispatched him of his
life, but that the Knight of Hope came then timely enough to prevent him, and
so received the blow, and returned it so fiercely on the Emperor that he was
wounded on the Thigh: and by this time the Prince of Mesapotamia was recovered
to his senses, and finding the danger he was delivered from, was first thankful
to the heavens, and then revenged himself on one of the Giants, who was next
him, whose Arm he cut off, and wounded him so in the side, that his life was
sacrificed to his revenge.

Thus the Battle was in this part of the field, but the Knight of the Golden
Image, and the Knight of the Flaming Sword keeping company with one another,
made very great havoc of their enemies, and being followed by a great party of
valiant Knights, gave the enemy so terrible an Onset, that after two hours
contention they fled and left the field, having first left it thickly strewed
with the dead bodies of the Emperors Forces. Don Bellianis pursued him so long,
that in the end they came to a great River, and seeing that death was both
before and behind them, they made a stand and bravely resisted him and all his
Forces, where they fought so desperately, that the streams of the River, which
were went to be of a christaline hew, were now by means of the great slaughter
was there made, become of a scalret^dy.

All this while the Emperor and his Giants, with great part of his Forces, were
engaged, as I told you, with the Prince of Mesapotamia and the Knight of Hope,
where though they on both sides performed miracles, yet in the end be in
despite of all the resistance he could make, after the death of many of his
Giants, and a very great slaughter of his men, was likewise forced to retreat,
which he did with a great deal of sobriety, hoping that the other part of his
Army was in better case then that which he commanded. But he was not long
without the knowledge of what had happened to them: and hearing that they were
engaged at the River side, he then commanded some of the most valiant of the
Grants to make good the Retreat with the best advantage, and the least loss
that they could, while he himself went in all haste to his Forces, hoping by
his presence to put new courage into their breasts. When he came to them, he
found that they had made a mighty resistance, and that she Fight was very
bloody; wherefore that he might exercise the part of a discreet General, and
bring them off with the least loss, he knowing that there was a Bridge not far
off, sent to possess it: which when he had done, he commanded his Army to
retire thither as fast as they could, he himself, with the most valiant Knights
of his whole Army, making good the Rear as well as they could; but
notwithstanding all the diligence and valor that they could use, Don Bellianis
and the Knights with him plied their business so well, that ere they got over
the River many of them lost their lives: At length they got to the other side
of the River, and in despite of Don Bellianis and all his Forces, they cut
down the Bridge, so that there was no way for him and his Forces to follow them.

This being done, he left a strong Guard at the Rivers side, and then returned
to the place where the Emperor had encamped, where they found great Treasure;
for so great was their haste in their Retreat, that they had not time to take
any thing with them. All the Booty of the Emperors Camp he gave to the
Soldiers, which gave them a great satisfaction, and caused them ever to have a
great esteem of him.

This being done, he dispatched messengers to inform the Souldan, of what he
had done not forgetting to write to his Dear Princess, the remembrance of whom
made him the more desirous to put an end to these wars, that he might solace
his spirits in her company. The Emperor of Trebizond being thus forced to leave
the field, and seeing that fortune was a little contrary to him, yet being of
an extraordinary courage, resolved still to persevere in his enterprise, and
not to leave off basely, hoping in the end to attain his desires, and in order
to the strengthening and recruiting his Forces, he sent commands to those Forces
that were behind, to a wait his coming to a City called Pharez, which was the
first City in his Empire; which being accordingly done, one evening leaving
some horsemen at the River side, he raised his Camp and departed to Pharez, and
the next day those that he had left behind at the water followed him: He thus
being arrived at the City, fortified it both within and without, and sent
thoroughout his Empire to all places for help, resolving to make that place the
seat of war, for else he knew that the Souldans Forces would follow him further.

The next day after their departure, Don Bellianis was informed thereof by
those he had left at the water side, wherefore he marched down thither, but do
what he could it was two days before he could mend the Bridge, which the
Emperor of Trebizond had caused to be broken; which when he had done, he passed
over with his whole Army, resolving to pursue his enemy, which he did
accordingly: and thus in good order he marched till he arrived near the City of
Pharez, where he saw that the enemy had made strong entrenchments without the
Town, so that all he did at present was to encamp himself near them; which when
he had done, he prepared to give them an assault, which he did, as shall be
showed you in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XXVI.
How the Emperor of Trebizond being besieged in the City of Pharez, sent
Ambassadors to Albanta, Georgia, Muscovia, and several other Kings his Allies,
to help him in his Wars with the Souldan of Babylon; and how Don Bellianis
assaulted his Forces that were encamped without the City.



DOn Bellianis being extremely desirous to do all that might be possible for
the overcoming of his enemy, before any other help came to him, that he might
acquire the more honor thereby, resolved to set upon his enemies Camp that was
without the City, and (if possible) force them to retire into the City, that he
might lay a close Siege thereto, and so hinder them from going abroad for
provisions. In order to which resolution, after his men had rested themselves,
he commanded them to provide to assault their enemies.

On the other side the Emperor resolving to abide him there, took care for
fresh supplies, for he not only sent thorough all his own Dominions for more
help but likewise sent Ambassadors to those Kings that were either his Friends
or of his Alliance, such as were the Kings of Albania, Georgia, and the Emperor
of Muscovia, desiring them not to fail him in this occasion, and the
Ambassadors who went made such expedition, and had such good success in their
Embassies, that the Emperor had great assistance, as you shall hear hereafter.
In the mean time, knowing that he had not only a valiant, but a politic enemy
to deal with, he kept strict Guards both within and without the City, lest he
should be surprised.

Don Bellianis notwithstanding all the diligence he took, did surprise him; for
having drawn out a Squadron of fifty thousand Knights, the most accomplished in
the whole Army, caused them to put a piece of white silk, or cloth in their
Helmets, that they might know one another though in the dark: and in the middle
of the night, when his enemies expected no such matter, he came to the Camp,
and killing the Sentinels, fell in among the Emperors Forces, and slew many of
them before they could arm themselves, and such was their confusion in the
dark, that they without knowledge slew one another, not knowing their enemies
from friends by reason of the darkness of the night, and their not being
acquainted with his stratagem. In this manner he run thorough the Camp, and
being followed by the best of his Army, came to the walls of the City, desiring
them to open, persuading the Guards that they were of their own party, telling
them that they must needs speak with the Emperor: but the Guards who had
commands to the contrary, went immediately to the Emperor and told him thereof,
who arising from his bed, came to the wall, and then he very well understood
that the Army was alarmed; wherefore he refused to open the Gates, not knowing
whither they were of his own Army or Enemies.

Don Bellianis perceiving this, and that it would be to little purpose to
continue there, departed, and so returned thorough the enemies Camp, killing
and staying all that were in his way, and so being gone thorough the Camp and
passed all the Guards, he caused the retreat to be sounded; which his Soldiers
hearing, soon understood the meaning thereof, and so left the Camp and came to
him; who when they were c^^e, fairly retreated to their own Quarters; But Don
Bellianis who had an intent to surprise the City, and failing therein, as you
have heard, was somewhat vexed: but however he considered that he done them a
sufficient mischief, for he had killed above twenty thousand of his enemies,
and came off with the loss of not above five hundred men.

This action gave the Emperor a sensible displeasure, and did resolve if
possible to revenge it, but he could not at present put his resolves into
execution, wherefore he gave strict commands to keep double Guards, and more
strict Watches, hoping in short time to have such aid that he might be able not
only to revenge that loss, but to beat his Foes out of the field: But before
any Forces came to his assistance, Baltasano Prince of Numidia arrived at the
Camp of Don Bellianis with one hundred thousand men, and with new Orders from
the Souldan, that if the Emperor would pay the cost of the War, and disband his
Forces, that then he should have peace, otherwise that they should prosecute
the War against him to the utmost; such was the desire and inclination that the
Souldan had for peace.

These Orders much troubled Don Bellianis, being very discontented that the War
must end, and that he could not sacrifice the life of his rival, fearing him so
long as he should live, lest he should so propound the having of the Princess
Florisbella, as the Souldan should accept of it, and indeed when the
prepositions were sent to the Emperor, he was willing to accept of them
provided be might have the Princess for his Wife, otherwise he would stand to
the utmost hazard of the war, not questioning but by the help of his Allies and
Friends, but that he should not only be able to beat his enemies out of his
Country, but to assault them in theirs, and give them such trouble that the
Souldan would be willing to propound his Daughter for a composition of the War.

This Answer being returned to the two Generals Don Bellianis and Baltasano,
displeased them both, but the anger that Don Bellianis was in at this
proposition was so great that I am not able to express it; for rising from the
place where he sat, he delivered this answer to the messenger:

Go tell thy Master, that so long as the Souldan of Babylon has Subjects in his
whole Empire, that he shall never compel him to such baseness as the
prostituting his most Royal Daughter to one so base and unworthy: and were all
the treasure of the Souldan exhausted, all his Subjects slain, and none left in
his whole Empire to defend him, yet I would command such an Army from other
parts in defense of the Royal Princess Florisbella, as should not only be able
to expel thy Master from the Souldans Dominions, but also to destroy him, and
all his in the very heart of his own Kingdom. And tell thy Master, that since
he has neglected the gracious and favorable Propositions of the Souldan, that
he now expect no more, but prepare himself for all the misfortunes that a cruel
and bloody War can bring him: And tell him, that I the Knight of the Golden
Image, do resolve when next I meet him to bereave him of his life or lose my
own in the attempt, and hereupon I bid him mortal battle.

This was the answer of Don Bellianis, and it was spoken with so much
fierceness, that the very fire issued from his eyes for anger, and he could
hardly utter his words for the inward vexation that he took at the demands of
the Emperor. Thus the messenger being returned, Don Bellianis and Baltasano
resolved both to assault him on the next day, and use their utmost endeavors to
gain the City, and thereupon they provided all things ready for an assault.

CHAP. XXVII.
How Don Brianel Prince of Macedon was Married to Aurora Queen of Antioch, and
of the Tilts and Tournaments that was held at the Wedding, and of an Adventure
that happened there.

WE will now for a while leave the two Princes of Greece and Numidia, and all
their companions and armies in their field, encamped before the City of Pharez,
as you have heard in the foregoing Chapter, and turn back to Antioch where we
left the Princes Don Brianel of Macedon, Don Clarineo of Spain, and Don
Lucidamore of Thessaly, Don Contumeliano of Phenicia, and Florispiano of
Swevia, who attended there to assist at the solemnization of the Wedding.

There was so great joy for the return of the Queen, that most of the Nobility
of the country resorted to Antioch to see her, and to tender her their dutiful
Allegiance, which she graciously accepted; and they still stayed to continue
the Triumph that should be at the Wedding. The day being come, and all things
provided, the Queen and Don Brianel were married in great pomp, and she that
day was most richly attired, so that notwithstanding all her sorrow in her
travels, she appeared to be one of the most handsome Princesses in the world:
Dinner being ended, every one resorted to the Tilt-yard, which was near the
Palace, where a Scaffold was erected, and on that was placed two Chairs of
State for the King and Queen to sit and behold the Tournaments and Feats of
Chivalry that was to be performed.



Don Clarineo, Don Lucidamore, Don Contumeliano, and Fliorispiano, and a young
Knight called Trion, or the Knight of the Wolf, who was Son to Damartino the
late Governor, were the Challengers, who undertook to Ioust, and keep the Field
against all corners for six days, and accordingly they being armed at all
points, entered the Lists, and commanded the Trumpets to sound, and the Herald
to proclaim, that if there were any adventurous Knights that would in honor of
the King and Queen break a Lance, they were there ready to receive him; which
was no sooner done, but there came a Knight armed in white Armor, who taking a
Lance entered the Lists, and expected the sound of the Trumpet that he might
begin his Course: the Knight of the Wolf did the like, and they bravely meeting
brake their Lances in the encounter, and so passed on; at the next encounter
the Knight of the Wolf had so good fortune, as to overthrow the other Knight
out of his Saddle, and passed on being unshaken, and expected another
Assaylant, when presently another Knight armed in azure Armor, entered the List,
and doing his obeisance to the King and Queen, expected the encounter, which
was so fierce that he lost both his stirrops, and the horse of the Knight of
the Wolf was on his buttocks, but he soon made him rise and so went bravely on,
when taking another Lance, and resolving to be revenged of his late disgrace,
he ran so fiercely against the Knight in the azure Armor, that he sent him from
his horse to the ground with his Saddle between his legs.

After this, another Knight entered the List armed in a green Armor, and on his
Shield was painted a Knight leaning on the ground under a tuft of trees, and he
went by the name of the Solitary Knight: This Knight after his due reverence to
the King and Queen, pranced about the field with a great grace, at last he
arrived at the end of the Lists, and taking a Lance from one of his pages, at
the sound of the Trumpets began his Caress, and performed so well that he made
the Knight of the Wolf lose both his stirrops, he being very little shaken with
the encounter: At the second course the Knight of the Wolf in revenge of the
former blow, ran so fiercely that he threw the Solitary Knight horse and man
both to the earth: at which there was a great shout.

And thus did the Knight of the Wolf throw many Knights from their horses, so
that he that day dismounted sixteen, and the night coming on they left off that
sport, and retiring into the Court, they disarming themselves, fell to dancing:
In which exercise they were as perfect as the other, so that they are as fit
for Venus as Mars. Much of the evening they spent in these kind of exercises,
but at length they left off, and conducted the King and Queen to Bed, where the
fair Princess gave to Don Brianel as full and free possession of her Body, as
he had formerly given her of her Kingdom, and there be received a full
satisfaction for all the travels he had sustained in her service.

Much was the content they both received, and I suppose there was but few
Knights in the Court but did envy their happiness, and would have been glad to
have had the company of so sweet a Bedfellow as he enjo^ed; in which enjoyment
we will leave him and all the rest to their several thoughts till the morning,
which being come they all arose, and the Queen signified by her blushes, that
she had parted from that Jewel which till then she had preserved.

They being all dressed, noon was come when they sat down to Dinner, which
being done they all went to the Tilt-yard to prosecute that Sport they had
begun, where every one being seated in the same order they were the day before,
the five Champions rid about the Field expecting the arrival of some
adventurous Knight: they had not stayed long ere they had their desire, for
there entered a Knight into the Field armed in black Armor, causing his Horse
bravely to praunce about the Field, performed his Duty to the King and Queen,
and then taking a Lance expected the sound of the Trumpet, which being heard
he put forwards, but he was encountered with such force by the Knight of the
Wolf, that he was thrown from his horse, and forced to measure his length on
the earth; which having done he retired, and then there entered into the Lists a
Knight armed with a white Armor, as a New Knight, and on his Shield he had two
Keys of Gold painted very artificially: this Knight gave all the Spectators
cause of admiration, for he demeaned himself very courteously, not only in his
saluting the King and Queen, but in his respects to all the Spectators, and
taking a Lance in his hand he ran against the Knight of the Wolf so furiously,
that at the first encounter he threw him to the earth, to the great amazement
of the Company, who now took him for a very brave Knight. Having performed so
well with the Knight of the Wolf, he faced about and expected to meet with some
other Knight, and be failed not long in his expectation, for Fliorispiano of
Swevia taking a strong and knotty Lance, at the sound of the Trumpets met him
with so great fury, thinking to revenge his Companions quarrel, but he was
deceived therein; for he only brake his Lance upon his Enemies Shield without
doing him any other harm, and the Knight of the Keye, having likewise broke his
Lance, took another and so they began a new Career: but that second was more
to the dis-advantage of Fliorispiano than the former, for he lost both his
Stirrops, and was forced to catch hold of his horse neck to keep him from
falling; at which he was much enraged, seeing his Adversary still on
horseback, and having only lost one of his Stirrops; but before he came to
the end of the Lists he bravely recovered himself, and so they did both, and
taking new Lances ran again, but to the greater misfortune of Fliorispiano
than before, for he was now tumbled from his horse. This gave much wonder to
all present to think who the Knight of the Keys was, for he was wholly unknown
there, and came then by chance, as shall be told you hereafter.

The Knight of the Keys having performed so valiantly, expected another Knight
to encounter him, when presently Contumeliano Prince of Phenieia prepared
himself for the Encounter, and taking a Lance in his hand went forwards to the
Knight of the Keys, and said to him: Sir Knight, I have one request to make to
you before we try our fortunes with the Lance, which is, that you would tell me
your Name, and of what country you are.

To which the Knight of the Keys courteously replied, Sir Knight, I am known
by no other Name than the Knight of the Keys, and to tell you any other Name
would little satisfy you, for I was born in a Country so far from hence, that
it has seldom here been heard of; and I Will assure you I came hither by
accident, and never was in your company, nor in this place before till this
day, and therefore if you have nothing else to say to me, let us proceed with
our Lances. To which the Prince of Phenicia replied, I to my experience know,
Sir Knight, that you do perform very well with the Lance, therefore I pray
grant this Request, that if we chance both to break one or two Lances without
any effect, and neither of us have any advantage, that you will proceed to the
Sword, where we may have more occasion to try our valors. To this Request the
Knight of the Keys consented, and so they forthwith brake off their discourse,
and began their Career.

Great was the fury with which both these Champions met, and they resolving to
show all their strength, brake their Lances in pieces, and so passed on: at the
next encounter they resolved to perform better, and so they did, for they not
only brake their Lances, as before, but meeting with their bodies with great
fury, fell both to the ground. Great was the admiration at this wonderful
encounter, and both the Knights were themselves much amazed, but they nimbly
got on their feet, and the Knight of the Keys being angered at this misfortune,
went to the Prince of Phenicia, and said: Sir Knight, it was your desire before
we tried our fortunes with the Lance, that if we should have no advantage with
the Lance, that we might end the Controversy with the Sword: now since we have
both had an equal misfortune, and thereby are incapable to end the difference
with the Lance, let us finish it with our Swords: To which the Prince of
Phenicia consented. And so they drew their Swords and began a mavelous brave
Combat, to the satisfaction and admiration of all the Beholders: they being
equally resolved to make amends with their Swords for the default of their
Lances, laid on many lusty strokes.

The Knight of the Keys being a young and lusty Knight, behaved himself very
nimbly, giving his Adversary very many strokes, and still avoiding those of his
Enemy, which so enraged the Prince of Phenicia that he should be so used before
so many brave Knights his Friends and Companions, that be resolved to fasten
one blow on his Enemy that should end the Combat, but he was deceived; for
though it was so mighty a stroke that the Knight of the Keys was forced to lay
one hand on the ground to save himself from falling, yet he quickly recovered
himself, and gave his Adversary a mighty blow on the Thigh, so that he was
wounded there extremely: Which the King and Queen seeing, and doubting that
what was begun in Jest and for Recreation, would end in earnest, and in the
execution of one or both of their lives, caused them to be parted; much pitying
that two such brave and valiant Knights should so injure one another upon so
slender an occasion. They being parted, the Sport for that day ended, and every
one returned to the Palace, much wondering who the Knight of the Keys should
be.

CHAP. XXVII.
Who the Knight of the Keys was, and some of his Adventures, and an end of the
Tournament.



IN the west Part of Christendom there is an Island called Ireland, in which
Island the Knight of the Keys was born, in a City called Wexford, situated
near the Seaside: his Parents being Christians at the time of his Baptizing
gave him the Name of Peter. His Father was Earl of one of the Provinces of that
Island, called Munster, and Brother to the King of that Island. This was the
place of his Birth, where being the only Son of his Father, he was bred up
with all the diligence and care that might be, he providing Masters to instruct
him in all things fit for so great a person.

At the age of eighteen years he being dubbed Knight, begged leave of his
Father to seek Adventures: to which his Parents hardly consented, in regard he
was the only Comfort and Joy of their old Age: but his importunity prevailing,
providing himself of things necessary, be caused a strong Suit of Armor to be
made, and in respect his Name was Peter, in remembrance of that holy Saint and
Apostle, be caused two Keys to be painted on his Shield: And providing himself
of all things necessary for so great a Voyage as he intended to take, he took
his leave of his Parents, his Mother giving him three rich Jewels at his
departure, and her Blessing, and so he departed, taking shipping for England,
where he arrived and performed many valiant Deeds of Arms: But his resolution
being to see strange and far Countries, he soon took shipping again, and
crossing over the Narrow Seas arrived in France, where at the Court of that
King he performed brave Feats at Arms at the Marriage of one of the Noblemens
Daughters.

And leaving a great fame of his Valor behind him, he traveled thorough all
France: and arriving at Marsellis he again embarked himself, intending to sail
to Constantinople, resolving there to spend some time in seeking out
Adventures: but as he was sailing thither, the Ship was forced to put in at an
Island called Sardinia, and being advertised that a great Feast was held there
in Honor of the Kings Coronation-Day, and that there was many Knights there who
approved their valors in running a Tilt, and such kind of honorable Exercises,
he resolved to spend some time amongst them; which he did to his great
advantage, for he so well demeaned himself that he got the sole honor of the
Tournament, and he carried himself so courteously to all, that he not only got
the good will and affection of the King and Queen, but also of their Daughter
the beauteous Magdalena, who was so wounded by the little God Cupid that she
knew not what to do: in vain was it to smother her affection, which she strived
by all means possible to do, but could not, so that an ancient Woman her Nurse
with whom she had been bred, did discover that somewhat was the matter more
than ordinary with her Mistress, and although she used many ways to find what
should be the matter, yet she failed in all, till at length the Princess not
being any longer able to smother her affection, discovered it to her Nurse,
begging of her not only to keep it concealed, but also to give her the best
advice that she could.

The Nurse now knowing the Disease of her Mistress, began to apply Remedies,
and like a discreet person told her, that it was altogether unfit for her who
was the Daughter of a King, and so great a Beauty as she was, that the greatest
Princes in the world might account themselves happy in the enjoyment of her,
that she should set her love and affection on a simple Knight, one who was but
a private person, and it was unknown whether he was nobly descended, or not.

To which the Princess soon replied, That she was confident he was not of mean
Parentage, but of Princely Birth, in respect of the Princely Endowments and
Qualifications that she saw he was endued with; and therefore if she would do
her any service it must be in this occasion, to find some way to discourse
with him, and gain some knowledge of him from himself, for she was resolved in
her love, and that it could not any ways be diverted.

The Nurse seeing this, desired her to smother her passions as well as she
could, that the King and Queen might not discover any thing from her, and that
she would take some speedy occasion to give her some satisfaction.

In these terms she left the Princess, who promised to be guided herein by her
advice, and sought opportunity to speak to the Knight, which she soon found,
for he was as deeply in love with the Princess, as she was with him, and
desired nothing more than to have an opportunity to speak to this old Lady, who
he saw was very conversant with the Princess, and did believe was her
Confident. They being both equally desirous of one and the same thing, meeting
together she began to him thus:

Sir Knight, I much marvel that you keep your self so concealed, for I very
well know that the King, Queen, and the fair Princess Magdalena, would be very
glad to know your Lineage and Country, especially my Lady Magdalena; and if you
would be pleased to tell it to me, I shall inform her therein, which I know
will be a great satisfaction to her.

The Knight hearing this discourse, and perceiving that it was occasioned by
the Princess, gave her this Answer:

That since his departure from his Parents he had not discovered himself to
any, and that the Princess should command more from him than any person in the
world: but she must excuse him in this particular, only you may certify her
in general, that I am born of Princely Parentage, and that I am her very humble
servant: And I pray Madam (said he) remember my hearty love and service to her,
and give her on my behalf this Jewel. And thereupon he gave her one of the
Jewels his Mother had given him, which the old Lady received, and so they
parted.

She in all haste coming to the Princess, gave her the effects of her
discourse, and the Jewel; at which she was extremely satisfied, and still every
day was more and more entangled and ensnared in the bonds of Love: and
thereupon she caused the old Lady to have another Conference with him. At which
second Conference he told her, that if the Princess would be pleased to grant
him private access to her, he would give her a satisfactory account of his
Estate and Condition: the which the old Lady promised to effect, and thereupon
he gave her another Jewel to present to the Princess in his behalf, which she
did accordingly, and then the Princess was more satisfied then before, longing
for the appointed time when he was to come: Which prefixed time being come, he
accordingly came to visit her, and was admitted into her Presence, where after
his Civilities tendered to her, he discovered himself to her, and of what
Lineage he was, and not only so, but seeing how matters went, he discovered his
love to her: At which she was not at all discontented, but told him of hers to
him, to the great satisfaction of them both; and there they so ordered the
matter, that they concluded to be at the dispose of one another during life,
and he in testimony of his love gave her another Jewel, more worth than both
the former; all which he had, as I told you formerly, received of his Mother:
and she in return took a Gold Chain from her neck, and bestowed it upon him,
the which he received in hearty good will. All this was done in private, not so
much as the old Lady being present; and when they had thus done and the old
Lady was come, after many farewels, though unwilling, he departed.

This business being thus concluded on, he lived long time in the Court, and
still was in the same credit with the King and Queen. At length he was resolved
further to try the Constancy of his Princess, and thereupon took an opportunity
to speak to her, and told her that now he had been there a long time, and saw
no way how to gain the good will of her Father and Mother, and therefore
resolved to go home and visit his Parents. At which discourse she was much
troubled, for her great love to him would not permit of any separation, but she
rather resolved to leave Father and Mother, and all her friends, than be
without him, and therefore it was resolved that she should go with him, and he
prepared a small Barque to that purpose: which when it was ready at the time
appointed, he in company of his Princess entered, she taking with her a good
quantity of Gold and Jewels, and so they departed and left Sardinia, with a
resolution to go toward his own Country.

No sooner were they gone, but the Princess was missed at Court, and the King
after some enquiry, hearing which way they were gone, sent several Ships after
them, but it was in vain; for a Tempest had forced the Barque in which the
Knight and the Princess were, quite another way, and drove them on shore at
another Island called Sicillia, where their Barque being split they got on
shore, being both glad and sorry for their good and ill fortune, where the Lady
after some travel by land to find a house where to repose themselves, being
weary, sat down, and drawing forth a little red Purse, showed her Knight the
three Jewels he had given her: at which he was joyful that she had not left
them behind; and laying it by her, she being very weary, fell asleep, and he
lay lovingly by her; but some ravenous Fowl flying by, and seeing the red
Purse, supposing it to be a piece of flesh, descended from the Sky and took it
up, which the Knight seeing, and knowing what was in it, he arose up, looking
to see whither the Fowl would fly, which did soon alight on a Tree: but he
soon followed her, and disturbed her with throwing of stones at her, till he
forced her to fly away with the Purse; he being more angry than before, still
followed her, and she flying toward the Water side, he still pursued her with
stones, which the Bird perceiving, at length let the Purse fall into the Sea,
but it was in so shallow a place that he could see it lie at the bottom, but
could not come at it, it being a great way in the water: he attempted many ways
to come at it, at last he discovered an old Boat hard by, to which he repaired,
and finding a Staff therein, he intended to push the Boat to the place where
the Purse lay, to the end he might recover it: which he could not do, for the
Boat coming into the strength of the stream, in despite of all he could do, he
was carried a great way from the place where he took Boat, and at length he
came into the main Sea, when, though too late, he would have thrown himself
into the Sea, if by that means he could have got on shore. Thus was his
Princess left alone on shore, sleeping in an unknown Land, of whose misery we
shall hereafter speak more.

But now we return to him who made heavy complaints, not only for his own
misfortune, but that of his Princesses: And thus his Boat was at the mercy of
the Sea for three days, he expecting every moment when he and the Boat should
be devoured by the Sea; but his Destiny having prepared him for more better
fortunes, at last he was forced by the impetuousness of the waves, on a little
Island in the Mediterranean Seas, called Zante, where when he came on shore, he
praised God for his safe deliverance from the Sea, not without many tears for
the less of his dear Princess. There when he had in some manner recovered his
health, which was impaired by his long fasting, he hired a small Ship to search
up and down all the Islands of the Archiepellago to find his Princess out, not
knowing the name of the place where he had lost her: but all was in vain, for
he had lost her quite another way.

Thus being crossed at his ill fortune, he at last landed at Constantinople,
and then not caring whither he went, such was his sorrow for the loss of his
dear Princess: His destinies after many weary Iourneys, at last brought him to
Antioch, where he arrived at the Triumphs held at the Solemnization of the
Wedding of the King and Queen, and there he performed such Knightly Deeds of
Chivalry, as has been told you in the foregoing Chapter.

The next day after the Combat between the Knight of the Keys and the Prince
of Phenicia, all the Champions resorted early into the Lists, and there the two
Knights desired of the King to give them leave to finish their Combat: but the
King would not assent thereto, but ordered that they should both desist there
from; and in regard there had been so much equalling in the Knights both at the
Lance and Sword, neither of them should be accounted Vanquished, or Vanquisher;
and that they should neither of them come into the Field all the following days
of the Tournament, but that the two Knights Don Clarineo and Don Lucidamore
should keep the Field only; which at last they all assented to, and they
performed it to their great honor: for in that time they dismounted many hardy
Knights, but still kept the honor of the Field till all the days of the
Tournament were accomplished.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How Don Clarineo, Don Lucidamore, Contumeliano, Fliorispiano, The Knight of
the Wolf, and The Knight of the Keys, did all take their leaves of the King
and Queen, and journeyed toward Babylon to meet with Don Bellianis.

THese Iousts and Tournaments being ended, and most of the Nobility departed to
their own Dwellings, the Knights Don Clarineo and his Companions, desired leave
to depart in quest of their Brother Don Bellianis, and the King and Queen
hearing that he was at Babylon, or thereabouts, knowing of the Wars that was
between the Souldan of Babylon and the Emperor of Trebizond, and that Don
Bellianis was engaged therein, they not only consented to their departure, but
also would have furnished them with many brave Knights to have gone with them,
but they refused that kindness.



The Knight of the Wolf likewise knowing their intentions, and that in their
company he should be certain to get glory, desired his Father Damartino to give
him leave to accompany them, which he did likewise consent unto, knowing the
worth of his Companions would be able to keep him from harm Thus were they
accompanied and ready to go, when Peter of Ireland, the Knight of the Keys,
being almost bereaved of his senses for the loss of his dear Mistress the
Princess Magdalena, and being resolved to search all the World over but he
would find her; and having a very great esteem for the Princes Don Clarineo,
Lucidamore, and the rest of their Companions, for the great worth and valor
that he saw them endowed with, he came likewise to them, and desired them to
admit him to be a Companion in their adventurous Travels: To which his request
they soon consented, for they had a very great esteem for him, having seen him
exercise his valor.

Thus accompanied, they came one morning to the King and Queen to take their
last Farewell, when the King told them that since they would not take any Forces
with them, he desired that if his Cousin Don Bellianis, or any of them had, or
should have any occasion for Forces, he would at any time assist them with
fifty thousand men, and come in the head of them himself, and give such
testimonies of his good will and affection for them, that he would merit the
esteem and service they had done for him. Having thus said, the Queen likewise
heartily thanked them for the honor they had done her, and desired to be kindly
remembered to Don Bellianis, hoping that he and they all, the Ware being ended,
would take that place in their way home, whereby she should again have the
satisfaction of their good companies: To which request of hers they assented
to, kissing her hands they departed, and set forwards for Babylon.

The Knight of the Keys was very heavy and pensive, as you have heard, which
gave them all some trouble, but Don Clarineo having a more particular esteem
for him than the rest, so wrought with him, that at the last he won him to give
him an account of the occasion of his melancholy: which when he had heard, he
was likewise much troubled thereat, participating in the sorrows of his Friend,
and promised him that so soon as he had seen his Brother Don Bellianis, that he
would return with him to Constantinople, and there he would cause such diligent
search to be made, that he would find her if she were any where in all those
Seas, vowing unto him an eternal friendship; which the Knight of the Keys not
only accepted, but promised the same should continue to him to the end of his
life.

This discourse being ended, they passed on their Journey in somewhat more
pleasant communication in such manner, that in short time they arrived near to
the City of Babylon: In which travels we will once more leave them, and turn to
Don Bellianis and his Companion, the Numidian Prince, and the rest of those
valiant warriors that were set down before the City of Pharez.

CHAP. XXIX.
How Don Bellianis and the Prince of Numidia assaulted the Emperor and his
Forces, and forced them all to retire into the City.



GReat was the vexation and anger of Don Bellianis, for that he saw the Wars
had held him so long from the fight of his dear Mistress the Princess
Florisbella, and therefore he resolved to assault his Enemies, and force them
to a Battle, and the Prince of Numidia was likewise of the same resolution:
Wherefore they providing all things ready, divided their Army into two parts,
which they took between them, and so with their whole Forces set upon the Enemy
in their Entrenchments, and having given them the Alarm, followed it with so
much puissance, that they soon forced them to retire to the City Walls.

The Emperor of Trebizond being advertised hereof came forth, and at the Head
of fifty thousand valiant men went to meet Don Bellianis, whom he soon found
and knew by the mightiness of his blows: the presence of the Emperor gave some
new courage to his Soldiers, and he engaging with Don Bellianis caused them
that were about to flee into the City, to face about and return upon their
Enemies, and then there was a fierce Slaughter on all sides.

The Prince of Numidia with a party of fifty thousand men rode up and down the
Field, to give his assistance to that part or place where there was most need:
and there was one party of the Emperor of Trebizond's Foot-soldiers of about
fifty thousand, who kept close together, and did much harm to his Soldiers,
being commanded and guarded by ten strong Giants, whom the Numidian attempted
to disperse, but they were all so resolute that he could not break through
their Rancks; wherefore he attempted them a new way, and retiring from them
first, ordered his Squadrons in the fashion of a Wedge, the Front not being
above twenty Knights, but the Rear was above five hundred men broad, and be in
the Head of this party forced with his twenty Knights into the Ranks of his
Enemies Squadron, and maugre all the resistance of the Giants and the rest, he
went into the body of the Army, and being gone so far, the rest followed him,
till at length the Rear of his Squadron opening to the right and left, and so
wheeling about both ways encompassed the Enemies whole Squadron, engaging them
in Front, Rear, Flanks and Middle, and indeed on all sides at one and the same
time, he had such success that in short time he killed most of them, so that of
fifty thousand men there was not left one thousand alive.

All this while the Emperor himself was fighting valiantly with Don Bellianis,
where be gave and received many wounds, but there was little advantage between
them, by reason they were hindered by the multitude of other Knights that fought
about them. This incensed Don Bellianis, being full of wrath that he could not
execute the Revenge he intended on his Enemy; but before they were parted he
gave him on large wound on the shoulder, and then the company increasing he was
forced to leave him, and so he fell into the Rancks of his Enemies, being much
angered; the effects of which caused the death of many person, for he seldom
gave a stroke but death immediately followed. He was attended by the Prince of
Mesapotamia, the Knight of the Flaming Sword, and the Knight of Hope, who did
very well testify themselves to be valiant Knights, and good Practitioners in
Bellonas Field: great was the slaughter where they came, but far greater where
the Prince of Numidia was; for he had destroyed all his foes, and was now
coming to Don Bellianis to assist him, but he needed little of his aid: for
like a roaring Lion he flew like Lightening into all places of the Field.

The Emperor of Trebizond hearing of the ill fortune of his Squadron of Foot,
in whose strength he put much confidence, was greatly dismayed at that
Overthrow, and being angered at his ill fortune, he caused a Retreat to be
sounded, but it was in a very ill manner performed; for he was forced to draw
all his Forces into the City, not being able any longer to keep the Field,
leaving his Entrenchments to his Enemies, and with great difficulty did he get
into the City, for he was hotly pursued by his Enemies, and many of his men
slain: but at the length into the City he got, and made fast the gates, and
then Don Bellianis, Baltasano of Numidia, and all their Forces being hindered
from going further, were forced to stay: But coming into the place where their
Enemies had encamped, they found very good Booty, which gave a great
satisfaction to the Soldiers, their General having given them free leave to
take all they could get. This being done, they fortified themselves in their
Enemies Entrenchments, the two Generals resolving not only to continue close
Siege to the City, but also to assault them there, setting Pioneers to work to
undermine some part of the City Wall, that they might make a breach and so
enter to them, and all the other ways that they could invent or imagine they
put into practice: but the design at that time was hindered, for the City was
soon after relieved by the arrival of fresh Supplies, as shall be hereafter
declared to you. And now we will for a while turn back to Babylon to the
Souldans Palace, and see what the Ladies did; which we shall show you in the
next Chapter.

CHAP. XXX.
How the Souldan of Babylon received a Letter from Don Bellianis, who sent
others to the Princesses Florisbella and Mattarosa: and of the Arrival of the
Princes Don Clarineo of Spain, Don Lucidamore of Thessaly, and the rest of
their Companions at Babylon, in quest of Don Bellianis.



THe Souldan of Babylon had not heard any News of the success of his Forces
under the Command of Don Bellianis, since the departure of the Prince of
Numidia, only such News as report gave out, and therefore much desired to be
satisfied in his Affairs: however he continually raised more Forces, and kept a
great Guard about him, to be ready at at all times when occasion should serve
to be upon the march. In these Affairs was he employed, when one day sitting in
Council, an express Messenger came with Letters from the Camp, which he
delivered to the Souldan, who immediately causing them to be opened, there was
written as follows.

The LETTER of Don Bellianis to the Souldan of Babylon,
Dread Lord,
SInce my arrival with your Forces I have been indifferently fortunate, for I
have not only satisfied the minds of your own Subjects in the way that I
marched, but have also received much aid by their voluntary assistance, which I
accepted of according to the Orders that you sent me, and we have had some
Engagement with the Enemy to a very good advantage; for we have forced him to
leave your Country, part of which he was entered into, and retire into his own
with much loss and disadvantage. The Arrival of the Prince of Numidia was very
importunely done, for we were then engaging the Enemy, who is so wilfully
resolute, that without the aid he brought we should have had some disadvantage.

The Offers of Peace you sent were tendered to the Emperor of Trebizond, but he
in hopes of Assistance from his Neighboring Kings, is still resolute to proceed
in the War, unless he may have the Princess your Daughter offered up to him:
Which Propositions of his we wholly declined, and such is the anger of your
Subjects at his Arrogance in propounding things so unreasonable, that rather
than their Princess shall be exposed to a thing so disagreeable to her
inclination, they will all lose their lives. If, Sir, you continue in this
opinion (as I hope your Imperial Majesty will never condescend to a thing so
base and mean, as the prostitution of your Daughter, to have peace with your
Enemy) I then question not but to force your Enemy to very good terms, and
much to your advantage. If the Aid the Emperor expects does come in to him, it
will occasion the lengthening of the War, and you some trouble to send some
fresh Supplies, which I question not your readiness to perform; And Sir, assure
your self, that in so just a Cause as this, I shall not only hazard my own
person to the utmost perils, but rather than condescend to any thing that is
base, I shall be able of my self to raise such Friends as shall bring me two
hundred thousand men to justify this Quarrel, and be revenged of your
unreasonable Enemies: But I hope, Sir, ere any fresh Supplies come to the
Enemy, that we shall be able to compel him to put an end to this War: And
assure your self that all my utmost endeavors shall not be wanting in execution
of this public Affair, as hitherto I have been ready to hazard my person in
the preservation of your Person, and that of your Family, and I shall think my
self sufficiently satisfied, if for all my trouble and travel you will do me
the honor to permit me to be a servant to You and your Family, and more
particularly to be admitted by your fair Daughter as a servant to her Virtues;
In expectation of which I shall account nothing dear, so as I may be admitted
for her Champion, and I question not but I shall give a satisfaction to you
all; which I make my resolve to do, or die

A Faithful Servant to Your Imperial Majesty, The Knight of the Basilisks.


Great satisfaction did this Letter give to the Souldan, not only for the good
Success that his Forces had already obtained, but for theit resolution to
continue constant to him: He considered that he had great cause to be thankful
to the Knight of the Basilisks (for so he was called at Court, not being known
by any other Name there:) he had been much bound to him already for delivering
Him and his Daughter from the Enchantment of the Tent, as it was set down in
the first Book of this History, for the Assistance he had given his Cousin the
Princess Aurora, in helping her to her Kingdom of Antioch; for his delivering
his Cousin the Princess Mattarosa, and her Brother the Prince of Numidia, from
the power of the Giant Altifer and his Companions, and more especially for
releasing him from the Enchantment in the Island, to the extraordinary great
peril of his person, and now at last he was engaged in a long and troublesome
War, and had performed very well already in it, and had sent him his
resolutions to persist therein, and all the advantage he desired and propounded
to himself for all these so signal Services, was only to be admitted a Servant
and Champion to his Daughter, whose Cause he was now fighting in.

These he thought so reasonable, that he immediately sent for his Daughter, and
being resolved to do nothing as to her person without her consent, he told her
the effect of the Knights Letter, and withal informed her of his Request,
desiring her that if it were not wholly against her inclination, that she would
grant the Request of the Knight.

She who was as desirous of this as he was, and had not only a good will, but
an extraordinary affection for him, answered her Father, That she considered
the Obligations they were all bound to the Knight of the Basilisks in were so
many, and binding, that she was ready to do that, as also any thing else that
her Father should desire that would give a satisfaction to the Knight of the
Basilisks, who she said, she believed was sent by the Gods for the preservation
of her and all her Family, and was certainly the Titular Angel of their
Country. And she further added, that were she knowing of his Birth and
Parentage, and that it were equal to hers, and the good Will of her Father and
Friends joined to her own Inclination, she should do that willingly for him
which the Emperor of Trebizond endeavored to force her to, so greatly was she
satisfied, not only in the Courage and Magnanimity, but also in the Virtues of
the Knight of the Basilisks.

When she had said thus she held her peace, and somewhat blushed that she had
so plainly discovered her affection to her Father: but she was somewhat
satisfied when her Father gave her this Reply, That he was wholly of her
opinion, and that he questioned not but one so every way accomplished, was
likewise of an Illustrious Birth; and that he would endeavor to satisfy
himself in his Birth, in the mean time he advised his Daughter to write to the
Knight, and give him some satisfaction, such as she should think fit: And he
said, he questioned not but he was of an extraordinary Quality, for he
propounded the Raising two hundred thousand men to fight under him in this
Service.

This was the discourse between the Emperor and his Daughter, which being ended
she retired into her Closet, where she was expected by her Cousin the Princess
Mattarosa, who had received Letters from Don Bellianis, one for her self, and
another for her Cousin. When the Princess Florisbella came there, she found her
Cousin reading of that to her self, but she quickly left off that to deliver
the other to her Cousin; which she no sooner received, but she opened the Seal,
and found therein written as follows.

The LETTER of Don Bellianis, to the Princess Florisbella.
MADAM,
I First crave your pardon for my silence hitherto, and give you this for
excuse, that my Sword has till this time been so employed, that I had not time
to exercise my Pen. My Sword has been exercised in the destruction of your
Enemies, and indeed we have had so good effects (the justness of your Quarrel
commanding it) that your Enemies are not only expelled out of your Kingdom,
but they are in some kind of distress in their own; for we have at last (by
the help of your valiant Cousin the Prince of Numidia, and the Forces he
brought with him) forced the Enemy with great loss to leave the Fie^d and
retire to the City, where we have now encompassed him. The Propositions your
Father sent were not accepted of, though very reasonable, and the Emperor of
Trebizond is still so presumptuous, as to desire your Person in marriage, and
upon these terms he will leave the War; and this he questions not to force you
to do by the help of more Forces he is raising, and by the Aid he expects from
some of his Alliance: how pleasant this Proposition was you may easily judge,
and that he might as well have said that we should all suffer our selves to be
slain without any resistance; and I for my part would sooner have consented to
that, than this so unjust command. This his presumption caused me to defy his
person, and I had a Resolution to kill him, or die at our next meeting, but
hitherto I have been hindered from executing this my just Resolution, but I
still keep in the same Determination. Madam, this is the present condition of
your public affairs, but I continaally suffer Martyrdom in my long absence
from your divine presence: Madam, I beseech you pardon my presumption in
writing so plainly to the Souldan your Father, I did it to understand somewhat
of his inclination: I pray let me by your answer know his resentments thereof.
Thus Madam, hoping, and not questioning your Constancy, and that your
inclination will still continue to make me happy, I rest

Your Eternal Servant, Don Bellianis.


The Princess having read hers with much content, desired to know the effect of
the Letter sent by her Knight to the Princess Mattarosa; which she delivered
into her hands to give her that satisfaction, and in exchange took hers: the
Princess Florisbella read as follows.

The LETTER of Don Bellianis to the Princess Mattarosa.
MADAM,
I Shall not trouble you with an Account of our proceedings in the War, my
Letter to the Souldan, or that to my Princess will give you that satisfaction:
but to tell you in general, that all things here are well, and we want nothing
but your pleasing Companies to divert us. Madam, I hope you sometimes have some
thoughts of us, and that that friendship which has been contracted between us,
is not forgotten; And I hope you have a particular care of the Affairs of me
your poor Servant, whom out of nothing you have made so happy: I beseech you
continue me in the good opinion of my fair Princess your Cousin, and assure her
that I will ever endeavor to give her daily effects of my duty and service.

The Prince your Brother is in very good health, and has performed Wonders in
this War, and the young Knight of Hope is very diligent in preserving the Favor
you were formerly pleased to give him, and in honor of your Name he acts
marvellously, and gives great testimonies of a valiant mind, the effects of
which have caused the deaths of many of your Adversaries; and indeed he is such
a one as deserves an esteem from you, having your Name and Person in great
veneration. This is all I shall at present trouble you with, yet once more I
beg you to continue my Princesses esteem toward me, and in doing thereof you
shall eternally oblige

Your Servant, Don Bellianis.


The Princess having read this Letter, returned it to her Cousin, and then they
conferred together what was necessary to be done. The Princess Florisbella
informed her Cousin of the Discourse that had happened between her Father and
her self about Don Bellianis, and said that there was nothing wanting to gain
the Souldans Consent, but the discovery of Don Bellianis his Quality, and then
she questioned not but her Father when he should be informed of his High Birth,
would be very well satisfied in every thing; and therefore, said she, I think
it will not be amiss for to you to discourse of this matter to your Aunt my
Mother, and you may take occasion to declare somewhat of Don Bellianis his
Extraction, telling her that you heard of it by some of his Company when you
were released from the Giant Altifer.

To this they both agreed and resolved, but they had no occasion thereof; for
not long after arrived at the Court the Princes Don Clarineo of Spain, Don
Lucidamore of Thessaly, and the rest of their Companions, in search of Don
Bellianis. When they arrived at the Palace, they enquired for the Souldan, who
was with his Council communicating to them the good News that he had received
by Letters from the Knight of the Basilisks.



Being come into the Presence, Don Clarineo in behalf of himself and his
Companions, told the Souldan that they came from the Court of the Princess
Aurora from Antioch, who desired to be recommended to him in all humility, and
had sent him a Letter, and then kneeling on his knees, he delivered the same to
the Souldan, who causing the same to be opened, it contained these words.

The LETTER of Aurora Queen of Antioch, to the Souldan of Babylon.
Most Illustrious Uncle,
MY hard misfortune in being expelled my Kingdom has long since arrived to
your knowledge, and now having so great a good as to be restored thereto, I
thought it convenient to inform you of the truth thereof. The Illustrious
Prince Don Bellianis of Greece, and Son to the Emperor, has (by the appointment
of the Gods) been the chief Instrument of my Restoration; for not only he and
his Friends killed the Usurpers Gallaneo and Tramolcano, but also have caused
the Souldan of Persia to give me full and quiet possession thereof, where I am
now peaceably settled: And I have also joined my self in Marriage with Don
Brianel Prince of Macedon, and Cousin to the same Don Bellianis, who as I hear
under the Names of the Knight of the Basilisks and the Golden Image, has done
you some services. Assure your self, Sir, that he has not his equal throughout
the whole Universe, as I by sufficient experience can testify, both for valor
and virtue; and I think my self the most happy in his Alliance, having married
into his Family. This Noble Company that are now come to you are his Brethren
and Alliance, and are come in quest of their Brother and Friend. What kindness
you shall do to them, I am confident they will deserve, and it shall be
likewise acknowledged to be done to

Your affectionate and obliged Kinswoman, Aurora of Antioch.


Greatly satisfied was the Souldan when he had read this Letter, for now he
knew that which he so much desired, the Quality of Don Bellianis, and seeing
his two Brothers, and knowing that they were all of his Alliance, he arose from
his Seat and kindly embraced them, and bid them heartily welcome, telling them
that he accounted himself extremely happy in their company, and that he was
more obliged to their Brother and Friend Don Bellianis, than to all the persons
on the earth.

They gave him many thanks for the good esteem he had of them, and told him
that they were likewise ready to serve him in what occasion soever he should
employ them: and since Don Bellianis was absent, they desired his leave for
them to depart toward him. The Souldan consented to this, but withal he
desired them to take some Forces with them, which was accordingly agreed on.

Thus after this Discourse with the Souldan, he conducted them to the presence
of the Emperess and her Daughter the Princess Florisbella, and her Cousin
Mattarosa, and the rest of the Ladies; which pleasant Sight gave a great
content to all the Knights but Peter of Ireland, but in him it renewed his
sorrow for the loss of his Princess Magdalena. The Emperess and Ladies being
informed by the Souldan of the Quality of the Knights, and that they were
Brothers and near Relations of Don Bellianis, was much pleased with their
company, and giving them their hands to kiss, told them that she was very
joyful to see them: the Princesses Florisbella and Mattarosa did likewise
kindly receive them: and the Princess Florisbella was not only joyful for
their arrival, but also greatly contented that now her Father was satisfied in
the true Quality of Don Bellianis.

The Knights were all very sensible of the occasion that continued Don
Bellianis in the Souldans service, and did truly think that it was for the sake
of the Princess Florisbella, whom they did esteem to be the most beautiful Lady
they ever saw, and therefore worthy to be served by so good a Knight.

At length after several Complements the Knights were disarmed, and after a
short repast the Souldan called them to Council, wherein it was concluded, that
they should depart the next day, and carry with them fifty thousand men who
were all ready for the march, to go and assist Don Bellianis.

CHAP. XXXI.
How the Emperor of Trebizond was relieved by the Arrival of the Kings of
Albania and Georgia with one hundred thousand men, and fifty thousand men sent
by the Emperor of Russia, and how he appointed a pitched Battle with Don
Bellianis, and Baltasano Prince of Numidia, and their Armies; and how the two
Princes Brothers to Don Bellianis, and all the other Knights came with the Aid
of fifty thousand men, and engaged with Don Bellianis and his Army against the
Emperor of Trebizond, whom in the end they conquer and take him prisoner: And
so leaving one hundred thousand men in the Field, under the Command of
Baltasano, Don Bellianis and the rest of his Friends and Alliance, with the
rest of the Army, marched back with their prisoners to Babylon.



IN some distress was the Emperor of Trebizond, by reason of his being so
closely besieged in the City of Pharez, but the expectation he had to be
relieved by his Friends, gave him some satisfaction, and still continued him in
his former Resolutions of not agreeing to the end of the War, unless it were on
the Conditions he had formerly propounded to Don Bellianis, who you know was
resolved rather to die than to yield to any such Proposals, and therefore he
and the Prince of Numidia endeavored all they could to gain the City, but it
was so well fortified that it was very difficult: however they caused the Mines
to be made to undermine the Wall, but before they hadended that, news came of
the Arrival of fresh Supplies to to the Emperor, whereupon they prepared
themselves to resist them, and to hinder (if possible) their entrance into the
City.

But the Kings of Albania and Georgia who were arrived within three Leagues of
the City, and heard that they must fight their way through the Souldans Army,
prepared for the Encounter, and so in good order marched on until they arrived
within sight of each other, and then Don Bellianis and Baltasano with fifty
thousand well approved Knights likewise advanced to meet them, where they soon
encountered one another. The two Kings of Albania and Georgia being both valiant
and redoubted Knights, couching their Lances went to encounter the two
Generals, the Princes of Greece and Numidia, who likewise couching their Lances
ran against them, and breaking their Lances without much prejudice to one
another, they passed on, and so both Armies joined to mortal Battle, where
great was the noise of the sound of Trumpets and all manner of other warlike
Instruments, and the clashing of Armor: but greater was the terror that the two
brave Generals Don Bellianis and Baltasano gave to their Enemies where ever
they came; for who ever came within the reach of their well-cutting Swords, did
pay dearly for that presumption. The two Kings of Albania and Georgia did
likewise behave themselves like hardy Knights, and valiant and discreet
Generals, for their great and valorous Deeds gave both encouragement and valor
to their followers. Very bloody was the Fight when news came to Don Bellianis
to advertise him, that the Emperor with great Forces was came out of the City,
and had assaulted his Camp. At which news he went to Baltasano, and advertising
him thereof, they concluded that the presence of one of them would be very
necessary, and therefore Don Bellianis out of the desire he had to be revenged
on his Enemy and Rival the Emperor, chose to go thither and leave the Prince of
Numidia to continue the Fight: which being agreed on he quickly departed, and
arriving at his Camp be found that the Enemy had made a valiant Assault, and
that they had been as well resisted by the two valiant Knights, the Knight of
Hope, and the Knight of the Flaming Sword, who were fighting valiantly in the
midst of the Emperors Forces: Don Bellianis seeing that, encouraged them by his
presence, and so departed to find out the Emperor, who at length he overtook,
and knowing him by the many hardy strokes he saw him deliver, he cried out to
him, Sir Knight, you will gain more honor by leaving those people and fighting
with me, who am resolved to conquer you or die. The Emperor hearing these
words, soon turned about to see who had been so hardy as to speak them: but he
was soon satisfied when he saw they were uttered by the valiant Knight of the
Basilisks; wherefore leaving his other enemies he came toward Don Bellianis,
and so they both making their ways through the Ranks of their Armies, joined in
fight together.

The Emperor heared in battle, gave Don Bellianis a mighty blow over the
Helmet, but be soon required it by returning him another on the shoulder, which
descending down, wounded him on the Arm. Thus was the Fight on all sides
vigorously prosecuted: But the Kings of Albania and Georgia being wholly
desirous to force their way into the City, made it their whole business to yet
thither, and so by degrees they got ground, till at length both the Armies came
in sight of one another, and then the Emperors Forces seeing that they were
likely to be so well relieved, gave a great shout, and j^yned all their Forces
together: the noise that they made gave some disquiet to Don Bellianis, who was
still fighting with the Emperor, and being desirous to know what was the
matter, he reached the Emperor so mighty a blow that he remained without
feeling, and so he turned his horse toward the place from whence the noise
came, and then he soon discovered that the occasion of it was the Arrival of
the two Kings into the Army with their assistance. He presently furiously rode
through all the Ranks of his Enemies, doing much execution, till he arrived at
the place where the Prince of Numidia was engaged in fight with two mighty
Giants; one of which he presently assailed, and with less than three strokes
laid him dead at his feet, when turning about he saw that his Companion the
Numidian had likewise killed the other: and so they both agreed to retire to
their own Forces to see how the Fight was maintained, and so making their way
by the death of many of their Adversaries, they arrived at their own Camp,
where they saw the two Knights of Hope, and the Flaming Sword, bravely engaged
with six courageous Knights, and yet they defended themselves very valorously:
they soon joined with them to the loss of all the lives of the six Knights.

In the mean time the Emperor being free endeavored to withdraw his Forces, and
coming to the two Kings of Albania and Georgia, after some Complements, he
desired them likewise to draw off their Forces, which being done they all
retired into the City, but with the loss of twenty thousand men, Don Bellianis
and his Forces following them to the very gates. When they were entered the
City, the Emperor conducted the two Kings to the Palace, where he entertained
them and gave them many thanks for this their aid and assistance, and then they
concluded to rest their Forces for two days, and by that time the Emperor told
them he was confident he should not only have aid from the Emperor of Russia,
but likewise more of his own, and so soon as they were arrived he intended to
take the Field, not questioning but he should quickly force the Enemy to leave
his Country.

Don Bellianis and the Prince of Numidia retired to their Camp, and resolved
very suddenly to give them a general Assault: but the next day the Forces of
the Emperor of Russia arrived, and in despite of Don Bellianis entrenthed
themselves, and kept the Field. The Emperor being thus well relieved, resolved
now to take the Field, and give a Field-battel to his Enemies, which he
concluded to do the next day: and in order thereunto early the next morning he
with all his Forces issued out of the City with one hundred thousand men under
his own Conduct, one hundred thousand men under the Conduct of the two Kings of
Albania and Georgia, and fifty thousand men under the Command of the Knight of
the Tiger, Kinsman to the Emperor of Russia, who had brought those Forces
thither.



In this equipage the Emperor was in the Field, and on the other side the two
Generals Don Bellianis and Baltasano, divided their Forces only into two
parts, and resolving on all sides to fight valiantly and conquer their Enemies,
they bravely assailed each other: Bloody was the Fight in all places, so that
soon was the Fields green Apparel turned into purple. The Generals on all
sides performed wonders: the Emperor on his part did very valiantly, resolving
to get the Field or never return to the City: and Don Bellianis being resolved
this day to show the invincibleness of his Courage, he being accompanied by
five hundred Knights, as his Guard, in despite of all opposition forced his
way into his Enemies Camp, where with his own arm he soon killed fifty Knights,
and those who followed him imitating his example, slew many of their enemies.

The Prince of Numidia had likewise in another place forced his way into the
Camp of his Enemies, and there he encountered the Knight of the Tiger, who was
encompassed with ten strong Giants, but maugre all their opposition be
furiously forced his way through them, and assaulted the Knight of the Tiger
with so mighty a blow on the head, so that he was not only astonished, but the
Sword falling on the horse his head, cleaved him downright, and he fell down
dead under his Master. The Giants who were near him soon assisted him, and
mounted him on another horse, but it cost two of them their lives, the one
being slain by the Prince of Numidia, and the other by the Knight of Hope, who
was now arrived with some Forces to the place where Baltasano was, and then
they all joined. Forces, and the Knight of the Tiger being very valiant,
revenged himself by the loss of the lives of many of his Enemies.

Don Bellianis having run through his Enemies Camp with great fury, returned
and rode up and down to find out his Rival the Emperor, whom he at length
found out and encountered, and many fierce strokes were given to one another,
the Emperor resolving to revenge himself on Don Bellianis, showed the utmost of
his skill and courage, and gave him a blow on the Thigh, so that the blood
issued out thereat through the Joints of his Armor: he was greatly enraged
hereat, and gave the Emperor another wound on the side: Thus they continued
fighting together, till at length the multitudes of both parties that came to
assault each other parted them, and then they ranged about the Field killing
and destroying many Knights.

It was now the Noon day, and the Fight had continued eight hours, and yet
there was not much advantage on either side, till they heard the sound of
Trumpets, and at some distance they might perceive fresh Forces enter the
Field, but to which that they belonged it was yet unknown: at length they
arrived in sight, and then by their Colors they were known to belong to the
Emperor, and indeed they were forty thousand men under the Conduct of the
Knight of Fame, Nephew to the Emperor, who hearing of the Fight made haste
thither, thinking to get Honor in the Battle, but he fared not so well as he
expected, as we shall declare to you anon.

Don Bellianis seeing this, quickly drew out forty thousand of his men and went
to meet him, and taking a new Lance couched the same, and ran furiously against
his Enemy, who did the like, but not with the same advantage; for Don Bellianis
only lost one of his Stirrops, but his Enemy came horse and man to the ground.
He soon recovered himself, and being angry at his misfortune, revenged himself
by the death of six Knights, whom he soon killed or overthrew: thus was these
two Battles joined, but Don Bellianis soon abated some of the vigor of his
Enemies, by the puissant and mighty strokes he gave them, killing ten Knights
before he brake his Lance, and then drawing his Sword he soon after sent twenty
Knights more to accompany their companions, so that now they were not so
furious to assault him as they had been: He quickly made his way thorough all
this Squadron, and having testified to them his strength and valor, returned
and went to assault the Knight of Fame, who was now engaged with his Enemies:
but at the arrival of Don Bellianis they soon gave way to him and he reached
him a mighty blow on the head, so that his Helmet flew from his head, and he
was likewise wounded, and Don Bellianis intending to give him a second blow,
was prevented; for two furious Giants opposed themselves to him: but he who was
used to deal well enough with these sort of people, soon let them know his
valor by the cutting off of one of their legs.

In the mean time the Knight of Fame had recovered another Helmet, and came to
revenge himself on Don Bellianis, so that now he was engaged both by a Giant
and the Knight of Fame, but he did well enough to maintain the Fight with them
both. In the mean time the two Kings of Albania and Georgia had engaged
themselves among their Enemies, and at last they arrived where the Emperor was
engaged, but they brought him such Aid that they caused the Souldans Forces to
retire, and many of them lost their lives, so that they being without any
valiant Commander did in a manner fly: This gave great encouragement to the
Emperor and the two Kings, and they pursued them some way, till they saw a Body
of men afar off who came on a great pace, and the nearer they approached the
more they appeared, and at length they were likewise known to be Forces of the
Souldans: This caused the Emperor and those that were with him to make a stand,
much wondering at this business, and not daring to go any further. They made up
toward them a great pace, and meeting with some of those who fled, informed
themselves of the manner of the Fight, and caused them to face about and return
on their Enemies.



The Emperor seeing this was resolved to receive them, but they still made
haste, and arriving near the Emperors Forces, six Knights advancing forwards
and couching their Lances, ran upon the Emperor and his Forces, and with the
furiousness of the Encounter they dismounted five Knights that opposed them,
and the Emperor who was the sixth, lost both his Stir^ops; they quickly passed
on and ran furiously into their Enemies Squadrons, and showed the admirableness
of their valor by the mighty blyws they gave, for in less than a quarter of an
hour they had dismounted and stain above a hundred Knights: and in this time
their Forces by their example followed them, and joining with their Enemies
soon compelled them, in despite of the Emperor and the two Kings of Albania
and Georgia, to retire to the rest of the Army. When they were all arrived
there they gave a loud shout, and cried out, Babylon, Babylon: This noise gave
a fresh Alarm to the Armies, and Don Bellianis wondering thereat, went to see
the occasion, doubting that the Enemy had got more Aid: but he was soon
satisfied of the contrary, for he knew the Common Soldiers by their Colors:
but he was much more astonished when he saw the incomparable Deeds of the six
valiant Champions, and indeed they were all unknown to him. He coming nearer to
them discovered one of them by his Armor to be Contumeliano Prince of Phenicia,
wherefore he went to him, and said: Ah worthy Friend! great pains have you
taken to come thus far to my assistance. The Phenician courteously replied to
him, Noble Prince, I should not think it any trouble to travel throughout the
whole world to serve you, especially in so good company as I have brought with
me: Then he knowing that Don Bellianis was willing to be informed who were in
his company, told him that his Companions were his two valiant Brothers, Don
Clarineo and Don Lucidamore, and his Cousin Fliorispiano of Swevia, and the two
other Knights were somewhat strangers, but both valiant Knights; and so they
were indeed, the one being the valiant Peter of Ireland, Knight of the Keys,
and the other the Knight of the Wolf, and that they had brought from the
Souldan of Babylon fifty thousand men for his assistance.

Don Bellianis being very joyful hereat soon entered the Fight, and was now
again resolved to conquer or die, and that this day should put an end to the
War: In this resolution he went to his Companion the Prince of Numidia, and
informed him hereof, and telling him that he would with a Party of Horse break
through the Enemies Forces, and get between them and the City and hinder their
entrance, and that he would only desire him to prosecute the Fight, assuring
him that there were such valiant Knights come, that he questioned not to have
the Victory.

Thus did he leave the Numidian and went to execute his purpose, and so he did,
and soon brake through the Forces of the Enemy. The Prince of Numidia being
thus encouraged, drew up all his Forces and freshly assailed his Enemies, and
in short time by the assistance of the six Champions, and the Forces they
brought, he got so great advantage of his Enemies, that he forced them to
retire; which they did not do so well but that many of them were slain. Among
the rest, Peter of Ireland did gloriously; for he flew the Knight of Fame,
Cousin to the Emperor, and many Knights and Giants that were near him. The two
Princes Clarineo and Lucidamore took the King of Georgia Prisoner, maugre the
resistance of all his Guards, and the Knight of the Tiger hardly escaped with
life, being very much wounded by Contumeliano Prince of Phenicia.

The Emperor of Trebizond seeing that by the means of this fresh Supply he
should lose the Day, resolved to retire before he should be quite vanquished,
wherefore he caused a Retreat to be sounded, and so retired to enter the City,
but Don Bellianis who expected him, hindered him therefrom and fiercely
assaulted him: Greatly surprised was the Emperor when he saw himself so
assaulted on both sides, wherefore he advanced forwards to see who it was that
hindered his Retreat; but he was so bravely received by his Rival, that
notwithstanding his utmost endeavors he could not get off: but after he had
received many wounds by Don Bellianis, was taken prisoner: the rest of his
Forces in the mean time seeing the Field lost, left him and fled in great
disorder into the City.

Great was the sorrow in the City for the loss of the Emperor, they not yet
knowing whether he were alive or dead. None of the Commanders returned back but
the King of Albania: the King of Georgia being taken, and the Knight of Fame
being killed, the Knight of the Tiger was brought in wounded, and thus the
night being come, the horror of the day was covered.

Don Bellianis seeing the Emperors Forces were got into the City, caused a
Retreat to be sounded, and so repaired to his Tent, which was set up near the
City walls, and the Prince of Numidia being come to him, they delivered the two
prisoners, the Emperor and the King of Georgia, into safe custody under a
strong Guard, commanded by the Knight of Hope; and then they sent for all those
valiant Knights who had assisted them. They quickly came to the Tent, where
they were kindly embraced by the two Generals, the Prince of Numidia being very
joyful to see his Friend Don Bellianis his two Brothers, who had discovered
themselves: they were on all sides joyful for this happy meeting, and much more
in that it had been so fortunate.

The Prince Don Clarineo delivered two Letters to his Brother, one from the
Souldan, and another from his Daughter the Princess Florisbella. Don Bellianis
looking on that from the Souldan, was greatly abashed when he saw the
Superscription to be thus: For the Most Accomplished Prince and Valiant Knight,
Don Bellianis of Greece: but he was astonished when he had opened it, and sound
therein these Lines:

The LETTER of the Souldan of Babylon, to Don Bellianis of Greece.
Noble Prince,
I Must beg excuse for the mean Treatment I gave you, the cause was my
ignorance of your Quality: had I known your Princely Extraction I should have
used you like the Son of so great an Emperor as is the Emperor of Greece: but
your Virtues and Magnanimity did well enough declare your descent; wherefore I
once again ask your pardon, and do promise you as a requital, my true
Friendship, and so soon as by your incomparable Valor you have put some end to
this War, I shall desire your presence, that We may by some action testify the
esteem We have of your friendship. We question not but you will receive a
satisfactory Answer from the Princess Our Daughter, who testifies not only a
respect, but some affection for you, and assure your self that We shall not
hinder it, but give her her freedom, which We suppose will be to your
satisfaction. We have gained so much favor for your sake, as to have the
assistance of your Brothers and Relations, whom We have sent here with some
Supplies, and do intend to send you more, if occasion be, but We hope that this
will be enough, not only to make Our Enemy to be reasonable, but also to give
him some sensible trouble for that he has given Us. Thus desiring of the Gods
a protection for you, We rest

Your Friend, The Souldan.


Great was the astonishment and joy of Don Bellianis at this Letter, now
concluding himself to be the happiest of all men living. Having read this
Letter, he omitted the reading of the other for a more private occasion, and so
again welcomed his Friends, but especially the valiant Knight Peter of Ireland,
who was a stranger to him, and in whom he saw a great magnanimity. Thus leaving
off Consultations till the morning, every one departed to Tents provided for
them: After they were departed, Don Bellianis breaking open the Letter from the
Princess Florisbella, he found in it thus written:

The LETTER of the Princess Florisbella, to Don Bellianis.
SIR,
YOur Letter gave me much satisfaction, but your presence would give me much
more: and now the arrival of your Brethren and Relations with a Letter from my
Cousin the Princess Aurora, has given that satisfaction to my Father that I
was in much trouble how to do it. He is very well acquainted with your
Condition, and has desired me to accept you for my Knight, which he needed not
to have desired, had he known how deeply your dear remembrance is fixed in my
heart: in fine, there wants nothing now but your presence to make me happy, and
I question not but this will the more stir you to the destruction of your
Rival, who I account for my mortal enemy; yet although I desire his ruin, I
would not have it purchased with your danger, therefore as you are mine, fail
not to preserve your self, and hazard not your person beyond the ordinary. I
hope the arrival of these your Relations, and the Forces they bring with them
will put an end to the War, that my trouble for you may end with your presence,
which I continually wish for. My Cousin Mattarosa fails not to keep you in my
remembrance, although she needs not give her self that trouble; but however it
is a pleasure for me continually to hear of you: all that I desire is, that I
may see you with all expedition, that I may have the satisfaction of your
company; in the mean time I will prepare things with my Mother that shall be to
your satisfaction; I pray for the future question not my constancy, but assure
your self I shall ever be

Your Constant Friend, Florisbella.


Don Bellianis having read this Letter kissed it a thousand times, and could
not satisfy himself with once reading of it, so pleasant was these charming
Lines, and in this satisfaction he went to rest, where though he took little by
reason of the great content he had received by the Letters, yet was he up early
the next morning, and mounting on his horse he viewed the Field, which was the
bloodiest spectacle that ever was beheld, it being best^owed with the bodies of
almost two hundred thousand men, whereof one hundred and fifty thousand were of
the enemies. Afterward he retired into his Tent, where some of the Commanders
and Knights were come to wait on him to know his pleasure, so he sent for the
rest of the Chief of the Officers, who entering into Consultation did resolve to
leave the Field in possession of Baltasano, and one hundred thousand men to
prosecute the War, and he and the rest would return with their Prisoners to
Babylon, to know the pleasure of the Souldan. This was generally well liked of,
and accordingly executed, so that the next day they departed, as they had
agreed, and marched toward Babylon.

CHAP. XXXII.
How Magdalena Princess of Sardinia being left alone in the Island of Sicillia,
made a great Complaint for the absence of her Knight Peter, Knight of the
Keys, and how she traveled into Ireland to find him out, where missing him
she caused a Monastery to be built, resolving there to live in disguise in
expectation of his return.



WE will now for some time leave the Princes, Don Bellianis of Greece, and his
Brethren and Companions, with their Prisoners and others in their return to
Babylon, who marched thither-ward in all content and pleasure, they being
greatly satisfied in what they had done, only Peter of Ireland still continued
extremely discontented for the loss of his dear Lady the Princess Magdalena, to
whom we will return, who as we told you was left in the Island of Sicillia,
being very weary of her travel, slept a great while, but at length she awaked,
and fetching a deep sigh, lifted up her head, and looking about her for her
Knight, she could not see him; whereupon she arose from the ground, and walking
about she could not find him: at which she much wondered, and in great
perplexity she made many turnings and walks about the place where she lay,
sometimes she went to the Water side to look that ways, and then again she
returned, but altogether unsatisfied; at length the night grew on and he
returned not, then was she much dismayed, and fell into these Lamentations.

Oh unfortunate Princess! how much unhappiness has thy rashness caused thee
already, and to what end will this turn? but yet how could I expect any
blessing in my actions, having left my Parents and Friends, who it may be at
this time are in as great perplexity for my departure as I am in, and it is but
the Justice of Heaven that I should bear them company in their Complaints: but
alas they are safe and well in their own Court, and I am here in a strange
place, having newly escaped the danger of the Seas, in which it had been better
I had been drowned, than now to be devoured by wild Beasts, or to expect a
worser death: It had been far better for me to have lost my life in the Seas,
for then I should have had my beloved Friend to have born me company, but now I
must perish alone and most miserable. Ah Knight of the Keys, what is become of
thee? whither art thou gone? certainly this was not done by thy good will, for
so much barbarousness could not enter the breast of any man, as to leave me
here in such an inhumane manner. But why should I condemn thee, or complain on
thee, for certainly thou do more deserve my pity than anger: it may be thou
by some mischance wandering in these Woods art devoured by wild Beasts, who
have by this time entombed thee in their hungry Maws. Oh that I were certain of
that, and that I knew where that Beast should remain, I would go seek him out
and offer my self to be devoured by him, that I might at least accompany thee
in death.

Having thus finished her Lamentation, she with extreme grief fell down to the
ground; but bethinking her self that she was a Christian, and therefore was
bound to preserve her life so long as she could, she arose and sought about for
a place where at present to lie down more conveniently to repose her self till
the morning: after some travel she found a place near the water side that was
somewhat commodious for that purpose, being encompassed with great Reeds, where
she laid her self down expecting the morning; which being come, she not having
taken any rest, arose; and not knowing what to do, nor whither to go, being in
a great Wood, at length with much difficulty climbed up a Tree, and being come
to the top looked about her, to see if she could discover any Houses or People:
At length she saw some people afar off walking, being glad of that, descended
the Tree and went forwards to that place, which was a Common Road; and seeing
people coming she retired into the Wood a little way, to consider with her self
what was necessary to be done. Then she resolved not to go home to her Father,
but rather to travel toward Ireland the Country of her dearly beloved Knight,
believing that if he escaped with life he would go thither, and thither she
intended to go and expect him: but the habit she was in being very gorgeous and
costly, she knew that it would be very inconvenient to travel in, and therefore
she resolved with the first convenience to alter her Aparrel: she quickly had
the opportunity of putting this her resolution into execution; for the next
woman that went by was a Pilgrim, to whom she went, and desiring her to come a
little out of the way they retired into the Wood, where the Princess told her
that she had a request to make to her, which she desired her to grant, and that
it could not be in the least to her prejudice.

The good woman seeing her in so rich Aparrel, thought that it would be ill
manners in her to deny her any thing, and therefore she consented to her
Request: Then the Princess told her that she desired her to exchange her
Aparrel with her. The woman at first was unwilling, but at length she
consented, and so changing their Habits, the Princess likewise gave her some
money, and so they departed.

The Princess being thus accoutred, desired to know the way to the next Port
Town, to which she traveled, and being come thither, she desired to embarque
her self: and enquiring for shipping she found one going for England, into
which she embarked her self, resolving never to return to her Father, but
still to travel in search of her Knight.

The Ship in short time arrived at England, and there she was exposed to a new
travel through that Country, and then taking shipping again she went for
Ireland; where when she arrived she traveled toward Wexford, the place of her
dear Knights Nativity: At length she arrived there, and enquiring for the Earl
his Father, found him and all his Family in much discontent for the absence of
his Son.

Thus being arrived here, and resolving to abide in this place, she caused
Workmen to build a small Monastery with the Money she brought from her Fathers
Court, and when it was builded she Dedicated it to the Honor of Saint Peter the
Holy Apostle, in memory of her dear Knight.

In this place she enclosed her self, resolving to live a Religious Life all
her days in expectation of the Return of her dearly beloved Knight. Here she
got an Acquaintance with the Earl and Countess, Father and Mother to the Knight
of the Keys, who seeing her of so Religious a Life and Conversation,
acquainted themselves with her, delighting much in her Society, and likewise
did very much countenance her in her Undertakings, and oftentimes invited her
home to their Habitation: to which place she sometimes went, otherwise she
never departed from her Monastery, still entertaining poor sick Travelers
therein. Thus did she shut up her self from all the world, while he was as much
afflicted for her absence, and was in continual care and trouble for her loss.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How the Earl of Munster and his Wife the Countess did believe their Son Peter
to be drowned, and how they informed the Holy Magdalena thereof, and of the
sorrow they all made.

THus continued these Personages, the Earl and his Wife, and the Holy
Magdalena, in continual care and fear, but they all still hoped one day to hear
of the Return of their Son and Friend: but they were much perplexed at an
adventure that happened one day, which was in this manner.

Certain Fishermen having been abroad at Sea a fishing, amongst other Fishes
which they caught one happened to be a very fair Sturgeon, at which they
wondered, and at their return to Wexford they went to the Earl, and presented
this Fish as a great Novelty to him: the which he thankfully received, and
showing the same to his Countess, she caused the same immediately to be cut
into pieces: but oh strange accident! in the belly of the Fish she discovered
somewhat that was red, which having taken out, they found it to be a red Purse
of cloth, and having opened the same there was in it three Jewels, which she
earnestly beholding, knew to be the same she had delivered to her Son Peter at
such time as he departed from her, when he first began his travels.

This sight gave her great astonishment, and she going immediately to the Earl
her Husband showed them to him, and he knowing them was as much troubled, and
then they certainly concluded and saw that all their hopes of the Return of
their Son Peter was in vain; for they verily believed that he had been cast
away at Sea, and the Fishes had devoured him: and in this opinion they
remained, making great Lamentations for the loss of him, never more expecting
to see him. Then they immediately put themselves and all their Family into
Mourning Aparrel, and hung all their House in Mourning, and ordered every thing
as if he had been certainly dead, and they had seen him buried, so confident
were they of the truth of this adventure. And thus continued they in great and
private mourning for many days, not being seen of any but their own family. So
soon as the Countess went abroad, she went to the Monastery to visit the Holy
Magdalena, where when she was arrived she expressed by her outward looks and
habit, the inward sorrow of her mind.

The Holy Maid being desirous to know the occasion of this, believing it to be
some extraordinary matter, desired the Countess to inform her of the true cause
of her immoderate sorrow, the which she did with many tears, and the Holy Maid
accompanied her in her tears, verily believing this to be true, and that now
she should never more see her dear Knight Peter. The Countess supposing that
she shed those tears out of affection to her loss, thinking to be consolated by
her, was forced her self to give her some consolation, so great was her grief,
but she little thought that the Holy Maid was so deeply concerned in this
occasion.

After many lamentations and tears, the Countess desired the Holy Maid that she
would come and visit her oftener, that they might lament together, and so she
departed, leaving the fair Magdalena in the greatest grief in the world. The
Countess being gone, she retirdd her self into her Chamber, where throwing her
self upon her Bed, she thus began: Ah unfortunate Maid, how far better had it
bin that thou had never bin born, than thou should be the occasion of so
much grief: I was the cause that the good Knight Peter adventured himself in
such manner, that he has now lost his life; and therefore it is thy cause that
so much grief is come to his Parents for his loss. Certainly he loosing of me,
has traveled so many Countries in the searching form, that he is now cast
away at sea, and become the food for Fishes. It had been much better that I had
never been fair, or at least that I had never consented to have left my
Parents, so to torment and afflict them; but Heaven is just, and has now
deservedly sent this loss to punish me for my disobedience: Ah what shall now
become of me? I shall never again see the face of my dear Knight, nor never
give any comfort to my dear Parents in my sight, for here I am resolved (since
I have been so unfortunate) to end my life, and for the future do better
service to God for the expiation of my sins.

Thus did she lament, and thus continued she in this place in the greatest
devotion in the world, never stirring out but to the Earls, where she went
sometimes to accompany them in their Lamentations for the loss of their Son and
her Friend, resolving that so long as she lived she would not discover her
quality and condition to any one: and in this place we must for some time leave
her, and return to her beloved Peter, and the rest of the Princes and Knights
who were in their way to Babylon: but we will first by the way tell you the
News that came to Babylon to the Souldan and the Princess Florisbella.

CHAP. XXXIV.
How News came to the Souldan at Babylon of the Victory obtained against the
Emperor of Trebizond, and how the Souldan and many of his Court went out to
meet Don Bellianis and his Companions.



THe Souldan of Babylon was very joyful for the Arrival of the two Princes
Clarineo and Lucidamore, Brothers to Don Bellianis and the rest of the Knights
their Companions, and he and all his Court had much hope that they and the
Forces which they conducted to Don Bellianis, would be able to reduce the
Emperor of Trebizond to better terms than had been already propounded. The
Princesses Florisbella and Mattarosa were greatly satisfied at the Arrival of
the Knights, and did both believe that in short time they should have the
company of their Knights; and therefore the Princesses Florisbella endeavored
to put her Affairs into such order, that Don Bellianis at his return might give
her and himself the satisfaction she desired, wherefore she taking an
opportunity when only her self, and Mother, and her Cousin the Princess
Mattarosa were together, she began to her Mother thus:

Madam, good fortune have we had, that the Gods have at so necessary a time as
this, sent us so valiant Knights to defend our Empire when it was most in
danger: but withal I am very sorry and discontented that my person should give
so great an occasion, as to endanger the lives of so many valiant Knights, and
I would to the Gods that we could consider of some way of preventing this
trouble for the future.

The Empress replied, I question not Daughter, but what Forces are already gone
(with the assistance of the Gods, a just Cause, and the Aid of so many brave
Princes and Knights) will be able without any more trouble to bring home
Victory, or at least to force the Emperor of Trebizond to such a Peace as shall
be as disadvantagious to him, and he intended to us: but there is somewhat else
to be further considered of, for so long as you remain unmarried, you being the
only Heir of this Empire, we shall be in the like danger, either the love or
ambition of some persons will readily prompt them to give us a trouble;
therefore dear Daughter, since your years of childehood are past, and you are
capable of making a Choice, it would be necessary and convenient for you,
amongst those many Princes and great Personages that sue for your favor, that
you would choose one whom you think fit to make your Husband, that thereby all
the rest may be satisfied, and we left quiet, and your Father and I in our old
age live without this trouble.

Madam, replied the Princess, If either you or my Father would propound some
one that were fitting for my Quality and Condition, I should be ready to bend
my inclinations toward him, and willingly content you therein.

Madam, said the Princess Mattarosa, I suppose the Princess my Cousin would
willingly satisfy your self and her Father in this particular: but if you
please to hear my advice, I shall endeavor to please you both. I believe it the
most necessary thing to be considered of in this Choice, to have one that shall
be both valiant and able to defend this Country from all its Enemies: these
Wars have testified that you have Enemies, and therefore it is necessary as
well to prevent a future danger as to end this: there are several brave Princes
and Knights engaged in this War, and out of the same one might be thought of
that might be a fit Match, and if I may with freedom speak, I shall name the
person.

The Emperess who had heard her Cousin, liked well of her counsel, and
therefore told her that she should willingly not only hear her, but also give
her consent thereto, provided it were such a person as was every way both by
Descent and Valor, deserving, and if her Daughters good will and inclination
were added thereto.

The Princess Mattarosa (very well knowing that she should give no distaste to
her Cousin in proceeding) replied, That the person whom she thought most fit
for a Husband for her Cousin was the most accomplished Person for Valor,
Virtue, and Princely Descent in the whole world, and the person that that
Empire and they all were most obliged to: and, says she, I shall not need to
name him further, for this Character does sufficiently testify that it can be
none other but the Prince Don Bellianis of Greece.

The Emperess replied, That truly she always had a very great esteem for that
Prince, and she supposed that gratitude had caused some inclination in her
Daughters mind; and, says she, I am sure that he has deserved more of her than
all men living: and could I find that she would be willing to accept of him, I
would not only give my own consent to the Match, but I would endeavor to
persuade the Souldan my Husband thereto, and I question not but the many
Services which that good Prince has done him, will engage him to give him that
satisfaction, if he desires it.

As for that Madam, said Mattarosa, I am sure that the valiant Prince Don
Bellianis is extremely amorous of my Cousin Florisbella, and that it has been
the sole cause of his coming hither, which has been so much for the advantage
of us all, he himself told me this, and I think my self not only obliged to
tell you this, but also to do what else for him I can.

The Princess Florisbella seeing things brought to this pass, thus answered
them, Dear Mother, since it is your pleasure for me to speak in this occasion,
I shall do it with all freedom, and therefore assure your self that ever st^ce
I first saw the Prince Don Bellianis, I have had a very great inclination for
him, but I have smothered it till now I hear he is a person not only fit by
his worth and desert, but your esteem of him to be so, and therefore if you and
my Father should be so contented, I shall think my self happy in having a
person so every way accomplished for my Husband, and I question not but his
worth will sufficiently plead for him to my Father.

The Emperess being highly satisfied in the Answer of her Daughter, said that
she would immediately take such Orders with the Souldan, as she would not only
know his mind herein, but also if occasion be, persuade him thereto to the
satisfaction of all, and so she departed from her Cousin and Daughter, leaving
them in the greatest satisfaction in the world.

The Emperess went to the Souldan her Husband, and discoursed of this matter to
him, who was so pleased therewith, that there was nothing wanting but the
presence of Don Bellianis to put a conclusion to the matter, and theref^re they
all wished for an end of the War. In these terms they were when a Knight armed
at all points came into the presence of the Souldan, and d^ing his ordinary,
Reverence, told him that he came from the valiant Prince Don Bellianis, and his
Companions, and had brought a Letter to him, and thereup^n the Souldan caused
it to be opened, wherein he found these words.

The LETTER of Don Bellianis, to the Souldan of Babylon.
Dread Lord,
SInce my last to you, our Success in your Wars has been very various, for the
Emperor of Trebizond continuing in his wilfulness, endeavored all he could to
lengthen the War, which he effected by the continual arrival of fresh Forces:
but however the Justice of your Cause gave us sufficient Success; for although
your Forces did rather diminish than increase, yet we still joined the better:
At length we being wearied with the tediousness of the War, resolved though to
our disadvantage, to hazard all in one Battle, which we both began and
continued with equal success, till new Forces arriving at his Army somewhat
discouraged your Soldiers: but however I resolved to put an end to the War
with that one days Battle, if possible, and therefore giving your Forces fresh
encouragement, by my endeavors we continued the Fight: but most fortunate was
it for us that those Forces you sent under the Conduct of my Brothers and
Friends, came at that time so opportunely, for it so discouraged our Enemies,
and gave so much encouragement to your Soldiers, that all resolved to make
this use thereof, either to conquer or die. This their Resolution they well
enough performed, for after a long and bloody Battle, our Enemies were forced
out of the Field (which they had before kept) into the City, to their great
loss: not only the Common Soldiers and many brave Knights suffered and lost
their lives, but the Chief Commanders also. The Emperor it was my fortune to
take prisoner, and the King of Georgia who had assisted him with fifty thousand
men, was taken by my two Brethren, and the rest put to flight, so that we may
conclude the War to be at an end. I have left the City with a hundred thousand
men besieged by Don Baltasano, and with the rest am coming toward Babylon, to
know your further Commands, which what ever they be, shall be surely executed;
for since your Incomparable Daughter has had so much goodness, as to admit me
to the honor of being her Servant, I find my self capable of any attempt.

I shall bring with me the Emperor, whose presumption gave her a discontent,
who shall either ask her pardon for his so bold attempt, or be otherwise
disposed of as you shall think fit. I thought good to send you this Messenger,
that you might participate in the Contentment we all receive by this Victory,
which you may account absolute, or else if you please to command it shall be
quickly perfected, either to the gaining of the Empire of Trebizond, or what
other Kingdoms you shall please, or else to the loss of the life of

Your humblest Servant, Don Bellianis.


If this News was pleasing to the Souldan you may easily judge, and he soon
expressed it by his Commands that a general Ringing should be made throughout
his whole Empire: And he then immediately assembled his Council together, to
advise what was necessary to be done; wherein it was concluded that He himself
and all the Grandees of his Court, and all the Forces that were then in the
City prepared for the War, should the next day march in triumph to meet the
valiant Don Bellianis and his worthy Companions.

The Princess Florisbella was soon informed of this Victory, not only by that
Letter of her Fathers, but by one of her own sent by Don Bellianis to her,
which when she had received it, she opened and read as follows.

The LETTER of Don Bellianis to the Princess Florisbella.
Dear Princess,
THe tediousness of the War has given me a very sensible trouble, not for any
thing of difficulty I met therein, but for my absence from your Divine
Presence: but now (thanks to the Gods) we have put a period thereto, the
justice of your Cause commanding no less;) for we have not only sacrificed the
lives of many of your Enemies to your just Anger, but I have in my custody the
persons of two of the most considerable, the Emperor your Grand Enemy, and the
King of Georgia one of his Alliance. I beg an excuse for my not giving you a
particular account of our Battle and Victory, doubting the tediousness thereof
would displease you. I shall bring the Emperor my Rival into your presence, but
I suppose he will not be so impudent as to persevere in his wilfulness of
having your divine Person at his dispose, nor at the least discontent you; if I
thought he would, I should hinder him therefrom by bereaving him of his life:
It was my intention to have sacrificed his life long since to your just
displeasure, and thereby have rid my self of a Rival; but he fell into my hands
at such a time that I could not in point of Honor kill him, wherefore he shall
come and receive his Doom from your own mouth, and I am indifferent whether you
give him life or death, so you will pronounce so favorable a sentence for me,
that I may enjoy that with your good will which he would have compelled you to.
Madam, I hope, and partly expect your performance of this, not for any merit or
desert of my own, but out of the excess of goodness and mercy the Gods have so
plentifully endued you withal. Madam, I shall now cease writing till I come to
your presence, but be confident of this that I shall never cease to be

The humblest of your Servants, Don Bellianis.


The Princess was sufficiently satisfied in the receipt of this Letter, but she
hoped for a further satisfaction in that of his presence, which she expected in
a few days, and was glad she had used the late discourse with her Mother. Thus
was both Court and City in great content, and the Souldan the next day went out
of the City, accompanied by his Nobility and others, to meet the Prince Don
Bellianis and his Companions.

CHAP. XXXV.
How the Souldan of Babylon met the Prince Don Bellianis and his Companions,
and how they all arrived at the City of Babylon



With great content and pleasure did the Souldan and all his company ride to
meet Don Bellianis and all his Companions, who were all merry and jocund for
the good fortune they had in vanquishing their Enemies; but he who was best
pleased was Don Bellianis himself, in that he was now so near the presence of
his Honorable Lady, at whose hands he hoped to receive so much favor, as would
sufficiently satisfy him for all his pains and travel. Thus did they all ride
on, when coming within half a days Journey of Babylon, a Messenger came to them
to inform them that the Souldan himself in person, and several of his Grandees
and Nobility, were in the way coming to meet them: At which news they all put
themselves in order to receive him, and so in very good order they marched
forwards: Don Bellianis being mounted on a stately Horse came in the Front,
riding between his two Princely Brothers Don Clarineo and Don Lucidamore, next
to them came the four valiant Knights, Contumeliano of Phenicia, Fliorispiano
of Swevia, Peter of Ireland, and Trion Knight of the Wolf, and all the rest of
the other Knights and great Personages in good order. In this equipage and
order did they march when the Souldan and his followers met them. At the fight
of whom Don Bellianis lightly leaping from his horse, marched on foot to the
Souldan; who seeing him dismounted did likewise alight, and Don Bellianis
falling on his knee, humbly desired the Souldan to permit him to kiss his
hands: but the Souldan refusing that, caused him to arise, and then the other
Knights being come together, the Souldan having embraced Don Bellianis with
much affection in the sight of all those many worthy Personages, in the hearing
of them all he said as follows: Most mighty Prince, We have great cause to be
thankful to the Gods for the mercy they have showed us, in sending you into
this Country at a time when We were in so great distress; for without your
presence we had all ere this bin in so great a strait, that our fortunes, nay
our very lives had been in very great hazard: there is none of us here but if
he enjoys Wife, Children, or Estate, or Liberty, is obliged to you for the
protection thereof, so that this whole Empire is of right belonging to you, it
having been so marvellously protected, and miraculously defended by your
invincible Valor. Therefore, most noble Prince, as all We have or enjoy is
absolutely your right to possess, so let Us know what, or how We shall make you
some satisfaction: As for Our own part, Our Self, Our Emperess, and Our
Daughter, shall be wholly at your dispose, and We shall all joyfully obey your
just Desires or Commands, knowing that the Gods who have endowed you with so
much Valor, have certainly bestowed on you the like quantity of Virtue; and
therefore most Noble Prince, let Us know your desires, and they shall be
absolutely obeyed.




Don Bellianis held his peace with very much difficulty, being very unwilling
to hear the Souldan go on in such Commendations of him, but withal he was
unwilling to disturb him till he had done: but so soon as he saw he had ended
his Discourse, he thus replied: Most redoubted Souldan, I am very sorry that I
should give your Highness so much trouble, as to come thus far to meet your
poor Servants, but much more discontented and ashamed that you should here
before this Noble Company heap so many commendations on me who have acted the
least of all this Company: but if I had done any thing worthy of note, it is no
more than I am bound by the Order of Knighthood, and the Bonds of Civility and
true Virtue to do; for what I have done has been to relieve the oppressed, and
nothing but Justice; with which Actions the Heavens are pleased we should
exercise our selves, and for that end are we created, one bare acknowledgement
is a sufficient recompense: but what I have performed has been by virtue of the
Commands of that Incomparable Princess your Daughter, who has made me so happy
as to admit me to be her Servant, and in whose just Quarrel I shall dare to do
any thing that she shall further command me, not questioning but her goodness
will give me a reward sufficient: and if you please to let me continue her
Servant, and give me freedom in that, I shall esteem my self in the greatest
height of happiness.




To this the Souldan replied, Prince of Greece, I am so far satisfied in my
Daughters mind, that she has not only a great esteem of your Virtues, but
also an affection for your Person, and if you are pleased with her, and think
the enjoyment of her Person will be any recompense for your great Labors, be
confident that you may have a free possession thereof, and We shall think Our
selves happy that We can have so brave a Prince for Our Son in Law, by whose
power and magnanimity we question not but we shall be able to defend this
Empire.




Don Bellianis having heard this, immediately fell on his knees, and
notwithstanding all the resistance of the Souldan, kissed his hand, and
straightly embracing him, in most humble manner thus replied.

Ah Mighty Sir, What Thanks or Returns am I able to make for this so immense
and most desirable Favor! were I possessed of the whole Worlds Empire, I
should yet esteem my self too mean a person to enjoy so great a happiness as
that of the Person of your Incomparable Daughter, whose rare Perfections
commands all the Potentates in the whole World to be at her dispose: And Sir,
assure your self, that for the future it shall be my endeavor to conquer
Kingdoms, and vanquish Kings, that I may lay their Crowns at her feet, as a
just Tribute to her Virtues.


Having thus spoken, he arose from the ground, and retiring back a few steps,
he permitted his Brothers and Companions to go forwards and be received by the
Souldan, and then he himself went forward and kindly saluted the Nobility of
Babylon. Thus having done they all remounted their horses and in good order
marched toward Babylon, but it grew so late that the Souldan resolved not to
enter the City that night, but to stay at a Palace of his a league from the
City: at which place they being arrived, took up their Quarters for that night,
and prepared for their entrance into the City the next morning; which being
come, they all again mounted their horses and set forwards. This day the Prince
Don Bellianis and the Souldan rode on together, and then his two Brethren, and
so the rest of the Princes and Knights in order: When they came near the City,
the Magistrates thereof came and presented themselves in their richest
Habiliments, and made a Congratulatory Oration to Don Bellianis: and so all the
way that they rode he had several Orations and Presents made him; for which he
gave them many thanks.

The two Prisoners, the Emperor of Trebizond and the King of Georgia, came in
the middle of the Army, being placed in two Chariots with Chains and Fetters of
God, and a great Guard about them, and thus did arrive at the Palace, where
they were met by the Emperess and her Ladies. The Princes and Knights soon left
their horses, and on foot advanced forwards, where Don Bellianis falling on his
knees was kindly and lovingly embraced by the Emperess; but when he came before
the presence of his Princess he kneeled on the ground, not daring to cast one
glance of his eyes upon her Divine Countenance. She was this day dressed in a
Gown of Sky-colored Satin embroidered with Gold, and richly beset with
Diamonds and Rubies, representing Stars in the Heavens, but her Face appeared
to be more glorious than the Sun when he is in his greatest luster: her Bosom
fitly represented the Milky whey, and in all her parts there was so much
excellency and divinity, that it dazzled the eyes of the Beholders. Our poor
Prince was all this while on the ground, not daring either to look up or speak:
but having her by one of her hands more white than the driven Snow, he most
amorously kissed that, and fetching many sighs, bathed it in tears. She well
knowing that he was surprised, said to him, What, most Noble Prince, after
having conquered many enemies, have you not confidence to behold a Lady, your
Friend? He then recovering himself, and looking on her Face, said: Dear
Princess, so much transcendent light proceeds from your divine Countenance,
that I am not holy enough to look up, lest for my presumption I be stricken
blind. But considering with himself that he was observed by many in that
passion, he again saluting her hand arose, and making an obeisance passed on
toward the Princess Mattarosa, who kindly received him: and so the rest of the
Knights having performed their duties to the Ladies, he went to his Princess,
and seeing the Souldan was leading the Emperess away, he likewise took the
Princess by the hand and went after them: after he was come into the great Hall
they disarmed themselves, and a costly Banquet being prepared they all sat
down; which being done, the Souldan did then declare to his Emperess and
Daughter what he had promised to Don Bellianis, wherewith they were so well
satisfied, that he intended forthwith to have them married; and therefore not
only caused all those Princes that were there present to continue in the Court
till the Ceremony should be performed, but he likewise sent into all the
adjacent Countries to summon all Knights to come at that time, which he
intended to be within fourteen days.

CHAP. XXXVI.
How the most Renowned Prince Don Bellianis of Greece, Son to the Emperor of
Constantinople, was Married to the Princess Florisbella, Daughter to the
Souldan of Babylon; and of the Solemnity of the Wedding, and the Tilts and
Tournaments then holden in honor of the same.



GReat was the Preparations that were made for the Solemnity of the Wedding
between the Prince of Greece and the fair Princess of Babylon, and many were
the great Personages that came to Babylon to assist or attend at that
Solemnity. The King and Queen of Antioch, Don Brianel and Aurora, with a Troop
of five hundred gallant Knights came thither (as they believed they were by
duty bound) to wait upon their Relations: and the King and Queen of Pharez, Don
Alfiron and Persiana, with another Troop of five hundred Knights likewise, came
at this time to render their love and service to the most accomplished Don
Bellianis, and great was the resort of several other Princes and Knights,
Princesses and Ladies from all parts, to see and assist at this great Ceremony,
so that not only the City, but all the adjacent Towns were filled with rich
Tents, and Companies of Ladies and Knights.

Don Bellianis and his Princess Florisbella spent much of their time in
welcoming and treating these persons that came so far to honor them: and the
Souldan and his Emperess were extreme joyful that they had been so fortunate as
to match their Daughter to so brave a Prince, and one so well beloved, not
questioning but now their Empire would be more flourishing than ever, and they
should be out of all fear of the power of any of their Neighboring Enemies.

At length the day so much expected and desired came, when all things being in
readiness, these great Personages set forwards to the Temple: The Fair Princess
Florisbella was led thither by the two Princes Don Clarineo of Spain, and Don
Lucidamore of Thessaly, both Brothers to Don Bellianis; and he was led thither
by the Princess Mattarosa of Numidia, and the fair Princess Cynthia Sister to
the Prince of Mesapotamia, the rest of the Princesses and Princes, Ladies and
Knights, in great state and very good order attending: Being come to the
Temple, and the usual Solemnities performed, they returned back again to the
Palace, where a most rich and gallant Dinner was provided. The Tables being
furnished with all manner of Delicacies which the Luxury of Asia could produce.
After Dinner was ended, every one made haste to the place appointed for the
Tournament, the Princesses and Ladies seating themselves on a Scaffold erected
on one side of the Tiltyard for that purpose, in the midst of which Scaffold
was placed two Thrones, on the one was seated the Souldan of Babylon and his
Emperess, and on the other the Prince Don Bellianis and the Incomparable
Florisbella his Bride, and the rest of the Kings and Queens, Princes and
Princesses, Knights and Ladies in several places appointed for that purpose. No
sooner were they all seated, but silence was commanded, and after the sound of
twelve Trumpets, Proclamation was made that all such Knights as was there
present, or should during the term of the Tournament arrive, should have free
liberty of showing their utmost endeavors in the Acts of Chivalry, both at the
Sword and Lance, provided they did conform themselves to such Orders as were
appointed, or should be appointed either by the Souldan or Don Bellianis. And
it was further proclaimed, that the Tournament should continue for four days.

The first day Contumeliano Prince of Phenicia had leave with fifty Knights to
maintain and keep the Field in honor of the New Married Pair, against all
Opponents. The second day was appointed for Peter of Ireland, with the same
number of Knights. The third day for Don Lucidamore of Thessaly. And the fourth
and last for Don Clarineo of Spain,

Soon after this Proclamation was made, the Prince Contumeliano entered the
Field accompanied with fifty Knights, and after he had done his usual Reverence
to the Souldan, and the rest, he took a Lance from one of his Attendance and
passed forwards: But he was no sooner arrived at the further end of the Field,
but he heard a noise of Trumpets, and after small attendance he saw a Knight
completely armed in a white Armor, with a Bear painted on his Shield, who being
accompanied with a brave Train of Knights entered the Lists, and having passed
on to the place where the Souldan and Don Bellianis sat, and made his
Reverence, be advanced forwards to the other end, and there prepared himself
for a Course against Don Contumeliano; which Contumeliano seeing prepared
himself to receive him, and so accordingly they ran against one another with
such force, that their Lances flew into the Air all broken into shivers without
any other disadvantage, but that of the Knight of the Bear loosing his
Stirrops, which he soon recovered, and by such time as he came to the end of
his Course, he had resetled himself on his horse in as good a manner as he was
at the first

This equality in our Champions raised a new vigor in them, and taking fresh
Lances they again essayed which should have the better: and not only they
themselves ran the second time, but also twenty of each of their Knights* but
this Course was much to the disadvantage of the Knight of the Bear and his
Companions; for he was thrown out of his Saddle, and with him twelve of his
Company, and only six of the Prince Contumeliano's Knights were foiled, and
himself was forced to lay hold on his horse neck.

This Course raised an anger in both the Champions, which made them and their
Companions quickly remount their horses, and it was then agreed on, that at the
third Course they and their whole Squadrons, which was equally divided into
fifty in a Squadron, should again run with their Lances, and after that try
their fortunes with their Swords. Which Agreement was quickly put into
execution, and they accordingly ran against one another with indifferent
equality of fortune; for there was about twenty of a party thrown to the
ground, but they quickly possessed themselves of their horses, and remounting
drew their Swords, and began a brave Skirmish, to the great delight of the
Beholders, many of them being beaten from their horses by the mighty and
puissant strokes which they gave and received each unto other. But there was
this Provision made before the Iousts, that none should enter the Fields whose
Swords were sharp, but only whose Swords were dulled on the edge, to the end
that none should be killed, and that the Recreation of some might not be the
destruction of others; however many of the Knights on both sides were with the
violence of the strokes beaten from their horses, and much bruised with the
falls, and the trampling of the horses killed some outright.

Thus this Skirmishing continued for the space of four hours, but in the end
the Honor of the Day was won by the Prince of Phenicia, the Knight of the Bear
by a fall which he had received, being disabled from sitting his horse, and
being carried out of the Field by several of his Knights was conveyed to his
Lodgings: And then Proclamation was made, That that days Tournament should
end, and so they all departed the Field and went to the Palace, where they
were no sooner arrived and seated in their places, but at the sound of Music
many of them began to dance.

In this and such like variety of Recreation they continued for some hours,
till it was time for every one to take their rest, and then out pair of
Incomparable Lovers retired into their Lodgings, went to Bed and received the
Enjoyment which they had so long wished for, and was now accomplished, to the
great Joy not only of the two Lovers, but of all their Friends and Relations:
In which Content we will leave them till the morning, which being come they all
arose, and the fair Princess Florisbella by the Crimson Die which appeared in
her lovely Cheeks, did well enough express that she had exchanged her
Maidenhead for that of a Wife: and the Prince of Greece by his outward
gestures did sufficiently testify the satisfaction of his spirit in the
Enjoyment of his Incomparable Lady.

Noon being come and Dinner ended, they did all repair again to the place
appointed for the Tournament, where the Valiant Peter of Ireland with fifty
Knights did bear away the Honor of the Day, to his everlasting fame.

Thus were three of the four days spent in Iusting, Tilting, Tournaments,
Skirmishing, and Dancing, and all other manner of delightful Exercises: And the
fourth day was now come, and Dinner being ended, and every one seated in their
several places, the Valiant Prince Don Clarineo of Spain (who as you have heard
was to maintain the Field for that day) was entered the Lists at the head of
fifty valiant Knights, when after the accustomed Civilities done to the Souldan
and Ladies, he placed himself ready for the Ioust, when presently entered a
Knight in black Armor, having the Figure of Envy painted on his Shield. This
Knight coming at a time of Mirth in such an unaccustomed manner, caused great
Admiration in all the Beholders: but the Actions which he did gave them greater
cause of anger; for no sooner had be placed himself at one end of the Lists in
the head of all his Knights, but he ran with great violence against the Prince
Clarineo, intending to kill him with his Lance, for which purpose, his Lance
had a long Spike of Steel at the end, and was made of the strongest Wood; but
he missed of his aim, for he only ran the Prince through the left arm, and
there brake his Lance. All his Companions did run with the like violence, and
intended the like mischief, but some of them were thrown from their horses: but
they being thus armed, did much mischief to several of the Princes Knights,
killing fifteen outright.

The Prince Don Clarineo seeing himself thus wounded, quickly drew forth the
piece of the Lance that was left in his Arm, though with much pain, and
presently drew his Sword, seeking about for his Enemy who had done him this
mischief, resolving to be revenged of him for the Injury he had received: but
it was some time ere he could find him, and then he saw him perform wonders;
for he killed ten of his Knights, and laid them at his feet: At length he came
to him, and having his Sword ready drawn assaulted him with great fury, but it
was to little purpose; for the Sword of the one was sharp, and the others was
blunt and without an edge: this disadvantage he was wholly unsensible of, his
anger and rage not giving him so much time as to consider thereof. But at
length he not only found himself full of wounds and faint for loss of blood,
but looking about he saw most of his Knights lie dead about the Field. In this
condition did he remain, when about one hundred Knights came to his Assistance:
but they prevailed not much, in regard that they were all armed as the others
were with blunt Swords and Lances, and the anger they were in caused them to be
unmindful of the danger they ran into. The Knight of Envy and his Companions
being all very valiant Knights, still laid about them with great eagerness and
fury, to the loss of the Souldans Knights, and to his great grief and sorrow,
who knew not how on a sudden to prevent so great a loss.

Don Bellianis and his Relations were extremely angered herewith, who were all
unarmed, or at the best had only blunt Swords according to the Agreement of
the Tournament, but extreme great was the Cry, Noise, and Confusion of the
Princesses and Ladies, fearing lest they should all have been destroyed in this
unfortunate Skirmish. This raised the anger of our Grecian Prince to such a
height, that he was ready even to run amongst the throng, unarmed as he was,
when suddenly he saw another Troop of above one hundred and fifty Knights enter
the Field, who soon testified to whom they did belong by the strokes which they
gave; for at every stroke blood followed their Swords, so that he soon knew
them to be his Enemies: which he seeing, and being now so far come to himself
as to consider the danger, he caused all the Ladies to depart, and he himself
with all his Friends, ran hastily to their several Chambers to arm themselves;
which they did in the best manner they could, and returning to the Field they
found that above five hundred of his Friends and Knights were either slain or
wounded. He soon made head against his Enemies, and assaulted them with a great
deal of rage and anger, to the great help of his Friends, and to the loss and
discouragement of his Enemies.

Many were on both sides slain by the hands of Don Bellianis and his Enemy the
Knight of Envy, who now met together and began a furious Fight, to the great
amazement of all the Beholders. They were both greatly wounded and astonished
at each others strength, when in the midst of their fury there appeared over
their heads a great Cloud, which breaking there was seen and heard great
Thunder and Lightning, which amazed all in the place, and a great Darkness was
over all the place for the space of a quarter of an hour: at the end of which
there appeared a small Castle in the place of the Combat, and by it lay Don
Bellianis along on the earth, and many of his Friends: There also appeared an
ancient woman who taking a Bottle, put it to the mouth of Don Bellianis, and
some of the Water that was in it passing into his body, he revived and arose,
and looking about him saw that which was happened, and saw the old Woman, and
knew her to be Bellona the Enchanteress, who desired him to go about the Field,
and pull off the Helmets from the Heads of those Knights that lay there, that
she might assist his Friends; which he did accordingly, and there they found
his two Brothers Clarineo and Lucidamore, Contumeliano, and Peter of Ireland,
with many others much wounded: to whom she gave some of her Water, and they
presently arose in very good estate and condition, much wondering at that which
had happened. Don Bellianis seeing this, did suppose that all that had happened
this day had been done by Enchantment, and therefore he asked Bellona who and
what these Enemies were? and whether they were real men, or only Enchantment?

To which she replied, That in general they were men, and valiant Knights, as
he and his Companions could well enough testify, that they were his Enemies,
and came to disturb the peace he was in: and that they might not for the future
be in a capacity to injure him further, she had provided that Castle which she
showed him, and whereinto she said it was necessary they should be put: in
order to which they all went about the Field, and as many of the Knights their
Enemies which were about fifty, as they could find yet alive, were presently
put into that Castle.

This being done, Don Bellianis and his Brethren, Friends, and Knights, in the
company of the sage Bellona, set forwards toward the Palace: but they were
soon met by the Souldan and his Emperess, the Princess Florisbella, and the
rest of the Princesses and Ladies, who had already heard of the good health of
their Knights, and greatly rejoiced thereat. Thus they all being together
returned to the Palace, where they being seated, the sage Bellona spoke to
them thus: Most Noble Souldan and Emperess, and you others Kings, Queens,
Princes and Princesses, Knights and Ladies, It is many years since I foreknew
the misfortune that would this day happen to you, and many days and nights have
I spent in considering of a way to prevent this mischief, but I could not find
a better expedient than what I have now executed. You are all now in good
health, and the ill that was intended is now prevented, so that you may assure
your selves that you are out of all danger of any present harm. What they are
that thus disturbed you, you need not care to know at this time, for they are
safe enough from doing you any further mischief; wherefore proceed now in your
Mirth, since nothing whatsoever shall be able to disturb you.




She having spoken thus held her peace, and the Souldan and the rest gave great
thanks to Bellona for the great Service she had done them. Thus Reader, we will
make an end of this Part of this History, leaving our Princes in great quiet,
and in the Third Part we shall tell you who were the Knight of Envy and his
Companions, and the cause of their coming at this time; As also an end of the
Wars between the two Empires of Trebizond and Babylon, and what became of the
two Princes Perianeo and Gramalis of Thrace in the Pleasant Island, and many
other pleasant and delightful Adventures.

FINIS.
An Advertisement.
THe four first Parts of that Ancient and Honorable History of Amadis De Gaul,
formerly printed in a large Volume in Folio, and now grown scare and dear, are
Epitomized and Contracted into one Volume in quarto, and are intended suddenly
for the Press, to the satisfaction of those who have the Fifth and Sixth Parts
of that History, lately printed: Also the Seventh and Eighth Parts are now in a
good forwardness; so that if the Stationer receives encouragement you may in
time have all the Parts of that History in English. You may in short time
expect the Third Part of this History of Don Bellianis, as also several other
Histories of this nature.

Books printed for Andrew Kembe at St. Margarets-Hill in Southwark.
THe Batchelors Banquet. Canaans Calamity: Or, The Destruction of Jerusalem.
Titana and Theseus. Don Flores of Greece. The Garland of Love and Good Will;
Francis Spira. Christmas Carrols. The Fathers Legacy. The Fifth Part of Amadis
de Gaul. The History of Palladine of England. The Second Part of the Famous
History of Don Bellianis of Greece. With other Histories of this nature.
FINIS.



