GOLD REFINED; OR, Baptism in its Primitive Purity. Proving Baptism in Water an
Holy Institution of Jesus Christ, and to continue in the Church to the End of
the World. WHEREIN It is clearly evinced, That Baptizo, or Baptism, is not
Aspersion or Sprinkling, or pouring a little Water upon the Face, or any other
part of the Body: But that it is Immersion, or dipping the whole Body, etc.
Also that Believers are only the true Subjects (and not Infants) of that holy
Sacrament. Likewise Mr. Smythies Arguments for Infant Baptism in his late Book,
entitled, The Non-Communicant, (and all other Objections) fully answered.

By BENJ. KEACH, Author of (...), A Key to open Scripture-Metaphors.

Isa. 1. 22. Thy Silver is become Dross. London, Printed for the Author, and
are to be sold by Nathaniel Crouch, at the sign of the Bell in the Poultry.
1689.

THE EPISTLE To all that love our Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity.
IT may possibly be a little wondered at, that I should write at this time any
thing upon this Subject, which may seem to revive the Controversy, of which
little has been written of late Years; it may therefore seem necessary I should
speak something by way of Apology for my self. First of all, I must tell you,
that this Treatise was wrote the last Summer, although it had no Birth till now,
and many know what Provocations I had about that time to write in behalf of our
Practice in respect of Baptism: having heard how a worthy Minister (whom I
respect and honor) who lives not far off from me, had publicly preached up
the baptizing of little Babes, bearing very hard upon those of our Persuasion;
and could I have had a friendly Conference with him, it is like this had not
seen the Sun. Besides, we were challenged to dispute the Point with some
Ministers of the Church of England much about the same time, not far from
London: But tho they had rendered us as odious as they well could (and as if we
had nothing to say for our Practice, viz. for baptizing Men and Women) yet when
all came to all, none of them would appear to defend what they had spoken,
which caused some to conclude it did behove me, or some other to write
something about it. Moreover, a godly Friend (of some Eminency in London) sent
for me to his House (who, tho a Baptist, yet walks with our Brethren called
Independents) and desired me that I would be pleased to write a Sheet or two
upon Baptism, chiefly to show what it was, since he perceived many good People
were mistaken therein, and did, as he conceived, take that to be Baptism, or
Baptizing, which was not the thing, he having examined what the Greek word
(...) Baptizo did signify, and found by Lexicons, and by conferring with
Scholars, it did not signify Aspersion, Sprinkling, nor pouring, nor any other
Washing than Immersion, or total dipping of the Body in Water; and therefore
did conclude it necessary this thing should be further opened, and would have
me to conser with one able Person who well understood the Greek Tongue about
it, which I was willing to do: Nay, and besides all this, when we wrote our Key
to open Scripture-Metaphors, we promised the Reader we would write something
concerning this very matter, as you may see if you read Page 38. Part 2. which,
though it be above six Years ago, we never performed till now. All these things
considered together, with that great Impulse of Spirit I found to do it, I
thought I had a sufficient Call to undertake the Work, although I know it has been
more effectually managed by far abler Pens some Years since, yet I conclude
(with others) a short Tract of a small Price might come into more Hands than
bigger Volumes would do.

Moreover I must confess, I have not a little wondered to see so many Eminent
Fathers, and famous Divines, both Ancient and Modern, speaking so clearly as to
the literal, proper and genuine Signification of the word Baptizo, and yet
finding so many wise and learned Men of late so strangely contradicting
themselves by their own Practice. I am sure if Prejudice and Partiality were
laid aside, and Men would deal faithfully with their own Consciences, they must
confess our Practice of Immersion (or dipping Believers in Water in the Name of
the Father, etc.) must of necessity be congruous both with the literal and
spiritual Signification of the word Baptism, and Practice of the Apostles and
Primitive Church; and so it will be found one day, and that they have no just
cause given them to reproach or charge us as they do: who laying the Foundation
of their own House false, or not according to the Pattern; and not contented so
to do neither, but vilify and reproach them who build exactly according to the
Direction of the Master Builder: We marvel how they can satisfy themselves to
keep up that Practice of theirs of Rantism, since there is nothing to be said
in the Defense of it from God's Word; and if once it was laid aside (with the
wrong Subject) as an unwarrantable Rite, and they would cleave to the Primitive
Institution and Practice, what a glorious Reformation in point of
Church-Constitution and Discipline would there be! and what a sweet Harmony and
Union would follow amongst us! for there has been no one thing that has caused
like Contention in the Church for many Years, as this of Infants-sprinkling
has. If our Brethren would but lay this seriously to Heart, I cannot but think
it would put them to a stand or pause about it. It had need lie clear in the
Word of God, since so great a stress as the Foundation of their Church in such
an eminent manner (in respect of its Constitution) is laid upon it, and it
being that main thing that obstructs and hinders that blessed Union and
Fellowship amongst so many good Christians as it does, who hardly in any other
things differ at all in any Article of Faith or Practice. And whereas our
Brethren seem to fly for Refuge to that indirect and remote Signification of
the word Baptizo of washing, yet how apparent is it, that it means no other
Wa^^^ but such as is by dipping, swilling, or total wet^^^^ that thing, Part,
Member, or Person all over ^it. Water, that is said to be baptized; for tho all
dipping or baptizing may be called a washing, yet all washing is not dipping,
etc. In a proper sense the word Baptize, Wilson in his Dictionary says, is
derived from (...), Tingo, to dip, or plunge into the Water, and signifies
primarily such a kind of washing as is used in Bucks where Linen is plunged
and dipped, etc. But how evident it is, that sprinkling, or pouring is no such
washing, viz. baptizing.

Ainsworth upon Lev. 15. 5. says, to baptize, or wash his Flesh, as is
expressed ver. 13, 16. means his whole Body; likewise (says a great Author)
the Hebrews affirm in every place, where it is said in the Law of bathing the
Flesh, and washing the Clothes of the Unclean, it is not meant but of baptizing
the whole Body, etc. but if the Greek word would bear sprinkling or pouring,
yet that will not justify Men thus to baptize, because not according to the
Usage of the Primitive Church; nor does it answer or reach the Signification of
this Ordinance, which is the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of Jesus Christ,
together with our Death to Sin, and rising with him to walk in newness of Life;
to represent which great Mystery, it was ordained, as you will find if you read
this Treatise. I have been the larger upon this, because if Baptism is nothing
less, nor more, nor any other Act than Immersion, or total dipping the whole
Body, etc. than abundance of godly Christians must seek after true Baptism;
neither can Infants, it appears from hence, be the Subjects of it, since their
tender Bodies cannot bear it in these cold Climates, without palpable danger of
their Lives, as our Opposites confess, and formerly, by woeful Experience, found
to be so. Jesus Christ never appointed an ^^^^nance to destroy the Lives of any
of his Creatures. ^ut why will not our Brethren keep to the great Insti^ution,
and exact Rule of the Primitive Church? Must we content our selves with that
Light which the Church had in respect of this and other Gospel Truths at the
beginning of the Reformation, -- since God has brought forth greater (to the
praise of his own rich Grace) in our Days? And why should a Tradition of the
Antichristian State, be so zealously defended? The Church will never certainly
appear in its Primitive Glory, till this Rubbish be removed; which is nothing
less than to take a Stone of Babylon, and lay it in Sion for a Foundation.
Besides, it does not a little reflect upon the Honor of the Lord Jesus, thus
to derogate from his holy Law, who is appointed Heir of both Worlds; who has
settled in his Church that Religion, and every Ordinance thereof, which must
remain unalterable to the end of Time, or Consummation of all things. He (as
our Annotators well say) is the Builder of God's House, propagating a holy (not
a fleshly) Seed for himself; and has appointed, and fixed on the Matter and
Form thereof, as seemed good in his own sight, who is the brightness of the
Father's Glory, and express Image of his Person, etc. And what an account our
Brethren or others will be able to give to him, for presuming to do any thing
contrary to the Apostolical Constitution, when he comes to judge the Quick and
the Dead, I know not.

As touching that great Argument for Infant Baptism, taken from the Covenant
made with Abraham, tho something is here said in Answer, and enough has been
said by others formerly, yet I must acquaint the Reader, there is a most
excellent Treatise prepared, written by a very worthy and judicious Person (and
ready for a timely Birth) wherein that grand Objection, and all others are
answered (beyond what any I think have ^itherto do^^.) But if we should grant
all they say of Abraham's Fleshly Seed, and Foe^^ Holiness, yet that will not
prove Children to have a Right to Baptism, because Baptism (as well as
Circumcision was) is a mere positive Law, and wholly depends on the Will and
Pleasure of the Lawgiver: which is in this Treatise opened and asserted again
and again, and not without good Reason. But lest I should keep the Reader too
loong at the Door, I shall conclude this Epistle with my hearty Prayers, that
God would be pleased in Mercy to open our Brethrens Eyes, or ours, wherein
either they or we lie short as touching any part of God's Will, and let us
strive to live in Love and Concord together, wherein we do, or can agree. It Is
Truth I contend for, and that Truth which was once delivered to the Saints, and
shall, I hope, whilst I am in the Body, who now (as well as formerly) subscribe
my self thy Servant for Jesus sake,

Aug. 6. 1688. Benj. Keach.

Advertisement.
IF any desire to be furnished that excellent Book, written some times since by
Mr. William Kiffin, proving no unbaptized Person ought to be admitted to the
Lord's Table; may have them at Mr. Nath. Crouch's, at the sign of the Bell in
the Poultry, or at the Authors House in Southwark:

Gold Refined; or; Baptism in its Primitive Purity.
CHAP. I. Wherein the Baptism of Water is proved to be that intended in the
Commission, and so a standing Ordinance till the End of the World.
I Having for many Years last past observed with what strength of Argument some
worthy Christians have labored to defend the Sacred Ordinance of Baptism; and
how they have endeavored to refine it from all Human Mixtures, to the great
Satisfaction and Establishment of many Persons in the Land; yet
notwithstanding, finding how that still a Multitude of gracious People remaing
very ignorant about it, and other^ very obstinately and reproachfully do slight
and contemn it, casting very scandalous and scurrilous Reflections upon those
who practice it according to the Primitive Institution, both from the Pulpit
and the Press: I have been put upon writing something further in the Defense of
our selves and Practice herein.

And that I may the more regularly proceed in this Work, I shall endeavor to
prove Baptism in Water to be that Baptism which is intended in the Commission;
and therefore to abide as an undoubted and standing Ordinance of the Lord Jesus
Christ until his second Coming, or the End of the World.

First of all, Water Baptism an Institution of Christ.
it may be necessary to show you, that this Ordinance was instituted and
ordained by our Lord Jesus, and given forth by him soon after he rose from the
Dead, and a little before he ascended into Heaven; see Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20.
Mark 16. 16. And Jesus came, and spoke unto them, saying, All Power is given
unto me in Heaven and in Earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Spirit: Teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded you: and lo,
I am with you always even to the end of the World. The Lord Jesus first of all
asserteth his Power and Authority. Secondly, he delegates a Power to his
Disciples. Thirdly, he subjoyns a gracious Promise to them.

1. The Power and Authority which he asserteth to himself is, all Power in
Heaven and Earth; Power to institute and appoint Laws and Ordinances, how and
after what manner God ought in Gospel Times to be worshipped; Power to give
Repentance and Remission of Sins; Power to congregate, to teach, and govern his
Church as the supreme Lord, Head, and Ruler thereof; yea, and Power to give
Eternal Life to whomsoever he pleases. This was inherent in him as God blessed
for ever, given to him as our Mediator, given to him when he came into the
World, but more especially confirmed to him and manifested to be given him at
his Resurrection, and Ascension into Heaven. And having declared himself
Supreme Lord and Lawgiver, He

2. Delegates a Power to his Disciples, Go ye therefore and teach all Nations,
baptizing them; the Greek word (...) make Disciples, that must be by preaching
the Gospel to them, instructing them in the Principles of the Christian Faith,
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo, I
am with you always to the end of the World, that is the Promise. These are the
words of the great Commission, which contains part of the last Will and
Testament of the ever blessed Jesus, the glorious Testator of the New Covenant,
wherein Baptism is found and expressly given forth, and with as great Authority,
and in as solemn a manner as ever was any Precept or Ordinance that we read of
in all the Book of God.

Object. But it is not said, baptize them in Water, it may therefore intend the
Baptism of the Holy Spirit.

Answ. To which we answer; As it is not said baptize them with Water, so it is
not said baptize them with the Holy Spirit: They were commanded to baptize,
that is evident; and that it was Water our Savior did require them to baptize
with, and not the Spirit, we prove,

First, Because the Baptism of the Holy Spirit was never by our Savior or his
Apostles commanded, it was never enjoined as a Precept or Duty to be done, but
was always mentioned as a Promise, He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and
with Fire. And again, Ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days
hence: It argues great Weakness, or else Wilfulness, that Men should see no
better how to distinguish between a Baptism that was commanded as a Duty to be
done, and a Baptism promised, which was never enjoined as a Duty.

Secondly, It cannot mean the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, because the Disciples
of Christ (nor no Man under Heaven) had ever any such Power delegated or given
to them, as to baptize with the Holy Ghost; it is strange Persons should be so
blind and bold to think (much less to assert) that mere Men can give the Holy
Spirit, or administer that Baptism, as if the Holy Ghost was at the disposal of
the Will of Man, or that Men know whom to give it to, which indeed only lies
hid in the Breast of God himself, who bestows it to whom and in what manner he
pleases. And therefore,

Thirdly, We do affirm from the Authority of God's Word, that to baptize with
the Holy Spirit is the peculiar Prerogative Royal of Jesus Christ, and that he
did never empower any Disciple of his to give it, He shall baptize you with the
Holy Spirit. The Father by him, and he immediately by himself in his own Person
distributes or gives forth of the Spirit according to the good Pleasure of his
Will, without imparting with this Sovereign Prerogative, or peculiar Power to
any other. Now since Christ's Disciples could not baptize with the Spirit, and
yet are commanded to baptize, it follows clearly it must be Water.

Object. Does not the Apostle show that Men had Power to give the Spirit? what
else is the meaning of these words, he therefore that ministers to you the
Spirit? it appears that Persons who preached ministered the Spirit.

Answ. By the Spirit is meant the Gospel, or Word of Christ: as the Law is
called the Letter, so is the New Testament called the Ministration of the
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6. The words that I speak unto you, says Christ, are Spirit,
etc. Does God (as if the Apostle should say) concur with our Ministry, and give
the Spirit to those who hear it, and help us to work Miracles to confirm it?
And is this done by our preaching the Law, or by the hearing of Faith, that is,
the Word of Faith, viz. the Gospel, see verse. 2. or by preaching the Word of
Christ?

Fourthly, The Baptism in the Commission cannot intend that of the Holy Ghost;
because the Spirit's Baptism signifies the miraculous Effusion, or
extraordinary Gifts thereof (and not the saving Influences, Graces, and
Operations of it) which but a few, and those too in the Primitive Time, did
partake of; but the Baptism in the Commission is enjoined on all that are made
Disciples in all Nations, and in every Age, even to the end of the World.

Fifthly, It must be Water Baptism, because our Savior joyneth it with
Repentance and Believing. Now all along in order of Practice these two went
together both before this time and also afterward. You may be sure had it been
any other Baptism, it would never have been thus joined together in order of
words, with that Baptism that was so united in order of Practice with
Repentance and Faith, without the least intimation of any thing by our Savior
to the contrary.

Sixthly, Because it is a Baptism that is to be administered in the Name of the
Father, of the Son, and Holy Spirit, how can any with the least shadow of
Reason, suppose it should be meant of the Baptism of the Holy Spirit, since it
is to be administered in the Name of the Holy Spirit? Were any ever baptized
with the Holy Spirit in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost? The Spirit
was that with which they were baptized; and therefore not baptized in the Name
of the Spirit.

Seventhly, The only way further to remove this Objection, is to observe what
the practice of the Disciples was after the Ascension of Christ in the
execution of this great Commission: What was it they baptized with? See Acts 8.
36. And they came to a certain Water; and the Eunuch said, See, here is Water.
Verse. 28. They went both down into the Water, and Philip baptized him. Acts 10.
47, 48. Can any Man forbid Water, that these should not be baptized? -- And he
commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus. That Baptism which
in the Commission the Lord Jesus commanded his Disciples to baptize with, was
the Baptism which they after his Ascension did baptize with; and that it was
Water the Scriptures we have now cited do evidently show; certainly the
Apostles well understood what Baptism it was their blessed Master did command
them to administer.

Eighthly, Besides, were it not the Baptism of Water which was given to them in
the Commission, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. They did that in his Name, i. e. by his
Authority, which they had no Authority to do, for other Commissions they had
not, this being the only place where Water Baptism is mentioned, as being
instituted and given in Commission to them to administer, and to all other
Disciples and Ministers of Christ to the end of the World. Water Baptism an
Ordinance of Christ to the end of the World.


Now, Secondly, that this Holy Ordinance of Baptism does continue to the end of
the World is evident,

First, Because whatsoever is given forth by Jesus Christ, is given forth by
him as he is King, and Mediator of the New Covenant, and as part of his last
Will and Testament; and his last Will and Testament, I hope, all will grant
stands in full force and virtue, and every Part and Branch of it unalterable to
the end of the World: Though it be a Man's Covenant, or Testament, yet if it be
confirmed, no Man disannulleth, or adds thereto Gal. 3. 15.
. How much more dangerous then is it for any to disannul, alter, add to, or
diminish from the last Will and Testament of the Lord Jesus the Son of God, who
received Commandment from the Father what he should say and speak Joh. 12. 49.
; And was faithful to him that appointed him, as a Son over his own House Heb.
3. 5.
?

Secondly, The Arguments that Men bring against the continuation of Baptism,
tend to root out all other Ordinances of the Lord Jesus as well as this. Why
may they not deny Preaching to continue, as well as Baptizing, since Teaching
is commanded by no other Authority than this? Are they not both expressly given
forth and joined together by our Savior in this his last and great Commission?

May I not argue thus; If Teaching continues to the end of the World, Baptism
continues? But Teaching none denies to continue, Ergo Baptism continues. Do but
observe the conjunction between Teaching and Baptizing in the Commission, Go,
teach all Nations, baptizing them; and again, teaching them, etc. Baptism is
fenced in on both sides, it is secured, one would think, (as our Lord Jesus has
placed it) from all Force and Violence whatsoever; and that such must be
impudently bold as dare attempt to raze it out, or seek to disannul it, and
make it of none effect.

Thirdly, The Promise that is subjoined in express words, in the Commission,
clearly proves the continuation of this Ordinance; And lo, I am with you always
to the end of the World; not to the end of that Age only as some affirm. See
our late Annotators on these words, Continuation of Pool's A^not. on ^at. 28:
1^, 20.
I am, and I will be with you; and those who succeed you in the Work of the
Ministry, being called of me thereunto, I will be with you, protecting you in
that Ordinance, and blessing you, and all other my faithful Ministers, that
labor for making me and my Gospel known, with success to the end of the World;
not of this Age only, but till the end of the World -- or till the World shall
be determined, and the New Heavens and the New Earth shall appear.

Fourthly, The practice of the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, after his
Ascension into Heaven, clearly proves, that the Baptism of Water does continue;
for how frivolous is that Objection that some make against it, viz. it was to
abide no longer than till the Baptism of the Spirit (which say they was
Christ's Baptism) took place, seeing it is so evident and plain in the Acts of
the Apostles, and in diverse other places, that it was both taught and
practiced, after that great Effusion, or pouring forth of the Holy Spirit,
which was the Baptism promised, and was first of all made good to the Apostles
and Saints of God at Jerusalem; When the Day of Pentecost was fully come, and
they were all with one accord in one place Acts 2. 1, (...), 3.
; by the help and power of which Spirit St. Peter preached to those Jews that
had put Christ to death: At the hearing of which Sermon, many of them being
pricked in their Hearts, cried out, What shall we do? Then said Peter, Repent,
and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission
of Sins, and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Spirit. Now the Baptism here
enjoined on these Penitents, could not be that of the Spirit; for how absurd
would that render the reading of the words, Repent, and be baptized with the
Spirit, and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Spirit.

Fifthly, But to make it appear yet more fully, that Baptism in Water continued
after the coming of the Spirit, or great Effusion of the Holy Ghost, see, Acts
10. it is said, While Peter yet spoke these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all
them which heard the Word, (that was on Cornelius and those with him). And they
of the Circumcision, which believed, were astonished, as many as came with
Peter, because on the Gentiles also was poured out the Gift of the Holy Ghost,
Verse. 45. For they heard them speak with Tongues, and magnified God. Then
answered Peter, verse. 46. Can any Man forbid Water, that these should not be
baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? verse. 47. And he
commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord, verse. 48. Here the very
Persons who were baptized with the Holy Spirit, were commanded in the Name
(that is, by the Authority) of the Lord Jesus, to be baptized in Water; and it
was a thing that no Man did or ought to deny to be their indispensable Duty; so
that the highest Gifts or Endowments of the Holy Ghost, cannot excuse or exempt
any Persons from this Blessed Ordinance of Baptism in Water; and how bold and
daring must that Man needs seem to be, who shall adventure to say, it is a low
and carnal thing, and I forbid it to such who have the Spirit's Baptism. I
would to God this were laid to Heart, for such Men are certainly grown to a
great degree of Pride and Arrogance, as well as it argues palpable Blindness,
Infidelity and Disobedience, and that they have lost their Way, and go astray
in untrodden Paths, who shall speak at such a rate.

Object. But say some, The Baptism mentioned by you in both these places, was
done in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and not in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and so not according to the Commission, and
therefore not the same Baptism.

Answ. To be baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ, Jewel B. of Sal. Sect. 9. in
Conf^t. Harding.
is to be baptized as Christ Instituted, Commanded, and Ordained; and as a
Learned Person says, These words, In the Name of Christ, signifies no more
that Baptism was administered only in the Name of Christ, not of the Father and
the Holy Ghost, than these words, Paul a Servant of Jesus Christ, argues, that
he was a Servant of Christ only, and not of the Father and Holy Ghost also: Or
as if those words of Paul to the Keeper of the Prison, Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, should be thought to free him from a necessity of believing in
the other two Persons: for as he that believes aright in Jesus Christ, believes
also in the Father and Holy Spirit; so he that is baptized in a right manner,
is baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
But because the Lord Jesus more immediately, and as our Sovereign Lord,
Lawgiver and Mediator, instituted and gave forth this Command, they are said
to be baptized in his Name, meaning, they were baptized by his Authority.

Peter, Cyprian Epist. 73. ad Jubaian.
says Cyprian, makes mention of Jesus Christ; not as if the Father were to be
omitted, but that the Son might be joined to the Father, etc.

And St. Austin says, Augustine. lib. 3. against Maxim. Bp. of the Arrians, c.
17.
They were commanded to be baptized in the Name of Christ; and tho the Father
and Holy Ghost were not mentioned, yet we understand they were not otherwise
baptized, than in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Why do thou
not apprehend, when it is said of the Son, All things were made by Him, that
the Holy Ghost also, though not mentioned, is there likewise understood?

To be baptized into Christ Jesus, Eulogius of Alexandria l. 2. contra
Novatian, apud Photium in Bibliotheca.
(says Eulogius) signifies, to be baptized according to the Precept of Christ,
that is, into the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And that other [ into his Death]
is typically representing his Death in Baptism. The same Patriarch, in the same
place, a little before says thus, What is said in the Acts, of those that had
received the Baptism of John, that they were baptized in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, denotes, that they were baptized according to the Institution and
Doctrine of the Lord Jesus; that is to say, they were baptized into the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. For so the Lord Jesus Christ taught and
commanded his Disciples to baptize, Mat. 28. 19, 20.

Object. Notwithstanding what we have said yet, says the Objector, John
Baptist opposes his Baptism to the Baptism of Christ; which could not have
been done, if the Baptism with Water was an inseparable Companion of Christ's
Doctrine; How could John say, Verily, I baptize you with Water, but he shall
baptize you with the Holy Ghost? etc. Moreover, if Christ had been commanded to
baptize with Water as well as John, the words would have run thus, Verily, I
baptize you with Water only, but he shall baptize you also with the (...).

Answ. Thus to distinguish the Baptism of Water, and that of the Spirit, into
John's and Christ's, and oppose these two one to the other, as if the one of
these were distructive to the other, as if that of John's were his own, and
none of Christ's, See Mr. S. F's Baptism before or after Faith.
is very ridiculous, and argues great darkness in the understanding of these
opposers of Water Baptism, for it is undeniably evident, that this of Water (as
well as that of the Spirit) was given forth by Christ himself, and as part of
his last Will and Testament, to abide together with teaching, believing and
repenting to the end of the World.

These Men would fain have us believe, that the Baptism of Water was the
Baptism of John's, and none of Christ's, but as if John had instituted it, and
not Christ, and as if John were the Author of it, and Christ the Finisher;
whereas nothing is more clear that Christ, (considered as God) was the Author,
and the first that ordained, appointed and instituted it to be administered by
John; and after John's decease, yea, and after his own Death, and Resurrection
too, gave order to its continuance. And for the observation of it amongst all
Nations, our late Annotators also on Mat. 3. 5. agree with us exactly herein,
He (that is, John) was sent to baptize in Water; so as from this time (say
they) the Institution of the Sacrament of Baptism must be dated.

Nothing can be more evident, than that the Baptism with Water was Christ's
Baptism; and howbeit it is called John's, as John was the first Minister and
Messenger from Christ to begin it, For, Mat. 3. 1.
behold, I send my Messenger, and he shall prepare my way before me, says
Christ, Mal. 3. 1. It was Christ's Appointment in whose Name, and not in
John's, it was begun and dispensed always even in that juncture wherein John
himself was living; and one would think Men could not be so blind to suppose it
ceased in John, fith our Lord Jesus after his Death and Resurrection, gives
special Command for the continuation of it, in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, in all Nations to the end of the World: And in
regard also that the Apostles after Christ's Ascension into Heaven preached the
same Doctrine of Repentance, and commanded such who were discipled to be
baptized in Water Act. 2. 39. and 8. 16. and 10. 47.
, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, which signifies, as we have already showed,
nothing less than according to the Institution of Christ, and that glorious
Commission they had received from him.

Therefore John Baptized only as Christ's Servant, and it was from Heaven he
received Commission to Baptize; and our Lord's Submission to it himself as
administered by John, to fulfill all righteousness, (that is, as one observes,
the Righteousness of his own Law, i. e. the Gospel, to be an Example to us, and
the Father's glorious Approbation of his Son in his Obedience herein, by a
Voice from Heaven at the time of his coming out of the Water) one would think
might put an end to these foolish Objections.

Jesus Christ we say, owned Water Baptism to be his Ordinance, by subjecting
himself to it, tho administered by his servant John; and the Father ratified it
also, as well as the Holy Ghost, the one by that Voice from Heaven, saying,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; and the other in coming
down, or descending (in a visible manner) like a Dove, and lighting upon him
Mat. 3. 16, 17.
And certainly had not this Ordinance been to abide, our Savior would not have
given such a Commission a little before he ascended into Heaven for the
continuance of it to the World's end. Nay, if it had been to cease, he would
doubtless have given some hint of it, and have told his Disciples plainly when
at Jerusalem, they should be anointed with Power from on High, they should go
and Preach the Gospel to all the World, or make Disciples of the Nations, but
not baptize them any more, for that the way of Repentance and Faith, and the
Spirit's Baptism, was all the Baptism they should teach and instruct the People
in. Moreover, had Peter known this to have been the Mind of his Blessed Master,
he would doubtless have said to them, Act. 2. (when they asked what they should
do?) Repent, and believe in Christ for the remission of your Sins, but in the
Name of Jesus Christ be not baptized in Water never a one of you, as some while
since every Penitent was required to be, for that was a Dispensation and
Baptism of John, and had its time for a while, merely to prepare the Way of
Christ, but now is abolished and out of date; ye must forsake John's old
Administration of Water Baptism, that being a carnal and low thing, and look
wholly to a higher and more sublime Baptism, i. e. that of the Holy Ghost: And
had he known this to be the Mind of his Master, would not he rather have said
concerning Cornelius, and those with him, Acts 10. (instead of saying, Who can
forbid Water?) Who can require Water, that these Persons should be Baptized,
who have received the Holy Spirit as well as we?

No doubt had Water Baptism ceased, or been abolished, we should have had some
discovery of it as well as we have of the Ceasing of Circumcision and other
Rites of the Mosaical Law; for the Apostles, we find, were as ready, and as
careful to make known the Cessation of such Rites, as Carnal Ordinances that
were not to abide in the Church, as they were in establishing and confirming
all those Precepts they knew were to continue to the end of the World.

If therefore, I say, Water Baptism must not have remained, or if it were not,
according to Christ's Will and Testament an inseparable Companion of his
Doctrine, we should have had some hint or intimation of it, either by Christ's
own Mouth, or by the Mouths of his Apostles, who were to deliver and command
nothing to People, but what they had received of the Lord Jesus, or what was
commanded them of the Lord as concerning the Cessation of that Service, or any
Toleration of any one Person to omit it, but as we find it given forth by
Christ, and practiced by his Apostles and Primitive Saints, even from the
beginning of it, which was in John's baptizing in Water. So we find it, ad
jure, to continue as part of his Mind and Testament, amongst other things, not
a tittle of which Testament is yet annihilated, nor shall, till he come to take
an account of all Men in respect of their Obedience or Disobedience, as to the
preceptory part of his Will contained therein.

But furthermore, whereas these Objectors seem to intimate, that Jesus Christ
was not commanded, or commissionated from the Father to baptize with Water as
John was, because it is said by John, I verily baptize you with Water, but he
shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit; as if Christ had nothing to do to
meddle with the Baptism of Water as any Ordinance of his, or to give any order
about it, or had any more power to dispense or enjoin it, than John had power
to meddle in, or take upon him to baptize with the Spirit, which peculiarly
belonged to Christ, as that of Water peculiarly belonged to John.

To what they speak upon this account, we must say, and tell them, that Jesus
Christ had Command and Commission from the Father, as Mediator, to give forth
and enjoin Water Baptism, though he committed the actual Administration of it
to his Disciples; for since he commanded them to do it, and so Baptized, says
an eminent Writer, per alios at least, if not per se; read John 3. 22. And
after these things came Jesus and his Disciples into the Land of Judea, and
there he tarried with them, and baptized. And John also was baptizing in Enon
near Salim, etc. verse. 23. Which is more fully explained, Chap. 4. 2. When
therefore the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and
baptized more Disciples than John, though Jesus himself baptized not, but his
Disciples. Now if he had not received Command from the Father thus to do, his
Testimony is not true; which to say, as the same Author observes, were
Blasphemy; for ^ote, what he affirms, John 12. For I have not spoken of my
self, but the Father which sent me, he gave me a Commandment what I should say,
and what I should speak -- Whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father
said unto, me, so I speak. Wherefore since he did, by the Hands of his
Disciples, baptize in Water in Judea, and made and baptized more Disciples than
John, he did it by Command from his Father: And indeed it is evident that the
People generally flocked to him for the Administration of Water Baptism at
last, and left John, insomuch as he in his Ministry, even of Water Baptism,
increased, and John decreased, John 3. 26, 27. Those words of John, in Answer
to the Jews, do plainly intimate no less, but that this very thing was intended
by those Expressions of his, though there might be more than this meant, And
they came to John, and said unto him, Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond
Jordan, to whom thou bear Witness, behold, the same baptizeth, and all Men
come to him. John answered, A Man can receive nothing, except it be given him
from Above. Verse. 28. Ye your selves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the
Christ, but I am sent before him. -- He must increase, but I must decrease,
verse. 30. Does he baptize? as if John should say, that is a sign he is sent of
God: and do all Men come to him? do they rather go to him to be baptized than
come to me? Why it is no more than what I have told you, He shall increase, but
I must decrease; He and his Ministry must and shall flourish, or increase in
Honor, and Dignity, and Reputation in the World; He is the Rising Sun, to give
you notice of which, I was but as the Morning Star; He must shine every day
more and more. I have had my time, and near finished my Course, but do not
think that the Baptism of Water shall cease with me; for as he baptizeth, and
rises more and more in Esteem and Honor; so he will do, and his ministration
of this very Ordinance will increase and be magnified in his Hands, more than
it has been in mine. I hope none will think it absurd to understand John's
words after this manner, for it must necessarily be taken in this sense, in any
solid understanding, I verily baptize you with Water only; as if he should say,
but he shall baptize you also with the Holy Spirit. He is empowered to dispense
higher Matters to you than Water only, with which he baptizeth (as you tell me)
as well as I, though not himself, but his Disciples; I can go no further than
to that outward Administration of Water, but he shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost. In which words John does not oppose his Baptism to the Baptism of
Christ, as if that which is called his, were none of Christ's, but rather that
John might magnify the Person of Christ above himself; as who should say, I can
but dispense with the bare outward Sign, but Christ, who though he came after
me, yet is preferred before me, in whose Name, and not in my own, I baptize,
and whose the Baptism is that I dispense, and not my own; he is able, besides
the Sign, to vouchsafe you the very Thing signified.

The Baptism then of Water, in the Name of Christ, together with Repentance
from dead Works, and Faith in his Name, John Baptist was the first Minister to
begin, in which respect it was called sometimes his; but he left it, after a
while, to Christ himself and his Disciples to carry on, who all, till Christ
was actually crucified, preached and practiced the self-same things that John
did, as did the Disciples after his Resurrection.

All the difference between the administration of Baptism, as dispensed by John
and the Disciples of Christ, before Christ's Death and Resurrection, and the
Administration of it afterward were only in some Circumstantials; which
briefly take as follows.

1. The Baptism in Water which was Christ's, and of which John was but a
Minister, together with Christ's other Disciples before Christ's Death, etc.

Was then the Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of Sins by Christ, who
was to come, i. e. e're long, to suffer Death, be buried, and rise again.

2. But after Christ had suffered, it is the Baptism of Repentance, and Faith,
for the Remission of Sins by Christ that is already come, has died, was
buried, and is risen again for our Justification; they baptized into Christ to
suffer; now we are baptized into Christ who has suffered.

3. Neither can this seem strange to any Man, since the Doctrine which John,
Christ himself, and his Disciples, preached before our Savior suffered,
differed in the same respect also, for they all then preached Repentance, Faith
and Salvation by Christ, to suffer.

But had John lived till Christ had suffered, he would have preached
Repentance, and Faith, and administered Baptism as we now do, viz. in and by
Christ, who has suffered; and this is all the difference, I say, that I know
of, (which is only circumstantial) between the preaching the Gospel, and
baptizing, before the Death of Christ, and that after his Death; wherefore the
word of the Gospel under John, and after Christ's Death and Resurrection, is
called the very same Word; and the Word that Peter preached to Cornelius and
his House, is said to begin from John's Baptism, as the same Word which John
came preaching; so that the Baptism with which John came baptizing, continues
still, and was preached and practiced by Command from Christ, by the Mouth of
Peter, on Disciples believing, in that very place Acts 10. Acts 10. 36, 37, 38,
39, 40, 41.
And this not in honor of John, as some frivolously affirm, but as a thing
which ought to be done, as in force anew from the Lord Jesus, in whose Name
Peter administered it, and not without Warrant from Christ so to do; He
commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord.

Object. But does not Paul positively affirm, he was not sent to baptize, but
to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1. 17. and that he thanked God he baptized no more
of them than Crispus and Gaius, and the Household of Stephanus?

Answ. Paul cannot mean, Christ sent him not at all to baptize; or, that the
Gospel he was commanded to preach, had not Baptism enjoined to be preached and
practiced, as an inseparable Companion of it, (because his Lord and Master, as
we have showed, has joined Preaching and Baptizing together in his great
Commission) Mat. 28. 19, 20. and so to continue to the End of the World.

Moreover, Teaching and Baptism, Faith and Baptism, Repentance and Baptism were
always preached and practiced together: But he means this of Baptizing was not
his chief business; nor did Christ require him absolutely to the actual
dispensing of the Ordinance of Baptism with his own Hands, but to preach the
Gospel, in which Baptism as well as Repentance and Faith were contained, and as
a sacred Ordinance thereof, which he was sent to preach as well as any other
Gospel-Institution, and that he did preach it, otherwise he could not have said
as he did, Acts 20. that he had not shunned to declare the whole Counsel of God,
and so, that it was done too by himself or some other, but it was not in his
Commission, that he must administer it in but his own P^rion; for it is
evident, the Administration or Act of Baptizing was not tied up to the
Apostles, or to the more ordinary Ministers, but that any faithful
gifted-Disciples might administer it as well as they; nor does the Efficacy of
Baptism depend in the least upon the Quality of the Person administering of it,
whether it be Paul, Apollos, or Cephas, or any other Disciple much inferior to
them in Capacity or Office, it is no matter; for Ananias, a private Disciple,
baptized; and Philip, who was no other than a Deacon, or Over-seer of the poor,
baptized many in the City of Samaria, Act. 8. so that we find in the Primitive
Times the simple Act of baptizing was a Work inferior, servile and subservient
to that of preaching the Gospel, or Doctrine of Repentance, Faith and Baptism
in Christ's Name for Remission of Sins, which was the great Work the Apostles
were more especially sent to do, yet baptize they sometimes did, (when probably
it was desired of them, or when the Multitudes to be baptized were so great
that it required their help with others to do it;) nor is it rational to
believe that Peter himself and the eleven did baptize all the three thousand,
Act. 2. without the hands of the 120; though at that occasion the Apostles
might baptize some likewise, there is no reason to doubt.

When therefore Paul says, Christ sent him not to baptize, he intends not, that
that Ordinance was none of those things he had in Commission to meddle with
(for had it been so, he went beyond his Commission in baptizing those few he
did baptize with his own Hands, which were absurd to think, since he was so
faithful a Servant of Jesus Christ, and positively affirms, that he would not
dare to speak of any of those things which Christ had not wrought by him) to
make the Gentiles obedient by Word or Deed: Romans 15. 18.
The words [not sent] do not import not at all, as appears by these Scriptures,
John 6. 27. 1. Tim. 2. 14. Ephesians. 6. 12. therefore he must mean not chiefly, or
only sent to baptize, but to preach the Gospel; or not sent personally to do
it, as I might further make appear in respect of Christ himself, who, as
Mediator of the New Testament, (as has been proved) received Command from the
Father to baptize; but yet in the like sense it might be said, he was not
commanded to baptize, i. e. personally to dispense the Ordinance himself, for
had he received such a Commission, he had not fulfilled it; for howbeit, it is
said he baptized more Disciples than John, yet he himself dispensed Baptism to
none with his own Hands, John 4. 1, 2. but by the Hands of his Disciples.

If what we have said here in Answer to this Objection were well considered, it
will appear to confute such who object against the practice of Baptism, for
want of a due and lawful Minister or Administrator, endued with an
extraordinary Call and Power to work Miracles.

Since the Act of baptizing is a more inferior thing than that of preaching the
Gospel, and that any gifted Disciple may baptize; all that is recorded of
Ananias's fitness or qualification (who baptized Paul) is, that he was a
Disciple, Acts 9. 10. And there was a certain Disciple at Damascus named
Ananias; and there is no cause to doubt but many such Disciples were employed
in baptizing those 3000 converted by Peter's Sermon, Acts 2. so that there is
no reason to tie up this Administration to ordinary Ministers or Pastors of
Churches, much less to the great Apostles, or such who have an extraordinary
Mission, since Paul says he was not sent to baptize, intimating, as you heard,
that that work was not limited to the Apostolical Office, or that it must be
done by Men extraordinarily qualified and called forth, and none else.

Moreover, whereas it is said by some, that he who takes upon him to baptize,
ought to have Power to work Miracles as the Apostles did; this seems very
strange, seeing the Text says expressly, Joh. 10. 41.
that John the Baptist, the first and most eminent Baptizer, did no Miracle,
yet the People made no Objection against him, or his Power to baptize
notwithstanding.

Quest. But had not John an express Commission to baptize?

Answ. That his Baptism was from Heaven, or that he did receive Command to
baptize, it is evident; yet we read not when or how he received such Commission;
but let his Commission be what it would, and never so full, it could not be
fuller or more plain than the Commission we have lest us Jesus Christ, Mat. 28.
19, 20. Go, teach all Nations, baptizing them -- and lo, I am with you always,
to the end of the Word.

Now as this Commission authorizes the Disciples of Jesus Christ to preach to
the end of the World, so it equally impowers them to baptize; and the same
Argument that is brought against baptizing, viz. not having an extraordinary
Mission, holds as strong against Preaching, and the practice of all Ordinances
whatsoever as well as that; therefore how dangerous a thing is it for any to
plead for the non-continuance of Baptism in the Church, or to say it ceased
when the extraordinary Gifts ceased, since there is no other Commission that
injoyns Christ's Disciples to preach, etc. but that which as well injoyns them
to baptize those who are discipled by the Word.

Object. But since the practice of Baptism in Water was lost in the Apostasy,
how could it be restored again without a new Mission?

Answ. That makes against the Restoration of other Gospel Ordinances. which
were lost as well as Baptism, in respect of the Purity of them, as practiced in
the Primitive Times: But as the Children of Israel had lost for many Years the
Ordinance of the Feast of Tabernacles, Neh. 8. 14, 15.
yet by reading in the Book of the Law there was such a thing required, they
immediately revived it and did as they found it written without any new
Mission, or extraordinary Prophet to authorize them so to do; even so ought we
to act, God's Word being a Warrant sufficient to justify us in so doing.

CHAP. II. Showing what Baptism is from the literal and true genuine and proper
Signification of the word Baptism.
IN showing the signification of the word Baptism, we will, with all
Impartiality, give the Judgment of the Learned; it is a Greek word, therefore
let us see what the Learned in that Tongue generally have, and do affirm to be
the express signification thereof: And such has been our care and pains,
together with a Friend of mine, (some time since deceased Mr. Delaune.
, who was several months in my House) as to examine the Writings of diverse
eminent Men upon this Account, amongst which are Scapula and Stephanus, Pasor,
Minshew, and Leighs Critica Sacra; Grotius, Vossius, Casaubon, Seldom, Mr.
Daniel Rogers, Mede, Chamiers, Dr. Tailor, Dr. Hammond, Dr. Cave, Hefychius,
Budaeus, Beza, Erasmus, Buchanan, Luther, Illyricus, Zanchy, Glassius, etc. who
with many other Learned Men, nay all indeed who are impartial, agree with one
Voice, that the primary, proper, and literal signification of (...), Baptiso is
mergo, immergo, submergo, obr^o, item tingo quod fit immergendo, that is, in
English, to immerge, plunge under, overwhelm, as also to dip, which is done by
plunging.

True in a less proper or remote sense, because thing that are washed, are
commonly dipped or covered all over in Water, it is put for washing, Luke 11.
38. Heb. 9. 10. Mark 7. 4. And we dare modestly assert, that no Greek Author of
any credit, whether Heathenish or Christian, has ever put Baptizing for
Sprinkling, or used those words promiscuously; the Greeks have a peculiar word
to express Sprinkling, viz. (...), Rantizo, which as a Learned S. Fisher.
Author observes, is ever used in Scripture by the Holy Spirit, when he speaks
of such a thing as (...) yea, it is used three times in one Chapter, viz. Heb.
9. 13, 19, 21. and is always translated Sprinkling: Neither is there, says he,
any one place of Scripture, wherein the word (...) is rendered to baptize, or
used to signify baptizing: Neither is there one Scripture wherein the word
(...), Baptizo, is rendered Sprinkling, or used to signify such a thing as
Sprinkling. This being so, and certainly so it is; How strangely has the
World, and many Godly Christians, been deceived, thinking they have been
Baptized, when in truth they never were to this day, but only Rantized.

We have had many long and tedious Disputes, and perplexed Controversies, about
the true. Form or Manner of Baptizing, whereas the thing in difference, is
properly not the Manner or Form of Baptizing, but what Baptism is; for, as one
observes, A Man may ride many ways, viz. East, West, etc. backward, forward,
apace, or slowly, etc. yet all this is riding still, whilst the Man moves to
and fro on Horseback, because the very formality of that Action of riding,
consists is being carried by a Beast; but while he moves upon his own Legs up
and down, you cannot at that time denominate him riding. In like manner a Man
may be Baptized [Anglice, Dipped] or put under the Water many ways, viz.
forward, backward, sideway, toward the right Hand or Left, with a quick or
slow Motion, and yet all the while be Baptized; if he is put under the Water,
for in such respect the Form or manner of Baptizing, i.e. Dipping, does
consist: the manner of Baptizing is one thing, and the manner of Rantizing is
another: Sprinkling is Sprinkling, let it be done how you please, but it never
was, nor never will be Baptizing.

And that Baptism is any thing else than Dipping, or Washing, which is by
plunging or dipping, we do utterly deny; for as the cutting off a little bit of
the Foreskin of the Flesh, and not the twentieth part round, is not
Circumcision; Circumcision, ^ cutting the Foreskin round about quite off.
so sprinkling a little Water on the Face is not Baptism: As it would be
ridiculous, and very absurd to call that Circumcision, so it is as false and
ridiculous to call Sprinkling, Baptizing.

If Accidentals, or mere Accessaries, be wanting unto Baptism (says one) there
may be right Baptism notwithstanding, but abstract the absolutely Necessaries,
it is not only none of the Baptism of Christ, but truly not any Baptism at all.

Object. But the word (...), though it signifies not to Sprinkle, yet not only
to Dip and overwhelm in Water, but also to Wash, and so it is rendered in the
Lexicons, as must be acknowledged by you.

Answ. If the word (...) do signify to wash, yet it is a real total washing,
only such a washing as is by Dipping, Plunging, or swilling the Subject in
Water, and that signification is far off from Sprinkling: Can any thing be said
to be truly washed, that has only a little Water sprinkled upon it?

The best Lexicons, and most eminent Critics, Danvers Treatise of Baptism, 2d.
Edit. p. 182.
as well as the holy Scripture, do most plainly decide the Controversy, as Mr.
Danvers and others observe.

Scapula and Stephens, two as great Masters of the Greek Tongue as most we
have, do tell us, in their Lexicons, that (...), from (...), signifies mergo,
immergo, obruo; item tingo, quod sit immergendo, inficere imbuere, viz. to dip,
plunge, overwhelm, put under, cover over, to die in color, which is done by
plunging.

Grotius says it signifies to dip over Head and Ears. Grotius.


Pasor, An Immersion, Dipping, or Submersion. Pasor.


Vossius says, It implies a washing the whole Body. Vossius.


Mincoeus in his Dictionary, says, Mincaeus.
that (...), is in the Latin Baptismus, in the Dutch Doopset, or Doopen
Baptismus or Baptism, to dive or duck in Water; and the same with the Hebrew
Tabal, which the Septuagint, (...)
or Seventy Interpreters, render by (...), Baptiso to dip, as these Texts in
the old Testament show, Genesis 37. 31. Exodus 12. 22. Lev. 4. 6. and 17. 14. Deuteronomy.
33. 24. Number. 16. 18. 2 King. 5. 14, etc.

This, says Casaubon, Casaubon.
was the Rite of Baptizing, that Persons were plunged into the Water, which the
very word Baptizo sufficiently demonstrates. Which as it does not extend so far
as to sink down to the Bottom, to the hurt of the Person, so is it not to swim
upon the Superficies -- Baptism ought to be administered by plunging the whole
Body in Water.

Also I find our late Famous, Dr. Du-Veil.
Learned, and Reverend Dr. Du-Veil, in his Literal Explanation of the Acts,
Chap. 1. verse. 5. citing the same Author in these words, The word (...), says
Casaubon, is to dip or plunge, as if it were to dye Color.

Leigh in his Critica Sacra, Liegh.
says, its native and proper signification, is to dip into the Water, or to
plunge under Water, Mat. 3. 6. Acts 8. 38. and that it is taken from a Dyer's
Fat, and imports a dying, or giving a fresh Color; for which also he quotes
Casaubon, Bucanan, Bullinger, Zanchy, Spanhemius: He says withal, that some
would have it signify Washing; which sense Erasmus, he says, opposed,
affirming that it was not otherwise so, than by Consequence; for the proper
signification was such a dipping or plunging, as Dyers use for dying of Clothes.

Salmasius says, De prim. papae, p. 193.
that that is not Baptism which they give to Children, but Rantism.

Beza, Beza.
on Mat. 3. 11. says, the word Baptizo signifies to dye, by dipping or washing.

Seldom says, De Jure Not. etc. l. 2. c. 2.
That the Jews took that Baptism wherein the whole Body was not baptized, to be
void.

Mr. Daniel Rogers says, Treatise of Sacr. par. 1. c. 8. p. 177.
That the Minister is to dip in Water, as the meetest Act the word Baptizo
notes it, for the Greeks wanted not other words to express any other Act
besides Dipping, if the Institution could bear it. What resemblance of the
Burial and Resurrection of Christ is in Sprinkling? All Antiquity and Scripture
confirm, that it was Dipping.

If you would, says Dr. Tailor, Rule of Conscience, l. 3. c. 4.
attend to the proper signification of the word, Baptism signifies plunging in
Water, or dipping with washing.

In the Synod of Celichyth, An. D. 816.
where Wolfred Archbishop of Canterbury presided, as it is cited by Dr.
Du-Veil, it was ordered that the Presbyters should take heed, that when they
administered the Sacrament of Baptism, they should not do it by pouring Water,
but always by plunging, according to the Example of the Son of God, who was
plunged in the Waters of Jordan.

The same Learned Author affirms, this was the constant practice of the
Universal Church, till the time of Clement the 5th, who was crowned Pope, says
he, Anno 1305, under whom first of all the Second Synod of Ravenna approved the
Abuse introduced into some Churches, about an hundred Years before that
Baptism, without any Necessity, should be administered by Aspersion. Hence,
says he, it came to pass, that contrary to the Analogy, or intended mystical
signification of this Sacrament, all the West, for the most part in this Age,
they use Rantism, that is, Sprinkling instead of Baptism, as Zepper speaks, to
the great scandal of the Greeks and Russians, who to this day plunge into the
Water those they Baptize, Conc. Flor.. 9. c. 9. and lib. of Infant Baptism, p
693.
and deny any one rightly baptized, who is not plunged into the Water,
according to the Precept of Christ, as we may find in Sylvester, Sguropalus,
and Cassander; the Custom of the Ancient Church was not Sprinkling, but
Immersion, in pursuance of the sense of the word Baptizo in the Commandment,
and of the Example of our Blessed Savior, Ductor Dubit. l. 3. c. 4. Reg. 15.
Number. 9. St. Martins Life, N. 16.
says Dr. Tailor.

The Greek word Baptein, (says Salmasius) ftom which the word Baptizein
derives, signifies Immersion; nor did the Ancients otherways Baptize.

Mr. Joseph Mede says, Diatribe on Titus 3. 2.
that there was no such thing as Sprinkling or Rantism used in Baptism in the
Apostles Days, nor many Ages after: He had spoke more proper if he had said,
there was no Rantism used in the Apostles Days but Baptism, than to say no
Rantism used in Baptism, since he could not be ignorant but that they are two
distinct Actions, and it cannot be Baptism at all if it be only Sprinkling or
Rantism as is now used, Dipping or Immersion being the very Thing, not an
Accident, but an Essential, so absolutely necessary, that it cannot be the thing
without it.

The ancient Use of Baptism, Pan. Cathol. Tom. 4. l. 5. c. 2.
says Chamier, was to dip the whole Body into the Element, therefore did John
baptize in a River.

Neither is it amiss to give you what Dr. Annotat. on John 13. Mat. 3.
Hammond speaks upon this account in his Annotations upon John 13. 10. where he
says, that (...) signifies an Immersion, or washing the whole Body, and which
answers to the Hebrew Word (...) used for dipping in the Old Testament, and
therefore tells us upon Matthew. 3. 1. that John baptized in a River, viz. in
Jordan, Mark 1. 5. in a Confluence of Water, as Aenon, John 3. 23. because it is
said there was much Water; which he further makes out by the Name by which the
Greeks called the Lakes where they used to wash; also the Ancients, he says,
called their Baptisterions, or the Vessels containing their Baptismal Water,
Columbethras, viz. swimming or diving-places, being made very large with
Partitions for Men and Women.

To all these famous Authors, it may do well to add our late Annotations, begun
by the Learned Mr. Pool, newly printed, Pool' s Annotat.
see what they say on Mat. 3. 6. A great part of those who went out to hear
John were baptized, that is, dipped in Jordan, and on Mat. 28. 20. say they, it
is true, the first Baptism of which we read in holy Writ, were by Dipping the
Persons baptized.

The Dutch Translation, according to their Language, reads Dipping.

Matthew. 3. 20. Jesus ge doopt zijnde, is terstont opge-klommon uit het Water.

And when Jesus was dipped he came out of the Water; hence they, for John the
Baptist, read John the Dipper; and for he baptized them, he dipped them. Why
our Translators, who have been so faithful and exact generally in all things
(as is acknowledged by all Learned Godly Men in the translating the holy Bible)
should leave the word Baptism (it being a Greek Word) and not translate it into
our Language, as the Dutch have done into theirs, I know not, unless it were to
favor their own Practice of Bantising or Sprinkling, which the word Baptize
will in no wise bear, as is confessed by a whole cloud of Witnesses.

Mr. Ball in his Catechism renders it washing by Dipping. Ball.


See also Dr. Ames in his Marrow of Divinity. Book 1. Cap. 40.


Mr. Wilson Wilson.
in his Dictionary says, to baptize, is to dip into the Water, or to plunge
one into the Water.

Also in the Common Prayer Book dipping into the Water is given as the proper
and primary Signification of the word.

We will leave this to the Consideration of all thinking Men, it being so, i.
e. that Baptism is Dipping or Plunging the Body all over in Water, whether
Infants can be the Subjects of it, since their tender Bodies cannot bear being
plunged thus into the Water in cold Climates, without palpable danger of their
Lives.

CHAP. III. Proving that Baptism is dipping, plunging, and covering the Body
all over in Water from the Practice of the Primitive Times.
CErtainly no better course or way in the next place we can take to find out
what Baptism is, than to examine the Scripture, and see what the thing was
which the Saints practiced in the Primitive Time, where we read they did
baptize, or were baptized: for as the Jews in Circumcision all along were to
practice that Rite, as it was commanded, and practiced by Abraham; and keep the
Passover as it was given to them from the Lord by Moses, together with all
other Ordinances and Services whatsoever, it behoved them to observe the first
or Primitive Institution and Practice of every particular Duty, and were not to
derogate from thence in any thing whatsoever; and for their adulterating any of
the Ordinances of God, they brought themselves under the Wrath of God, and many
heavy Judgments from him, as the Old Testament does sufficiently witness; so it
behooves us, I say, to see to the first or Primary Institution and Practice of
Baptism in the Gospel-Time, that being a Pattern or Rule to us, and to all
Christians to the end of the World, in respect of every Gospel-Ordinance; and
if we derogate from that Rule, we must expect to meet with sharp Rebuke from
the Almighty first or last. Now that that Ordinance which is called Baptism, is
Immersion, Dipping, or Plunging into Water, will appear, if we observe the
Practice of John the Baptist, who was the first that was sent by Christ to
baptize; read Mat. 3. 6. he it is positively said baptized in a River, viz. in
the River Jordan.

Diodate on this place in his Annotations, Diodate Annotat.
says he plunged them in Water; and our late Annotators say he dipped them in
Jordan. Pool's Annotat.


Moreover it is said that John was baptizing in Aenon near Salim; Joh. 3. 23.
the Reason is given, because there was much Water. Now if it had not been
dipping or covering the Body in Water, this could be no reason, for a little
Water would have served to sprinkle thousands, as Cornelius a Lapide notes.

Piscator on this Passage says, See Mr. Gosnold's Doctrine of Baptism, page 20.
that Baptism was dipping the Body in Water.

Also our late Annotators Pool' s Annot. on Joh. 3. 23.
upon the place say thus, viz. It is from hence apparent, that both Christ and
John baptized by dipping the Body in the Water, else they need not have sought
places where had been a great plenty of Water. They say well, and less they
could not speak unless they would stifle their Consciences, or offer Violence
to their Reason: but if they had from hence said, it is apparent that Christ
and John Baptized, and not Rantized Persons, they had come off better, and had
undeceived the People.

Secondly, It Is said when our blessed Savior was baptized by John in Jordan,
Mat. 3. 16.
he went up straightway out of the Water, Acts 8. 38, 39.
etc. and Philip and the Eunuch it is said went both down into the Water, and
that they came up out of the Water.

The Assembly in their Annotations on this Text, say, they were wont to dip the
whole Body; and Piscator on the place (as I find him quoted by a worthy Divine)
says, the ancient manner of Baptism was that the whole Body was dipped into
the Water.

Certainly it had been a vain and weak thing for them to have gone down into
the River to be sprinkled with a little Water.

There is no ground to think they would ever have done so, if Sprinkling or
Rantism had been the Ordinance required of them, the manner was not to apply
Water to the Subject, as some do, but the Subject to (nay into) the Water.

In Mark 1. 9. It Is said, Jesus was baptized of John in Jordan: Now, says one
on this place, it had been nonsense for Mark to say that Jesus was baptized in
Jordan, if it had been sprinkling, because the Greek reads it into Jordan,
(...), could Jesus be said to be sprinkled into Jordan? it is proper to say he
was baptized, that is, dipped into Jordan, and that was the Act and nothing
else, as all the Learned acknowledge.

Moreover, Philip needed not to have put that noble Person, who was a Man of
great Authority under Candace Queen of the Ethiopians, to the trouble to come
out of his Chariot (if Sprinkling had been Baptism) and to go into the Water
and dip him; or if Sprinkling might have done as well as Dipping, sure Philp
would on this occasion have dispensed with Immersion, and let Rantism have
served, considering he was a great Man and on a Journey; he might have fetched
a little Water in his hand and have sprinkled him in the Chariot. But as Philip
had preached Baptism to him, so there is like ground to think that the Eunuch
very well understood what it was, and readily submitted to it; but if
Sprinkling would not excuse them, I know not how any Christian can think it may
excuse us in these days; we have no Reason to think Christ Jesus, or his
Apostles, did do or teach any thing in vain, yet so we must conclude, if he
went into a River to receive no more than Sprinkling; and so we must think of
Philip and the Eunuch also.

But to proceed, here I cannot well omit that which Mr. Daniel Rogers, Rogers
in his Treatise of the two Sacraments, part 1. chap. 5.
a most worthy English Writer, has said in a Treatise of his, It ought (says
he) to be the Churches part to cleave to the Institution, which is Dipping,
especially it being not left arbitrary by our Church to the Discretion of the
Minister; but required to dip or dive: And further says, that he betrays the
Church, whose Officer he is, to a disordered Error, if he cleave not to the
Institution, which is to Dip. What abundance of Betrayers of the Truth and
Church too have we in these days? How little is the Institution or Practice of
the Primitive Christians minded amongst many good Men? and where is the Spirit
of Reformation? And doubtless that famous Author, and Learned Critic Casaubon
was in the right; will you have his words; I doubt not, Casaubon on Mat. 3. 11.
says he, but, contrary to our Churches Intention, this Error having once
crept in, is maintained still by the Carnal Ease of such as, looking more at
themselves than at God, stretch the Liberty of the Church in this case deeper
and further than either the Church her self would, or the Solemness of this
Sacrament may well and safely admit. -- Afterward further says, I confess my
self unconvinced by Demonstration of Scripture for Infants Sprinkling.

But Oh! how hard is it to retract an Error which has been so long and
generally received, especially when there is Carnal Ease and Profit attending
the keeping of it up, and when the contrary Practice, I mean dipping, is looked
upon so contemptible a thing, and those who do it are daily, by the ignorance
of foolish Men, reproached and vilified, as it is now as well as in former days.

Acts. 8. 38. -- And they went both down into the Water, both Philip and the
Eunuch, and he baptized him.

We may see, Calvin on Act. 8. 38.
says Calvin, what fashion the Ancients had to administer Baptism, for they
plunged the whole Body into the Water: The use with us is now, says he, that
the Minister casts a few drops of Water only upon the Body, o^ upon the Head.

And upon John's baptizing in Aenon near Salim, Joh. 3. 23. says the same
Calvin, From this place we may gather that John and Christ administered Baptism
by plunging the whole Body into the Water.

The Learned Cajetan upon Mat. 3. 5. says, Cajetan on Mat. 3. 5.
Christ ascended out of the Water; therefore Christ was baptized by John, not
by sprinking or by pouring Water upon him, but by Immersion, that is, by
dipping or plunging into the Water.

Moreover, Muscul. on Mat. 3.
Musculus on Mat. 3. calls Baptism Dipping, and says, the Parties baptized
were dipped, not sprinkled.

Object. But it is still objected, Sprinkling is Baptizing, say you what you
will; and Baptism signifies Sprinkling as well as Dipping.

Answ. To this we always answer, and again say and testify, that the Greek word
to sprinkle, is, (...), Rantizo; and that the Translators themselves never so
much as once, in all the New Testament, render Baptism, Sprinkling; and where
is the Man that affirms the word signifies Sprinkling?

Object. But the word Baptizo will bear Washing.

Answ. We answer then, It Is such washing as is done by dipping; so much as is
baptized, or washed, is dipped, and your Rantism is no washing; and we also say,
and that too with good Authority, that though the word Baptizo does sometimes
allow of that Acceptance, yet it is not the direct, immediate, genuine, and
primary signification of it, for that is to dip, or plunge, as you see in the
Lexicons. But at the best it is but indirectly, collaterally, by the by (as one
observes) so meant, or improperly and remotely, that it so signifies: And we
ask, Whether when we try any Matter by the signification of the word as it is in
the Original, we shall go to the direct, original, prime, and proper, or to the
occasional, remote, indirect and improper signification to be tried by? Your
practice it seems is built only upon the indirect, improper and remote
acceptance of the word, and therefore is at best only an uncouth, indirect,
improper and far-fetched practice; and indeed, as the word is found in
Scripture, respecting Christ's Ordinance of Baptism, it is evident to all what
it signifies.

Object. But the Pharisees, Mark 7. 4. held the washing of Hands, Vessels,
Cups, Pots, and Beds, etc. and there VVashings are called Baptism.

Answ. Yea, and what then, for, says Mr. Wilson, to baptize, is to dip or
plunge primarily, and signifies such a washing as is used in Bucks wherein
Linen is plunged and dipped; and thus they washed their Vessels, Hands, and
Cups, viz. they swilled, rinsed, cleansed, and totally washed, dipped, or wetted
them all over with Water, or else you may be sure it could never be said they
baptized them. But, Sirs, who-ever washes Hands, Cups, Pots, or Beds, by
sprinkling a few Drops of Water upon them? there is no washing by such a kind
of Sprinkling. O that you would give over such Arguing, since the practice of
Baptism in the Primitive Times does, as you have heard, evidently show that the
Baptized were always dipped all over in Water; Certainly it is no Baptism at
all, if not so administered.

Object. Does it follow that we must Baptize so now? That was in a hot Country;
but we live in a cool Climate, and when Children were Dipped, some of them died;
and God will have Mercy, not Sacrifice.

Answ. Ought you not to make God's Word your Rule? Have you a Dispensation to
make the Commandments of God void by your Traditions? We conclude, the
Institution of Christ and the Practice of the Primitive Church, ought to be
followed in all things as near as we can. But you say this is a cold Climate:
Pray, Sirs, did not Christ, when he gave forth his Commission to his Apostles,
to teach and make Disciples, and Baptize, bid them go into all the World, and
into all Nations? Were they not to go into cold Countries as well as Hot? And,
were they not to teach the same Doctrine, and administer the same Ordinances
alike wherever they come? Or, did he tell them they should Baptize those in
hot Countries that were Disciples, and Rantize such who received the Word in
cold Countries? Unless you can prove this, I am sure all you say is nothing.

Certainly you were as good never pretend to Baptize, but wholly deny it, and
cast it off as a low and carnal Thing, as some do, as to do another thing in
the room of it, which Christ never commanded, and call it his Ordinance; Which
we do declare and testify, by the Authority of God's Word, and a great Cloud
of VVitnesses, who all understand the Greek Tongue, (may be better than some of
you do) that it is no Baptism at all, but a thing of Man's devising brought in,
in the room of Christ's Baptism, and unjustly fathered upon him.

Sirs, How dare you, In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, say, I
Baptize thee, etc. when you do but Rantize the Person? for you neither dip the
Person, nor wash him. Has the Holy Trinity given you any Authority so to do?
For God's sake, for time to come, use the Names of those Persons by whose
Authority it was first set on foot and given forth, till you can show you have
Authority from Jesus Christ to sprinkle, or pour a little Water upon the Face
of a poor Infant, or an adult Person. Nor is it any marvel, when they did dip
poor Children in Water, that some of them died, since they are not the true
Subjects of Baptism; if they had, no doubt God would have preserved them, as
well as he did those Babes whom once he required to be Circumcised. Can any
believe God would command any such thing to be done, that should endanger the
Life of a Child? that was doubtless a just Re^uke for the profanation of
Christ's blessed Ordinance; he will one day, I fear, say, Who has required
this at your hands? Nay, and who knows what Judgments and Wrath may come upon
this Land for the abominable abuse of the Sacred Institution of Baptism. God
many times shows Men their Sin, by the punishment he brings upon them, if you
are so fond of Humane Traditions and Innovations.

Object. But why must the whole Body be dipped? may not the Head be sufficient,
that being the principal Part?

Answ. I must confess, in a late Discourse I had with a Minister of the Church
of England, he pleaded for this, seeing he could not defend Rantism. But to
give a direct Answer, pray consider whether it be the Person, ( viz. the Man or
Woman) or part of the Person that Christ commanded to be baptized; if not the
whole Body, why might it not serve only to wash or dip the Hands? But if it
were the Hands only, or the Feet, or the Head only that was to be Baptized, i.
e. dipped, a small Vessel of Water would have served, and no need for Christ or
John to have gone into Rivers and Places where there was much Water, to
baptize.

2. It is not said, John baptized him, i. e. our blessed Savior, not part of
him: But as the blessed Virgin bore him in her Womb, and brought him forth,
and laid him in a Manger; so John baptized, or dipped him, that is, his whole
Body into Jordan, or in the River Jordan. Moreover, it is said, Acts 8. 12. They
were baptized, both Men and Women, (that is, the Bodies, the whole Bodies of
those Men and Women) and not some Part or Members of them: If this be not
granted, we shall be run into many strange Absurdities almost every where in
reading the Scriptures.

3. To put this out of doubt, it is evident the whole Body ought to be dipped or
baptized, because (as we shall show in the next Chapter) Baptism is a Figure of
the Burial and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, nay, called a Burial. Now a Person
is not said to be buried, that is not totally covered in the Earth; no more can
a Man be said to be baptized, except he be covered all over in the Water.

4. We have showed how all the Learned agree, and positively assert, that
Baptism was administered in the Primitive Times, by a total dipping the Body in
Water. And indeed at first, when this Innovation of Rantism came in, they used
to sprinkle the Body all over, being sure it was not one Part, but the whole
Body that was to be baptized, and so they Rantiz'd the whole Body. But you are
gone here too, for you in (your Practice, and in your own Sense) Baptize but
the Face only; so that all your People are unbaptized Persons, as evident as
any thing can be, take it how you will, if it should be granted. I mean, that
Sprinkling is Baptism.

CHAP. IV. Proving that Baptism is Dipping, Plunging, or Burying the whole Body
in Water, In the Name, etc. from the Spiritual or Metaphorical signification of
this Gospel-Ordinance or Administration.
TO make it appear yet more fully, that Baptism is not sprinkling, pouring, nor
any other thing, than dipping, plunging, or covering of the Body in Water, we
shall proceed to examine what it was ordained for by our Lord Jesus Christ, to
hold forth, or to be a Sign or Representation of; for like as in the Holy
Sacrament of the Supper, it behooves us to know, what the breaking of the
Bread, and pouring forth of the Wine signifies, or are Figures of; so in like
manner we ought (with as great care) to endeavor to know what is held forth,
or represented to us, as the Holy Signs of the Blessed Sacrament of Baptism;
for as all true Christians readily do confess and agree with us, that the
Ordinance of the Lord's Supper is not, cannot be rightly nor truly administered,
if the great Ends and Design of Jesus Christ, in the Institution of it, are not
answered thereby, or* what it was ordained and appointed to signify, plainly
held forth and represented in its administration; but it is contrariwise a
great abuse and profanation of it; and from hence we, and all true
Protestants, always say, Let us keep to the exact words of the Institution, and
manner of its first Celebration, that so the great Things signified, both by
the breaking the Bread, and pouring forth the Wine, may clearly appear, and be
represented in the Administration thereof.

Now then, this is that which we affirm, viz. That as the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper was ordained to hold forth the breaking of Christ's Body, and the
pouring forth of his Blood; So in like manner the Sacrament of Baptism was
instituted and appointed, to hold forth Christ was really dead, buried, and
that he arose again for our Justification. And that this is so, we shall not
only prove it from the plain Authority of God's Word, but by the joint
Testimony of almost all famous VVriters and Divines we have met with, Ancient
or Modern. And indeed we cannot but be much affected with the great Love and
Goodness of our Blessed Savior in the Institution of these two great
Ordinances, it being his gracious Design and Condescension, hereby to hold
forth, or preach, as I may say, to the very sight of our visible Eyes by these
fit and proper Mediums, the glorious Doctrine of his Death, Burial, and
Resurrection, which in the Ministration of the Word, is preached or held forth
to the hearing of our Ears, that so we might the better and more effectually be
established and grounded in the sure and steadfast belief thereof; which is
indeed absolutely necessary to Salvation, as the Apostle does plainly testify,
1 Cor. 15. 1. 2, 3, 4. Moreover, Brethren, I declare unto you the Gospel which
I preached unto you, which also you received, and wherein you stand, verse. 1.

By which also you are saved, if you keep in memory what I preached unto you,
unless ye have believed in vain, verse. 2.

For I delivered unto you first of all, that which I also received, how Christ
died for our Sins, according to the Scripture, verse. 3.

And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the
Scriptures, verse. 4.

This being so, let none blame us for contending so earnestly for this
Ordinance according to the Primitive Purity, or its Original Glory, wherein,
according to the gracious Design of Jesus Christ we daily receive, in beholding
the Administration of this Sacrament, (as well as in the Lord's Supper what is
represented to us) such a blessed establishment in the Truth of the Doctrine of
Christ's Death, Burial, and Resurrection, as well as in many other Respects,
the Profit and Use appears to us, no Ordinance being more significant, or
ordained upon more weighty and glorious Purposes and Designs: for certainly, if
we consider the grand Errors and Heresies of the present Age, so boldly
maintained amongst us, (by those deceived People who cry up the Light within to
be the True Christ; or that the Light or Power in that Person, called Jesus of
Nazareth, distinct and apart from the Body that was Crucified, etc. is all the
Christ they own) it will clearly convince us how gracious Christ was to appoint
this Ordinance, besides the Word to confirm us in the Belief, that the True
Savior was a Man, and that he did die, and was buried, and rose again, which
we see in a Figure represented before our Eyes, in the administration of this
Ordinance, And that this is signified in Baptism, we shall now prove;

First, From the Scripture.

Secondly, By the Consent and Agreement of a Cloud of Witnesses.

1. The first Scripture is Romans 6. Therefore we are buried with Christ in
Baptism: He seems, Pool's Annotat.
say our late Annotators, to allude to the manner of Baptizing in those warm
Eastern Countries, which was to dip or plung the Party baptized, and as it were
to bury him for a while under Water.

Cajetan, Cajetan.
upon this place, says, we are buried with him by Baptism into Death. By our
Burying he declares our Death by the Ceremony of Baptism: because he that is
baptized is put under Water, and by this carries a Similitude of him that was
buried, who was put under the Earth now, because none are buried but dead Men
-- from this very thing that we are buried in Baptism, we are assimulated to
Christ buried, or when he was buried.

The Assemblies Annotations on this place of Scripture say likewise thus,
Assemblies Annotat.
i. e. in this Phrase the Apostle seemed to allude to the ancient manner of
Baptizing, which was to dip the Party baptized, and as it were to bury them
under Water for a while, and then raise them up again out of it, to represent
the Burial of the Old Man and our Resurrection to newness of Life: the same
says Diodat?

Tilenus, Tilenus in his Disput. p. 886, 889 890. on Romans 3. 4^
a great Protestant Writer, speaks fully in this case; Baptism, says he, is
the first Sacrament of the New Testament, instituted by Christ, in which there
is an exact Analogy between the Sign and the Thing signified; the outward Rite
in Baptism is threefold.

1. Immersion into the Water.

2. Abiding under the Water.

3. A Resurrection out of the Water.

The Form of Baptism, viz. internal and essential, is no other than the
Analogical Proportion which the Signs keep with the Things signified thereby;
for the Properties of the Water in washing away the Defilements of the Body, do
in a most suitable Similitude set forth the Efficacy of Christ's Blood in
blotting out of Sins; so dipping into the Water does in a most lively
Similitude set forth the Mortification of the old Man, and rising out of the
Water, the Vivification of the new Man: The same plunging into the Water, says
he, holds forth to us that horrible Gulf of Divine Justice, in which Christ,
for our sakes, was for a while in a manner swallowed up -- abiding under the
Water (how little time soever) denotes his Descent into Hell Or Grave.
even the very deepest of Lifelesness, which lying in the sealed or guarded
Sepulcher, he was accounted as one dead; rising out of the Water, holds forth
to us a lively Similitude of that Conquest which this dead Man got over Death
-- in like manner, says he, it is therefore meet that we being baptized into
his Death and buried with him, should rise also with him, and so go on in a new
Life. --

St. Ambrose says Water is that wherein the Body is plunged to wash all Sin
away, Ambrose.
there all Sin is buried: we suppose he means it is a Sign of this, to show that
all Sin is buried.

Many other of the Ancient Fathers speak to the same purpose, See Dr. Du Veil
on Acts 2.
as is observed by the famous Sir Norton Knatchbul in his Learned Notes printed
at Oxford, 1677. (cited by Dr. Du Viel) the sense and meaning of Peter (says
he) that Baptism, which now saves us by Water, that is, by the assistance of
Water, and is Antitypical to the Ark of Noah, does not signify the laying down
the Filth of the Flesh in the Water, but the Covenant of a good Conscience
toward God, while we are plunged in the Water, which is the true use of Water
in Baptism, thereby to testify our Belief in the Resurrection of Jesus Christ;
so that there is a manifest Antithesis between these words by Water, and by the
Resurrection; Nor is the Elegancy of it displeasing. As if he should say, the
Ark of Noah, not the Flood, was a Type of Baptism, and Baptism was an Antitype
of the Ark, not as Baptism is a washing away the Filth of the Flesh by Water,
wherein it answers not at all to the Ark, but as it is the Covenant of a good
Conscience toward God by the Resurrection of Chrst, in the Belief of which
Resurrection we are saved, as they were saved by the Ark of Noah: For the Ark
and Baptism were both a Type and Figure of the Resurrection; so that the proper
end of Baptism ought not to be understood as if it were a sign of the washing
away of Sin, although it be thus oftentimes taken metonymically in the New
Testament, and by the Fathers, but a particular signal of the Resurrection by
Faith in the Resurrection of Christ, of which Baptism is a lively and
emphatical Figure, as also was the Ark out of which Noah returned as from the
Sepulcher to a new Life, and therefore not unaptly called by Philo, the Captain
of the new Creature: And the Whales Belly out of which Jonas, after a burial of
three days, was set at liberty: And the Cloud and the Red Sea in which the
People of Israel are said to have been baptized; that is, not washed, but
buried; for they were all Types of the same thing as Baptism, viz. not the
washing away of Sin, but of the Death and Resurrection of Christ, and our own;
to which the Apostles, the Fathers, the Scholasticks, and all Interpreters
agree. The thing is so apparent as not to need any Testimonies. But because
there are not a few who do not vulgarly teach this Doctrine, it will not be
superfluous to produce some of these innumerable Testimonies, that I may not
seem to speak without Book; and first let us begin with St. Paul, Know ye not
that so many of you that have been baptized into Christ, Romans 6. 3, 4.
were baptized into his Death? therefore we are buried with him in Baptism into
Death, Col. 2. 12.
etc. Else what shall they do that are baptized for the Dead, 1 Cor. 15. 29.
if the Dead rise not at all? As if he had said, if there be no Resurrection,
Why are we baptized? In vain does the Church use the Symbol of Baptism if there
be no Resurrection. The like Testimonies frequently occur among the Fathers --
Ignat. Epist. ad Tral. id Epist. ad Philadelp.
that believing in his Death we may be made Partakers of his Resurrection by
Baptism. Baptism was given in Memory of the Death of our Lord; we perform the
Symbols of his Death and Resurrection in Baptism.

We know but one saving Baptism, in regard there is but one Death for the
World, Justin Martyr.
and one Resurrection from the Dead, of which Baptism is an Image.

Here Paul exclaiming, Basil the Great.
they passed through the Sea, and were all baptized in the Cloud, and in the
Sea Basil of Seleucia.
; he calls Baptism the Passage of the Sea; for it was a flight of Death caused
by the Water.

To be baptized, Chrysostom. Ambros.
and so plunged, and to return up, and rise out of the Water, is a Symbol of
the descent into the Grave, and return from thence.

Baptism is a Pledge and Representation of the Resurrection Lactant. Bernard.
; Baptism is an Earnest of the Resurrection; Immersion is a Representation of
Death and Burial. Innumerable are the Testimonies which might be added. But
these I think sufficient to prove that Baptism is an Image of the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, (from hence we acknowledge the Mystery of our Religion,
his Deity and Humanity) and of all the Faithful who are baptized in his Faith,
from Death to Sin, to newness of Life, which if they lead in this World, they
have a most assured hope, that being dead they shall hereafter rise to Glory
with Christ: -- Which things if so, what Affinity is to be seen between a
Burial and a Washing, that Christian Baptism should be thought to draw its
Original from Jewish Lotions? for if it were true that the end of our Baptism
were to signify a Washing, or Ablution; or if it were true, that the Jews of
old did admit their Children or Proselytes into their Church, by the
administration of any diving, as it is asserted by many Learned Persons of late
Days; yet to prove that our Baptism is indeed an Image of Death, and
Resurrection, not of washing, enough has been said. Thus far Sir Norton
Knatchbul.

And indeed, what this great Man has asserted, and clearly demonstrated, does
fully detect our Brethren, who argue for their Childish Rantism, affirming,
Though Dipping was the Baptism that was practiced in the Primitive Time; yet it
does not from thence follow, that Dipping is essential to Baptism; they are the
words of our late Annotators on Mat. 3. 6. The Reason they give is, See
Continuat. of Pool's Annotat. on Mat. 3. 6.
Because, the washing of the Soul with the Blood of Christ, the thing, say
they, signified by Baptism, being expressed by Sprinkling, or pouring Water, as
well as by Dipping, or being buried in Water.

In Answer, St. Bernard.
we say with St. Bernard, viz. Immersion is a Representation of Death and
Burial.

But says the famous Dr. Du-Veil, Dr. Du-Veil, on Acts 2. 38. p. 78. Aquinas.
To substitute in the room of Immersion, either Sprinkling, or any other way of
applying Water to the Body to signify the same thing, is not in the Power of
the Dispensers of God's Mysteries, or of the Church, for that, (says he) as
Thomas Aquinas excellently well observes, It belongs to the Signifier to
determine what Sign is to be used for the signification; but God it is, who by
things sensible, signifies Spiritual things in the Sacrament. To which let me
add, Shall frail and silly Man seek out, or contrive new Rites, or Signs,
having other significations than ever the great Lawgiver appointed or intended,
and call them by his Name, viz. Ordinances or Sacraments of Christ? Will God, I
say, ever, think you, suffer any Man, to invent, out of his own Brains, new
Signs or Symbols of Divine Gospel-Mysteries, and father them upon him? What
Ordinance has he ordained to signify the sprinkling of the Blood of Christ?
this cannot cer^ainly stand with his Care, Wisdom, and Faithfulness; you may as
well, no doubt, and be as far justified, to contrive some other proper and fit
Signs or Figures of other Gospel-Mysteries, and call them Sacraments of Christ,
as to change his Holy Institution of Immersion, or Dipping, designed and
ordained by him, chiefly as it most clearly appears to represent his Death,
Burial, and Resurrection into Sprinkling, or Pouring, and make it represent
washing in, or sprinkling with the Blood of Christ, and then say, and not
blush, It may serve as well.

Object. But do you not acknowledge Baptism to signify our being washed in the
Blood of Christ?

Answ. In Answer to this, we do say, in a more remote sense, Baptism does hold
forth our being washed or bathed in Christ's Blood, which we doubt not but is
signified in that of Titus 3. 5. by the washing of Regeneration; and in Heb.
10. 22. Yet certainly Sir Norton Knatchbul is in the right, The proper end of
Baptism, says he, ought not to be understood, as if it were a Sign of the
washing away of Sin, although it be oftentimes taken thus Metonymically in the
New Testament. This therefore, we say, Washing is not at all the main or
principal thing, or such as is immediately, or primarily, but only remotely,
and secondarily signified thereby. But the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of
Christ, which is the Rise and Root, the Original and Meritorious Cause of all
the Good we partake of, is the principal Thing signified hereby. But what
advantage is it to you that are only for Rantism, for us to own Washing is
signified by Baptism, since Sprinkling can, as you use it, in no proper manner
represent Washing? But suppose it did answer in that, yet it cannot be Baptism,
because it cannot, nor does it in any respect represent the Death, Burial, and
Resurrection of Christ; nor our death to Sin, and rising again in a Figure, to
walk in newness of Life; which Baptism we have showed was appointed to do, and
therefore can be no other but Immersion, Dipping and Plunging, or covering the
Body in Water, which does resemble, and most lively hold forth the Things
signified thereby to our sight.

Yea these Matters, viz. Christ's Death, Burial, and Resurrection, are the
cardinal or great Things to be considered; for as in the Lord's Supper remotely
many Things may be signified to us, yet all the Things cannot plainly be
represented to our Eyes; but such Things that are the more immediate
Significations of it are the proper Cause of all the rest, viz. Christ
Crucified, and our feeding on him by Faith, or the breaking of his Body, and
the pouring forth of his Blood, are most lively set forth and represented to
our visible sight: So in Baptism likewise, the main and more immediate
Significations, which are the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of our Blessed
Savior, with our death unto Sin, and vivification to a new Life, is clearly
resembled, though the Fruit of his Death, and Remission of Sin, and Purging,
etc. are consequently gathered from it also.

Calvin says, Calvin. l. 4. c. 16.
Baptismum esse sepulturam, in quum nulli msi jam mortui mortuo tradendi sunt;
i. e. That Baptism is a form or way of Burial, and none but such as are already
dead to Sin, or have repented from dead Works, are to be buried.

Also Learned Zanchy, Zanchy.
I find, writes thus on Col. 2. 12. Of Regeneration, says he, there are two
parts, Mortification and Vivification, that is called a Burial with Christ,
this a Resurrection with Christ; the Sacrament of both these, says he, is
Baptism, in which we are overwhelmed or buried, and after that do come forth
and rise again: It may not be said truly, but sacramentally, of all that are
Baptized, that they are buried with Christ, and raised with him, but only of
such as have true Faith.

Now we may appeal to all the World, whether Zanchy does not clearly and
evidently testify the same thing which we assert, viz. that Baptism is and can
be no other than Immersion, or Dipping, since Sprinkling, all must confess, does
not represent, in a lively Figure, the Burial and Resurrection of Christ, nor
our dying, or being dead to Sin, and Vivification to Newness of Life, says he,
Sacramentally, i. e. Analogically; and in respect of the near Resemblance, yet
truly to be buried with, and raised with Christ. This, we say, cannot be said
of them that are sprinkled only; for if in respect of Mortification, and
Vivification, they may be denominated, buried, and raised with Christ, yet that
outward Rite and Ceremony cannot of it self denominate them so much as
Sacramentally buried and raised with Christ, for there is not so much as any
likeness of such Things in it. But in true Baptism, viz total dipping the Body
in Water, and raising it again, it is in a lively Figure held forth to our
sight.

Moreover Chrysostom says that the old Man is buried and drowned in the
Immersion under Water; Chrysostom.
and when the Baptized Person is afterward raised up from the Water, it
represents the Resurrection of the new Man to newness of Life, and therefore
concludes (says my Author) that the contrary Custom, being not only against
Ecclesiastical Law, but against the Analogy and Mystical Signification of the
Sacrament, it is not to be complied with.

It has been too long, God grant Men Light to see their Error, and do so no
more. Prim. Christianity, p. 320.


Also Dr. Cave says that the Party baptized was wholly immerged, or put under
the Water, which was the almost constant and universal Custom of those Times,
whereby they did most notably and significantly express the great Ends and
Effects of Baptism; for, as in immerging there are in a manner three several
Acts, the putting the Person into the Water, his abiding under the Water, and
his rising up again, thereby representing Christ's Death, Burial, and
Resurrection; and in our Conformity thereunto, our dying to Sin, the
destruction of its Power, and our Resurrection to a new course of Life. By the
Person's being put into the Water, was lively represented the putting off the
Body of the Sins of the Flesh, etc. by his being under it, which is a kind of
Burial into Water, his entering into a state of Death, or Mortification, like as
Christ remained for some time under the State or Power of Death; therefore it
is said, as many as are baptized into Christ, are baptized into his Death, etc.
And then, by his Emersion, or rising up out of the Water, is signified his
entering upon the new course of Life; that like as Christ was raised by the
Glory of the Father, so we should wal^ in newness of Life.

We are said (says Paraeus) Paraeus upon Ursi^, p. 375.
to die, and to be buried with Christ in Baptism -- and further shows, that the
external Act of being buried in Water in Baptism, is a lively Emblem of the
Internal Work of Regeneration.

This, Austin.
says Augustine, speaking of these things, is by a Sacramental Metonimy, and
the meaning of it is, not that one thing is changed really into another, but
because the Sign does so lively resemble the thing signified.

Thus all Men may see how the Learned agree with us, that these Scriptures do
hold forth Baptism to be a lively Resemblance of Christ's Death, Burial and
Resurrection, and not of the spiritual things signified only, viz. our
Mortification of Sin, and rising to Holiness in a way of likeness to Christ's
Death and Resurrection, but also the outward Rite or Form of Administration of
the Sign it self -- to be done in a way of likeness or lively Resemblance to
them both; so that either our Brethren and other Pedo-Baptists must deny the
Apostle speaks here at all of the Ordinance of Baptism, or else confess they
have no Baptism; I mean none of Christ's Sacrament of Baptism, their's not
answering nor representing any such things that Baptism was appointed to do,
and still does among those Christians and Churches who have it according to the
Primitive Institution restored to them, and practiced by them.

We are, says Mr. Leigh [buried with him in Baptism unto Death:] Baptism,
Annotat. on Romans 6. 4.
says he, is an Instrument not only of thy Death with Christ, which is the
killing of Sin, but also of thy Burial with him, etc. He alludes to the manner
in which Baptism was then administered, which was to plunge them in Water; the
plunging of them into Water which were baptized, was a Sign of their Death and
Burial with Christ.

Dr. Jer. Tailor, late Bishop of Down, Dr. Tailor, in his Book of Proph. p. 242.
in his Plea for the Baptists says, This indeed is truly to be baptized, when
it is both in the Symbol and in the Mystery; whatsoever is less than this, is
but the Symbol only, a mere Ceremony, an opus operatum, a dead Letter, an empty
Shadow, an Instrument without an Agent to manage, or force to actuate it.

CHAP. V. Proving Baptism to be Immerging or Dipping, from those Typical and
Metaphorical Baptisms spoken of in Scripture.
THat we might remove every stumbling block out of the way, if possible, we
shall show you what those Metaphorical Baptisms spoken of in the Scripture do
hold forth.

1. We read of the Baptism of Afflictions or Sufferings, Woy great Afflictions
are called Baptism.
Mat. 20. 22, 23. Mark 10. 38. Luke 12. 50. I have a Baptism to be baptized
with, and how am I straightened till it be accomplished! From the literal
Signification of the word Baptizo, viz. drown, immerge, plunge under,
overwhelm, great Afflictions come to be called Baptism, and signifies, as
Vo^lius shows, not every light Affliction, but that which is vehement and
overwhelming, as there are Waves of Persecution and Tribulation mentioned in
Scripture; so such as are drowned and overwhelmed by them may seem in a
mystical way to be baptized; the reason of the Metaphor is taken from many deep
Waters to which Calamities are compared; He drew me out of great Waters, says
David, Psalm. 32. 6. I am come into deep Waters where the Floods overflow me,
Psalm. 69. 1, 2. and hence great Afflictions are called Waves, or compared to
the Waves of the Sea that overflow, T^y Waves and thy Billows are gone over me,
Psalm. 42. 7. Christ spoke of his Suffering, who was as it were drowned, or
drenched, or overwhelmed in Misery, no part free: every Suffering is not the
Baptism of Suffering, but great and deep Afflictions, suffering unto Blood and
Death, in opposition to a lesser degree or measure of them, being dipped and
plunged into Afflictions.

Mr. Wilson on the Baptism of Affliction renders it to plunge into Afflictions
or Dangers as it were, says he, into deep Waters; so that it appears also from
this Metaphorical Notion of Baptism, to baptize is to dip, or overwhelm, or
cover the Body in Water. See Continuation of Mr. Pool's Annotat. on Mat. 20. 22*
See what our last and best Annotators positively affirm on Matthew. 20. 22. To
be baptized, is to be dipped in Water, say they, Metaphorically; to be plunged
in A^flictions. I am, says Christ, to be baptized with Blood, overwhelmed with
Sufferings and Afflictions; are you able so to be? etc.

2. We read of the Baptism of the Holy Ghost and Fire: Mat. 3. 11. Mark 1. and
Luke 3. 16.
I indeed baptize you with Water, says John, but he shall baptize you with the
Holy Spirit and with Fire. Now the Question is, What we are to understand to be
meant by the Baptism of the Holy Ghost? whether the sanctifying Gifts and
Graces of the Spirit are intended hereby, which all the Godly receive? or those
extraordinary Gifts or miraculous Effusions of the Holy Ghost only, which many
received in the Primitive Times?

I know some are ready to make use of the Baptism of the Spirit to justify
their Rite of Sprinkling or Pouring, because God is said to pour the Spirit
upon his People, and to sprinkle them with clean Water, which we do grant does
intend the Graces of the Holy Spirit.

But certainly if they did consider the ground and reason why Persons were said
to be baptized with the Spirit, they would soon perceive this Argument would
utterly fail them likewise, or stand them in no stead.

For we do affirm that every Believer who has the Holy Spirit, What it is to
be baptized with the Spirit.
cannot be said to be baptized with the Spirit; like as every one that is under
Afflictions and Sufferings, cannot be said to be baptized with Sufferings, as
we have showed.

But in the first place, it is necessary to understand the difference between
the Baptism commanded and the Baptism promised; the Baptism commanded is that
of Water, the Baptism promised was that of the Spirit. Our Savior after his
Resurrection gave forth his Commission to his Disciples, to teach and baptize,
and then being assembled together with them, Mat. 28. 20
commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the
Promise of the Father, which, said he, ye ha^^ heard of me, Acts 1. 4. What was
that? why it is expressed in the fifth Verse, Ye shall be baptized with the Holy
Ghost not many days hence; and this was made good to them on the day of
Pentecost, Acts 2. 1, 2 3. which was no other than the Spirit in an
extraordinary manner, or the miraculous Gifts thereof; these the Apostles and
believing Jews received first, and in the tenth Chapter of the Acts the same
extraordinary Gifts, Act. 10. 46.
or Baptism of the Spirit, the believing Gentiles received, I mean Cornelius,
and those with him, for they spoke with Tongues and magnified God: and Peter
says, Chap. 11. And as I spoke unto them, the Holy Ghost fell on them, as on
us at the first; then, says he, I remembered the word, etc. Ye shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost, ver. 15, 16.

Now no other Gifts of the Spirit than these great, and extraordinary, and
miraculous Effusions of the Spirit we do conclude is or can be intended or
meant by the Baptism of the Holy Ghost. And that you may see we are not alone
in this Opinion, see what Dr. Du Veil says on Acts 1. 4, 5. shall be baptized,
Dr. Du Veil on Act. 1. 4, 5.
the Greek word (...), says Casaubon, is to dip or plunge, as if it were to dye
Colors; in which sense, says he, the Apostles might be truly said to have
been baptized; for the House in which this was done was filled with the Holy
Ghost; so that the Apostles might seem to have been plunged into it, as in a
large Fish Pond.

Hence Oecumenius on Acts 2. says, Oecumenius on Acts 2. 2.
a Wind filled the whole House, that it seemed like a Fish Pond, because it was
promised to the Apostles, that they should be baptized with the Holy Ghost.

To the same effect, See Key to open Script. Metaphors, lib. 4. p. 36.
says another, as is noted in our Book of Metaphors, Baptism is put for the
miraculous Effusion of the Holy Spirit upon the Apostles, and other Believers
in the Primitive Church, because of the Analogical Immersion or Dipping, for so
Baptizo signifies; for the House where the Holy Spirit came upon the Apostles
was so filled that they were (as it were) drowned in it; or the reason of the
Metaphor says he may be from the great plenty and abundance of those Gifts in
which they were wholly immerg'd, as the Baptized are dipped under Water.

And it appears by what Mr. Del^un has written and translated out of Tropical
Writers, Philologia Sacra, p. 190.
that Glassius and others assert the same things.

And so likewise Mr. Gosnold, Treat. of Bapt. p. 62.
a worthy and learned Man, understood it, speaking of those Scriptures; We have
here cited, says he, these places diligently compared together, evidently show
that the Baptism of the Spirit is a distinct Baptism from that of Water, and
has no Reference at all to the inward sanctifying Graces of the Spirit; but
notes out the most extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit that ever were given to
the Sons of Men, therefore called the Baptism of the Spirit.

Object. But yet this Baptism however was by a pouring forth of the Spirit, and
why may not Baptism be administered so?

Answ. It Is evident 'twas not by a sprinkling or dropping of the Spirit, and
therefore no ways for your turn; and though it was by a pouring out, or a
pouring forth of the Spirit, yet in such sort that the House in which they were
is said to be filled, and so they immerg'd or baptized with it: But however,
all confess this was but a Metaphorical Baptism, and therefore your Argument
from hence at best is but far fetched, and signifies nothing, for it is a
strange way to go to the Metaphorical Notion of a word to prove a Practice that
is contrary to the literal and proper Signification thereof. Moreover, if this
be granted which we have hinted here, it may serve to detect the Error of some
Men who own no other Baptism than that of the Spirit, and think that the
ordinary Gifts and Graces of the Spirit is the Baptism of the Spirit, which
there is no ground, as I can see, to believe; nor was there any other Baptism
to continue to the end of the World, but that of Water without doubt, since the
Baptism of the Holy Spirit was given only to the Apostles and Saints in the
Primitive Time for the Confirmation of the Gosp^l, as these Scriptures show,
Mark 16. 16, 17, 18, 20. Heb. 2. 3, 4. Therefore let such take care who say
they have the true Baptism, and are baptized with the Spirit, left they are
found Liars, and to be indeed without any Baptism at all; for though the Saints
before that great Effusion of the Spirit, nay before Christ was manifested in
the Flesh, had the Holy Spirit, and some of them in a glorious manner; yet, as
some learned Men observe, they were not said to be baptized with it: so
likewise Believers in these days have the Spirit of Christ in the ordinary
Gifts and Graces thereof, yea and the Promise of Christ is, that the Blessed
Spirit the Comforter shall abide with us for ever, yet are not we, nor any now
baptized with it, nor have any (as I humbly conceive) since those miraculous
and extraordinary Gifts ceased in the Church.

Thirdly, There is another Typical or Metaphorical Baptism spoken of, viz. the
Children of Israel, or the Fathers are said to be baptized to Moses in the
Cloud, and in the Sea, 1 Cor. 10. Some have of late intimated, That the Rain
that fell from the Cloud, sprinkled them as they past through the Sea, and from
hence would have Baptism to be Sprinkling: Truly, if that was a Baptism, viz.
it raining upon them, the People may save their Money, and never go to Priest
^or Minister more to Christen their Children, for it is but to carry them abroad
when it rains, and they will be so baptized; and it will be as true a Baptism,
no doubt: for the using the Name of the Father, etc. does not make Baptism,
though true Baptism cannot be warrantably administered without mentioning the
Names of the Sacred Trinity. But we must conclude, there was something else
than that which these Men suppose in that Case, which caused the Apostle to
say, Our Fathers were baptized unto Moses, in the Cloud, and in the Sea. It was
doubtless a Type and plain Figure of Gospel-dipping, or burying in Water; for
they were overwhelmed, it is evident, as it were, in the Cloud, and in the Sea.

And we must give our late Annotators their due at this turn also, See
Continuation of Mr. Pool's Annotat. on 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2.
for they speak much the sense of the Spirit of God in that place; pray take
their own words, after they have given the sense of diverse Learned Men upon the
Text; this they fix upon us to be most probably the meaning of the Scripture;
Others, say they, most probably think, that the Apostle makes use of this
term, in regard of the great Analogy betwixt Baptism, (as it was then used) the
Persons going down into the Waters, being dipped in them; and the Israelites
going down into the Sea, the great Receptacle of Water, though the Waters at
that time were gathered on heaps on either side of them; yet they seemed buried
in the Waters, as Persons in that Age were when they were baptized. -- A very
plain Figure doubtless, they having the Water on each side of them; and to
which they might have added, the Watery Cloud over them, whether it broke down
upon them or no, they were, as it were, buried in the Cloud and in the Sea; so
that this Notion of Typical Baptism makes nothing for Sprinkling.

And thus we hope we have fully evinced, and clearly proved, to all unbiased
Men, what Baptism is you have heard.

First, It is immerging, or dipping into the Water, from the proper, literal,
and genuine signification of the word Baptizo.

Secondly, From the manner of Baptizing in the Primitive Times.

Thirdly, From the Spiritual Signification of the Holy Ordinances of Baptism,
together with the great Design and End of Christ in the Institution of it.

Fourthly and lastly, From the Typical and Metaphorical Baptisms we read of in
the Scriptures. We shall now proceed to speak of the Persons who are the true
Subjects of Baptism in the next place.

CHAP. VI. Proving Believers, or Adult Persons, only to be the Subjects of
Baptism, from Christ's great Commission, Mat. 28.
WE having clearly evinced and proved what Baptism is, and that Rantism is not
the Ordinance, it is clearly another Act; nor is Baptism any other thing than
Immerging, Dipping, or Plunging the Body all over in Water: And this being so,
we may from the whole infer, that all those who have been only sprinkled,
whether as Children, or Adult, are all Unbaptized Persons, and will certainly
be so found in the Day of the Lord; let their Teachers affirm or say what they
will for their calling it Baptism, does not make it to be so: for suppose the
Jews, or the Offspring of Abraham, to whom God commanded Circumcision, instead
of doing that Act, should have devised some other Thing in the room of it, as
the pairing off the Nails of their Children at eight days old, and have given
that Act the name of Circumcision, would that have made it Circumcision? And
truly, they might have as good a Plea, no doubt, for such an Invention,
considering how dangerous and grievous a thing Circumcision was to little
Children, as the first Inventers of Sprinkling a little Water on the Face of a
Babe could pretend unto, in changing Baptism into Rantism.

Now, in the next place it behooves us to enquire, who or what kind of Persons
they are, that our Lord Jesus Christ has required to be baptized; and there is
no better way certainly to know this, than to go to the great Commission,
Matthew. 28 19, 10. All Power, says Christ, is given to me in Heaven and Earth.
Go ye therefore, teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc.

1. First observe, that this Commission was given forth by Christ, just as he
came out of the Grave, or rose from the Dead. Certainly what he said at other
times, should with all care be minded, he being the Son of God; but much more
now at this time. If God should have sent a Saint from the Dead, to let us know
what we should do, would we not give all diligent heed to him? but much more to
Jesus Christ.

2. In the second place, especially considering the Power and Authority he
testifies the Father had given to him as Mediator, viz. to be Head and chief
Governor of his Church; or King and Lawgiver in all Spiritual Things and
Matters over the Souls and Consciences of Men, all Power to dispose of all
things in Heaven and Earth, or Power over Men and Angels, i. e. Power to make
and give forth Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, how, and after what manner God
ought by us to be worshipped in Gospeldays, a Power that is given to him alone,
whose Laws and Appointments none have any Power to dispense with, nor change or
alter the Administration of to the end of the World; Go ye therefore, teach all
Nations, baptizing them, etc.

3. Observe what is Antecedent to Baptism, Teach all Nations; there must be
teaching, they must be first Taught, or made Disciples, for the word (...), as
is well known and confessed by all, does signify, to discipulize, or make
Disciples, and next baptize them. And this also we find was his own practice,
first to make Disciples, and then to baptize them; John 4. 1, 2. Jesus ('it is
said there) made and baptized more Disciples than John; it is not rantize them,
and then teach or make Disciples of them, as the manner of some now-adays is,
and for a long time has been.

Lord, that ever Men should be so bold and presumptuous, as once to attempt to
alter or change any thing of this Holy or Great Commission, or adventure to do
Things contrary to what is given forth here by Jesus Christ, as King and
Lawgiver of the New Testament. What will they say when God rises up? What will
they answer him when he visits them? Job 31. 14.

4. Note the Extent of the Commission here given by Christ to his Disciples, Go
teach all Nations, baptizing them, Mark 16. 15.
Go into all Nations; or, as Mark has it, Into all the World, East as well as
West, North as well as South, into Cold Countries as well as Hot, and make
Disciples wherever you come, and Baptize them, etc. not Rantize them; not dip
them in hot Climates, and sprinkle them in Cold.

5. Observe in whose Name they are required to baptize, viz. in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; into the Name, so the Greek: In
the Name does not only import the naming of the Names of the Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit, but in the Authority, and into the Profession of the Blessed
Trinity, of the one Divine Being, dedicating the Persons baptized (says our
Annotators) to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. But how dare any presume to
Rantize a Babe that is incapable to be taught or made a Disciple by teaching?
In the Name of the Glorious Trinity, can they say and prove it, Christ has
given them any such Authority? I am sure they have no Warrant nor Authority so
to do, from this Blessed Commission of Jesus Christ -- It was by dipping of
Adult Persons then -- But it was in an hot Country, Object.
say our late Annotators, where at any time, without the danger of Persons
Lives, it might be so done.

Does not our Blessed Savior's Words immediately following fully answer this
Objection, Answ.
and, lo I am with you always to the end of the World? Has not Christ Power to
preserve, protect, and uphold all such Persons which he commands to be
Baptized? Nay, can we think Christ would institute an Ordinance to destroy the
Lives of any Persons? Besides, we know he has preserved thousands in this cold
Climate; nay, and never did I hear of any one Person that received the least
Hurt or Damage by being Baptized according to the Commission of Christ; though
some have gone into the Water in the time of the great Frost, and at other
Times of bitter Frost and Snow; nay, and Persons very Aged, and of both Sexes,
and some that have been very weak and sickly -- though our Adversaries have
falsely reported to the contrary. But can they be so (...) left to themselves,
to think this will be a good (...) for them, for changing this Ordinance of
Jesus Christ, when he comes to call all Men to an account? certainly they will
find themselves deceived.

But say our late Annotators, Pool' s Annotat. on Mat. 28. 20.
Where it might be, we judge it reasonable, and most resembling our burial with
Christ, by Baptism into Death, but we cannot think it necessary, for God loves
Mercy rather than Sacrifice.

Answ. Sirs, wherefore do you judge it reasonable, and not necessary? Is it not
necessary for you to do what Christ has commanded, and when at no time there
is any danger of the Lives of Persons? If you will follow your Master's
Command, and only Baptize such who are made Disciples, viz. believing Men and
Women; is it not necessary for you to do Christ's Work, as Christ has required?
Is it necessary you should alter any of his Holy Laws, and make void one of the
great Sacraments of the New Testament by your Traditions? I pray, my dear
Brethren, consider more seriously of it.

From hence it is evident, that those who ought to be Baptized, are Disciples,
and none else; and that a Disciple is one that is a Believer, one that is
taught, or has learned of Christ; The Disciples were first called Christians in
Antioch, Pool' s Annotat. on Acts 11. 26.
Acts 11. 26. Not only, say our Annotators, as Scholars were called amongst the
Greeks from their Masters, viz. Platonists, Pythagor^ans, to teach us whom we
profess to learn of, and be instructed by, but to mind us of our Unction, for
Christians are Anointed ones, 1 John 2. 2^. Such Disciples are the true
Subjects of Baptism.

Yea, Christ (says Mr. Baxter) in his Commission, Baxter on Confirmation and
Restoration, page 27.
directs his Apostles to make Disciples, and then baptize them, promising,
That he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved.

And in another Book of his, speaking of the same Commission, See Mr. Tomes's
Book, called Felo de se. Baxter's Dispute of Right to Sacraments, p. 149.
This, says he, is not like some occasional mention of Baptism, but is the
very Commission it self of Christ to his Disciples, for Preaching and
Baptizing, and purposely expresses their several Works, in their several
Places and Order.

Their first Task is, To make Disciples, says he, which are by Mark called
Believers.

The second Work is, To Baptize them; whereto is annexed the Promise of
Salvation.

The third Work is, See Danvers on Baptism, p. 2, 3.
To teach them all other things, which are after to be learned in the School of
Christ. To contemn this Order, (says he) is to contemn all Rules of Order: for
where can we expect to find it, if not here? I profess my Conscience is fully
satisfied from this Text, that there is one sort of Faith even Saving, that
must go before Baptism, the profession whereof the Minister must expect: What
can any Baptist say more?

Let Mr. Baxter tell us what difference there is between contemning that Order
Christ has left in his great Commission, and a direct derogating from it, or
acting quite contrary to it: And is not this so, viz to Rantize or Sprinkle,
instead of Baptize and Sprinkle first, before they are taught or made
Disciples? nay, and such too, who are not capable to be taught or made
Disciples of: Is no^ this to flight, is not to contemn Christ's Order in his
Commission? for since Christ appoints such, that by Teaching are made Disciples
to be Baptized, he excludes all other the institution of Christ in this his
Commission, being doubtless a perfect Rule; and those who do otherwise, follow
their own Inventions.

I find Mr. Danvers cites Mr. Perkins, Danvers Book of Baptism, p. 3, 4.
Perkins.
(I have not that Book of Mr. Perkins) speaking to this purpose, on the words
of the Commission, Teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. I explain these
Terms, says he, thus: Mark, first of all it is said, Teach; that is, make
Disciples, by calling them to believe and repent. Here we are to consider the
Order which God observes in making with Men a Covenant in Baptism.

First of all he calls them by his Word, and Commands to believe, and to
repent. In the

Second place, God makes his Promise of Mercy and Forgiveness. And,

Thirdly, He Seals his Promise by Baptism. -- They, says he, that know not,
nor consider this Order which God used in Covenanting with them in Baptism,
deal preposterously, over-slipping the Commandment of Repenting and Believing.

It appears to me as if God will sometimes make Men speak the Truth whether
they will or no, and confirm his own blessed Order, though they contradict
their own Practice thereby.

Paraeus (the same Person says) upon Mat. 3. 5. shows, Paraeus.
that the Order was, that Confession as a Testimony of True Repentance go
first, and then Baptism for Remission of Sins afterward.

What Commission our Brethren have got, who sprinkle Children, I know not, let
them fetch a thousand Consequences, and unwarrantable Suppositions for their
Practice, it signifies nothing, if Christ has given them no Authority or Rule
to do what they do in his Name. Natural Con^sequences from Scripture we allow,
but such which flow not naturally from any Scripture we deny; Can any think
Christ would leave one of the great Sacraments of the New Testament, not to be
proved without Consequences. For I am sure there is no Baptism to be
administered before the Profession of Faith in the Commission, nor no where else
in Christ's New Testament; and that Faith is required in the second place as
pre-requisite unto Baptism, is very plain from Mark 16. 16. They must be
Believers, none are fit Subjects of Baptism, but they that believe, and are
capable to believe; He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, etc.
not he that is baptized, and then believes. Take heed you do not invert
Christ's Order; and if there is no Baptism to be found in the New Testament to
be practiced before Faith, much less Sprinkling or Rantism is there required.

CHAP. VII. Proving Believers to be the only true Subjects of Baptism, from the
Apostles Doctrine, and the Practice of the Primitive Churches.
WE read that the Apostles, according to the Commission Christ gave them,
preached the Gospel of the Kingdom, having received the Spirit from on high,
and began at Jerusalem as he had commanded them, and so endeavored to make Men
and Women Disciples, i. e. bringing them to the sense and sight of their Sins,
and knowledge of their lost and miserable condition by Nat^^e, as being
unconverted and without Christ; and in Acts 2. where Peter preached the first
Sermon that was preached after the Ascension of the Lord Jesus, And when they
heard this (the Text says) they were pricked in their Hearts, and sai^ unto
Peter and the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? then
said Peter, REPENT AND BE BAPTIZED every one of you in the Name of Jesus
Christ, for the Remission of Sins, and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy
Ghost, etc.

And then they that gladly received the Word, were baptized; and the same day
there was added to them about three thousand Souls.

Pray observe the Footsteps of this Flock, I mean the manner of the
Constitution of this Church, it being the first Church that was planted in the
Gospel-days, it was the Church at Jerusalem, and indeed the Mother Church; for
evident it is, all other Gospel-Churches sprang at first from this, and hence
some conceive the Apostle calls this Church Jerusalem above, Gal. 4. 26.
, being the Mother of us all, said to be above, not only because she was in her
Constitution from Heaven, or by Divine and Evangelical Institution, but also
might be said to be above in respect of Dignity or Privilege, being first
constituted, and having the first Fruits of the extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit poured out upon them; and besides, having all the great Apostles at
first as Members with her; and hence it is that all other Churches were to
follow the Church of God that was in Judea, and were commended in so doing, and
certainly it is the Duty of all Churches so to walk unto the end of the World.

But to proceed, Acts 8. we find Philip, being by the Providence of God cast
into Samaria, he preaches Jesus Christ to them, and when they believed Philip,
Act. 8. 12.
preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the Name of Jesus
Christ, they were baptized both Men and Women: not till they were Disciples,
and did believe, were any baptized: [ Men and Women,] not Children, not them
and their little Babes; if Philip had so done, he had acted contrary to his
Master's Commission. In the same Chapter we find he preached Christ to the
Eunuch also, Act. 8. 36, 37.
And they came to a certain Water; and the Eunuch said, See, here is Water,
what does hinder me to be baptized? ver. 37. And Philip said, If thou believe
with all thine Heart, thou may. And the Eunuch answered, and said, I believe
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God: And they both went down into the Water,
both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him. There must be Faith or no
Baptism, thou may or thou ought, it is lawful, or according to Christ's
Law, Pools Annotat. on. Act. 8. 37.
i. e. his Commission. A Verbal Profession is not sufficient, say our late
Annotators on this place. Philip in God's Name requires a Faith as with all the
Heart, and not such as Simon Magus had, who is said to believe, and be
baptized, verse. 13. this was (say they) the only thing necessary, either then
or now if rightly understood.

How was it known, Baxter on Confirmat. p. 27.
says Mr. Baxter, but by their Profession, that the Samaritans believed Philip
preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the Name of Jesus
Christ, before they were baptized both Men and Women* and, says ^he, Philip
caused the Eunuch to profess before he would baptize him, that he believed that
Jesus Christ was the Son of God.

Moreover, Act. 10. 45, 47, 48.
in the tenth of the Acts we find Cornelius and those with him were first made
Disciples by Peter's preaching, and the Spirit's powerful Operation, and then
were baptized; Who can forbid Water (says he) that thest should not be
baptized, who have received the Holy Ghost as well as me? And he commanded them
to be baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus; that is, by the Authority of
Christ according to the Commission. Acts 16. 31, 32, 33.
So in Acts 16. when the poor trembling Jailer was made a Disciple, i. e. did
believe with his whole House on the Lord Jesus Christ, he was with his whole
House baptized; so Lydia believed and was baptized, Acts 16. 14. the like in
Acts 18. Crispus believing on the Lord, Acts 18. 8.
and many of the Corinthians hearing, believed, and were baptized.

The Chief Ruler believed with all his House and were baptized, he believed,
his House believed, the Jailer believed, all runs in their believing, all must
by believing be made Disciples, or not be baptized.

Luther says that in Times past, Luther, Tom. 3. fol. 168. cited by Mr.
Danvers, p. 8. on Baptism.
the Sacrament of Baptism was administered to none except it were to those that
acknowledged and confessed their Faith, and knew how to rehearse the same, and
why are they now?

See Mr. Baxter in his sixteenth Argument against Mr. Blake, Baxter's 2d
Disputation, p. 149.
if there can be no Example given in Scripture of any one that was baptized
without the Profession of a saving Faith or any Precept for so doing, then must
we not baptize any without.

But, says he, the Antecedent is true, therefore so is the Consequent.

1. I have, says he, showed you, John required the Profession of true
Repentance, and that his Baptism was for Remission of Sins.

2. When Christ lays down the Apostolical Commission, the Nature and Order of
the Apostles Work, it is first ^o make them Disciples, and then to baptize them
in the Name, etc.

That it was saving Faith that was required of the Jews and professed by them,
Acts 2. 38. is plain in the Text.

The Samaritans believed, and had great Joy, and were baptized, etc.

The Condition upon which (says he) the Eunuch must be baptized was, if he
believed with all his Heart.

Paul was baptized after Conversion, Acts 9. 18.

The Holy Ghost fell on the Gentiles before they were baptized, Acts 10. 44.

Lydia's Heart was opened before she was baptized, and was one the Apostle
judged faithful, Acts 16. 14.

So he goes over with all the Scriptures we have mentioned, proving they were
Believers, and none else, that all along in the New Testament were baptized;
it is strange to me that the Man should have such clear Light and plead for the
Commission, and the Practice of the Primitive Christians, and yet dare attempt
to sprinkle Children, having neither a Command from Christ, or a Precedent from
the Apostles for any such thing.

Object. I know it is objected Baptism was administered only to Believers in the
Apostles time, but that was the Infancy of the Church.

Answ. I am not a little troubled to hear any Man to argue after this manner;
for though it be granted in the Apostles days the Church was newly constituted,
and so might be said to be new born; yet to say that was the Infancy of the
Church, (as Infancy imports in our common Acceptance, Weakness or
Imperfection) is a false and foolish Assertion.

1. Because that was in truth the time of the Churches greatest Glory,
Perfection and Beauty, and very soon after the Apostles fell asleep, the
Church, though she grew older, yet she decayed, and Corruptions crept in; the
Church might in that respect be compared to a glorious Flower, that as soon as
ever it is blown and quite put forth it is in its Glory, and let it stand a
while and it soon fades, and loses much of its Luster and Beauty; even so did
the Church of God: Acts 20.
and it was foretold also by the Apostles, it would so after their departure
come to pass, by the entering in of grievous Wolves who should not spare the
Flock, i. e. the Church; 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
nay, the Spirit of Antichrist, ( Paul says,) or Mystery of Iniquity, did even
then work in the Apostles days. 1 John 2. 18.
And St. John speaks to the same purpose, Little Children, it is the last time:
and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many
Antichrists, whereby we know that this is the last time: and indeed all
generally believe the Church continued not a pure Virgin to Christ much longer
than one hundred Years after his Death; now then shall any presume to say that
was the Infancy of the Church, as if the Church arrived to clearer Light,
Strength, and Glory in Aftertimes.

But, 2. Had not the Gospel Church in that Age the extraordinary Apostles with
it, like to whom never any rose after to succeed them; nay such who were
conversant with the Lord Jesus after he rose from the Dead, Acts 1. 3.
and spoke to him mouth to mouth, Act. 10. 41.
and did eat and drink with them? as Peter says, Acts 10.

3. Had not the Church then extraordinary Gifts, nay, such an infallible Spirit
and Presence of Christ with her, that her Sons could clearly discern Spirits,
and know when they speak, and when the Spirit spoke in them? Now speak I, not
the Lord.

4. Was not that Church set up to be a Pattern, or perfect Copy, after which all
succeeding Churches were to write? can we think that others ever attained to
the like, much less to greater Light and Knowledge than they? These things
considered, fully show the folly and weakness of this Assertion and Objection.

But if Believers were the only Subjects of Baptism in the Primitive Time, and
this was according to the Commission of Christ and Practice of those days, how
came this Order and Administration to be altered and changed, I mean by whose
Authority? nay, and which is worst of all, (...)
if that Infant Baptism may be deemed to be a Divine Rite, or an Ordinance of
God, since it is not recorded in the Scripture, nor practiced in the Apostles
Time, it renders not only the Gospel Church weak and imperfect, but Christ
himself unfaithful, or less faithful than Moses, who was but the Servant, and
yet lest nothing dark or unwritten which God commanded him, but did do every
thing exactly according to the Pattern showed him in the Moun^.

Nay, and by the same Argument (since Infant Baptism was not instituted by
Christ, no^ practiced in the Primitive Church) and yet may be admitted as a
Divine Ordinance of Christ, and so practiced by Christians* why may not all, or
many other Rites and Sacraments owned and maintained in the Romish Church, be
admitted also? But,

Object. I have heard some say, Is it my where forbid?

Answ. To which I answer, where are such things as Crossings, Salt, Spittle,
and Sureties, etc. forbid? At this Door what Inventions and Innovations may not
come in, or be admitted, of such a dangerous Consequence is this, that it would
undo us all!

Object. But say you at that time, i. e. at the first preaching the Gospel and
planting Churches, Adult Persons were baptized only because they were before
they believed either Jews or Heathens; but when they believed and were
baptized, their Children had a right to Baptism likewise.

Answ. This is soon said, but hardly, nay not at all to be proved. For it
cannot be their Childrens right without Authority or Command from Christ: for
if we should grant all our Brethren say concerning Abraham's Seed, and of their
Childrens being in Covenant, this will not justify their Practice of baptizing
them, if they argue thus till Doomsday, except Christ has left them a
Precept, or his Church a Precedent so to do; for Abraham's Seed, though they
were such a thousand times over, had no right to Circumcision until he received
the word of Command to circumcise them from the great God. Nor had Lot, and
other godly Men in that day, any right to that Ceremony who were not of
Abraham's Family, because God limited his Command to himself, his Sons, and
Servants, or such who were bought with Money, and so came into his House.

Secondly, We des^re it may be considered that the History we have of the
Gospel Church in the Apostles days from the first planting of the Church at
Jerusalem, till St. John received his Revelations, contains more than ^ifty
Years, and there was no ^ewer than three thousand Persons baptized at once in
that first Church; so that we may conclude there were many thousands of
Believers who doubtless had many Children born unto them during the time of the
Gospel (...) in the History we have recorded in the New Testament, and yet we
read not of one of their Children upon the account of federal Holiness, and
their Parents covenanting with God, baptized; and can any be so blind as to
think the holy God would have left this thing so in the dark without the least
hint or intimation, had it been any of his Mind or Counsel that Believers Seed
should be baptized? I am sure they cannot say it, without reflecting upon the
Faithfulness, Care, and Wisdom of God.

CHAP. VIII. Proving Believers the only true Subjects of Baptism from the
special ends of this holy Sacrament.
WHat the special end and use of Baptism is, comes next in order to be
considered, wherein it will more fully and clearly appear that no Infant in
Nonage ought by any means to be baptized.

First of all, it was ordained to be a Sign (...) the Baptized of some inward
(...) viz. of the Person's Death unto (...) to a new Life buried with (...) i.
e. Christ does certainly (...) ^mmediately (if not wholly) in (...) Scripture
to that outward Sign (...) that in which there is a plain Representation of the
Mystery and inward Grace, we are said to be buried and risen both in
Signification, and also in lively Representation of the inward and spiritual
Burial and Resurrection with Christ.

Secondly, Here is mention made of the Sign, and of the Thing signified. And as
for that which is spoken of under this Expression, Buried in Baptism, it is
delivered as a M^dium (says one) whereby, as a Motive whereunto, and as a
Reason wherefore, as an Image and Representation, wherein we are both to read,
Romans 6. 3, 4, 5, 6.
and remember, and also practice and perform that other; for, do but mark, how
shall we that are dead to Sin, (i. e. should be) live any longer therein? Know
ye not, that as many of you as were baptized into Christ, i. e. into, or in
token of an Interest in him, and of a Oneness and Fellowship with him by Faith,
are baptized into his Death? i.e. in token of such a Communion with the Power
of his Death, as to kill Sin, and crucify the old Man, so that henceforth we
should not serve Sin? therefore hence it is, says he, that in Baptism, ( i. e.
the outward Sacrament) we are buried with him, i. e. outwardly, visibly, bodily
in Water into his Death, i. e. in token and resemblance of our dying unto Sin
by virtue of his Death? That we should be ever practically mindful of this,
That like as Christ rose again after he was dead, so we should rise to a new
Life; for if we have been planted together in the likeness of his Death, (i. e.
signally in outward Baptism, spiritually, and really in the inward Work of
Death unto Sin, etc, performed by the Spirit upon the Soul) we shall be also in
the likeness of his Resurrection.

Thirdly, This Burial and Resurrection that is immediately expressed by these
words, Buried with him in Baptism, wherein ye are also risen with him, is made
a Motive, Argument, and Incitement to the spiritual Death and Resurrection; for
therefore are we persuaded to die to Sin and live righteously, because in
Baptism we are buried in Water, and raised again, in token that we ought so to
do; and to this end are we baptized, and buried, and raised therein, and so
interested into all the other Benefits of Christ's Death, Remission of Sins,
and Salvation, viz. that we should die to Sin and live holily, and to the end
also that we may thereby be put in mind so to do.

Now if this Death and Burial in Baptism be to this end, viz. to teach us, and
show us how we must die to Sin: Then I infer two things,

First, That the burial in Baptism, here spoken of, is not the Death to Sin;
for the Motive, and things we are moved to do, are two; and so are the Sign,
and the Thing signified.

Secondly, That Infants are not capable Subjects of Baptism: for this Sacrament
calls for Understanding, and Judgment, and Senses to be exercised in all that
partake thereof, or else the whole work will be altogether insignificant.
Therefore, says one, to carry a poor Babe to Baptism, is as much as to carry
it to hear a Sermon. -- A Sign, Pareus.
as Pareus observes, is some outward thing appearing to the Sense, through,
which some inward thing is at the same time apprehended by the Understanding.

Therefore, says Mr. Perkins, Perkins Case of Consc. p. 177.
the preaching of the Word, and the administration of Sacraments are all one in
substance; for in the one the Witness of God is seen, and in the other heard.

Secondly, Another end of Baptism is, that it might be a signal Representation
of a Believers Union with Christ, hence called a being baptized into Christ,
and a putting on of Christ.

As many as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, and are all one
in Christ Jesus, Baxter on Confirm. p. 32.
says Mr. Baxter, and are Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to Promise, Gal.
3. 27, 28, 29.

This speaks the Apostle of the probability grounded on a credible Profession,
etc.

And further, says he, our Baptism is the Solemnizing of our Marriage with
Christ, and it is a new and strange kind of Marriage where there is no
Profession of Consent.

Now if this be true which Mr. Baxter affirms, and I see no cause to doubt of
it; (most worthy Men, as well as Scripture, agreeing in this case with him) how
absurd and ridiculous a thing is the Invention of Infant Baptism, since all Men
know they are not capable to signify their Consent of Marriage with Christ; if
any thing in the World cuts in pieces the very Sinews of Infants Baptism it is
this; for there is a Contract made between both Parties before the
Solemnization of Marriage; and how can a Babe of two or ten days old do that?
it is a strange Marriage if it be not done, though more strange indeed without
the other. But may be some will say it is a Marriage by Proxy or Sureties, as
Princes sometimes are married.

Answ. Sometimes there has been some such like Action done I must confess: But
does not the Prince actually consent so to be married? But all this while, who
has required any thing of this at our Hands? Are not Sureties in Baptism a mere
human Invention? and have not our Brethren cast it away as such?

The third end of Baptism, as Mr. Perkins observes, is this, viz. It Is a Sign
to Believers of the Covenant on God's part of the washing away of our Sins in
the Blood of Christ; we see, says lie* what is done in Baptism, the Covenant
of Grace is solemnized between God and the Party baptized; and in this Covenant
something belongs to God, and something to the Party baptized. Are Infants
capable thus to covenant with God? though we doubt not but it is so in some
good sense between the Almighty and a Believer, who is the only Subject, i. e.
there is indeed a mutual Stipulation on both Parties in that Solemnity, but an
Infant can do nothing herein.

Baptism, says Bullinger, Bullinger upon Acts 2. 38.
is an Agreement or Covenant of Grace which Christ enters into with us when we
are baptized, etc.

Fourthly, Baptism is called the Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of
Sins; one end of this Ordinance therefore is this, viz. To testify the Truth of
our Repentance, and to engage us thereby to bring forth Fruits meet for
amendment of Life.

As their Sins are not forgiven them, Baxter on Confirm. p. 30, 31.
says Mr. Baxter, till they are converted; so they must not be baptized for
the Forgiveness of Sins, till they profess themselves converted, seeing to the
Church non esse and non apparere is all one. Repentance toward God, and Faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ, is the sum of that preaching that makes
Disciples, Acts 20, 21. Therefore both these must by Profession seem to be
received, before any at Age are Baptized. And that no other, say I, besides
them at Age ought to be baptized, by this very Argument is very clear and
evident.

Bullinger, Bullinger on Act. 2. 38.
as he is quoted by Mr. Baxter, I find speaks thus, viz. To be baptized in
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, says he, is by a Sign of Baptism, to
testify that we do believe in Christ for the Remission of Sins: First, mark, it
is not only an Engagement to believe hereafter; but the Profession, says he,
of a present Faith. Secondly, And that not a common Faith, but that which has
Remission of Sin.

Farewell to Infant Baptism; a present Faith is required of such that are to be
baptized, nay, and more, a present profession of it too. Infants have neither
Faith, nor can they profess it, Ergo they are not to be baptized.

Fifthly, Another End of Baptism is, (as one well observes) to evidence present
Regeneration; whereof, says he, Tit. 3. 5. Baxter in his Disput. with Mr.
Blake, p. 117. as quoted by Mr. Danvers.
it is a lively Sign or Symbol -- Hence it is called the Washing of
Regeneration; what signifies the Sign, where the Thing signified is wanting?
Baptism is frequently called the Lave^ of Regeneration, it being a Sign or
Figure of it to the Person Baptized.

Christ has instituted no Baptism, says Mr. Baxter, but what is to be a Sign
of present Regeneration; but to Men that profess not a Justifying Faith, it
cannot be administered as a Sign of Regeneration. Therefore he has instituted
no Baptism to be administered to such. Does not this Argument make void the
Baptism of Infants, as well as Adult Unbelievers, by the Ancients? Let Mr.
Baxter take it again, but with a very little alteration. Christ has instituted
no Baptism but what is to be a Sign of present Regeneration; but to little
Babes that profess not a justifying Faith, it cannot be administered as a Sign
of present Regeneration, therefore he has instituted no Baptism to be
administered to Infants. The stress of the Argument lies in the Institution of
Christ, in that no Baptism is instituted and commanded by Christ, but what is a
Sign of present Regeneration, not Future; therefore Infant Baptism can be no
Baptism of Christ.

Sixthly, Baptism is called, An Answer of a good Conscience, 1 Pet. 3. 21.
by the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead; or the Covenant of a good
Conscience by the Resurrection of Christ, (as says Sir Norton Knatchbul, in
his Learned Notes printed at Oxford, 1677.) in the belief of which Resurrection
we are saved, says he, as they were saved by the Ark. But now Infants cannot
Covenant thus, nor Witness thus in Baptism by a Belief of the Resurrection,
(which says the said famous Learned Man) Baptism is an emphatical Figure, or a
particular Signal of, to the Person baptized.

See what our Late Annotators speak upon the place; Pool' s Annotat. on Tit. 3.
5.
In Baptism, say they, there is a solemn Covenant, or mutual Agreement between
God and the Party baptized, wherein God offers, applies, and seals his Grace,
stipulating or requiring the Parties acceptance of that Grace, and devoting
himself to his Service; and when he, out of a good Conscience does engage and
promise this, which is to come up to the terms of the Covenant, that my be
properly called the Answer of a good Conscience -- it seems, say they, to be an
allusion to the manner of Baptizing, where the Minister asked the Party to be
Baptized concerning his Faith in Christ; and he accordingly answered him, Do
thou believe? I believe, etc. Acts 8. 37. Now, are Children capable to do any
of this? Can they covenant with God? Can they answer a good Conscience, by
believing the Resurrection of Christ? or can Baptism appear to be a Symbol of
it to them? No, nor indeed can Rantism be so to any other, I mean to the Adult.

Seventhly, Baptism has another End and Use assigned to it, viz. That the
Party baptized may have an orderly entrance into the Visible Church, and so
have a right to partake of all other Ordinances and Privileges thereof, as
breaking of Bread, etc. This hereafter I shall make fully appear; nor is it any
other thing than is generally owned by Christians, and eminent Men; but Infants
cannot be admitted to those Privileges, viz. to the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, etc. and therefore ought not to be baptized; for he that has right to
one, cannot be denied the other, by any Ground or Authority from God's Word.

CHAP. IX. Containing several other Arguments, proving, why not Infants, but
Believers only, are the true Subjects of Baptism.
IF there is no word of Institution, 1. Argument.
or any thing in the Commission of Christ for Baptizing Infants, but of
Believers only, then not Infants but Believers only ought to be Baptized.

But there is no word of Institution, or any thing in the Commission of Christ,
for baptizing Infants, but of Believers only; Ergo, not Infants, but Believers
only are the Subjects of Baptism.

The Major Proposition is undeniable: for if Infants may be baptized in the
Name, etc. without any Authority from Christ, or word of Institution, or the
least intimation of it in the great Commission, what Innovation can we keep out
of the Church? This is enough to cause any Protestant to renounce his Religion,
and cleave to the Romish Communion, who asserts the Church's Power is such,
that without a word of Institution, she may do the Lord knows what. -- Nor do
they, as far as I can find, assert Infant Baptism from the Authority of the
Scripture; but from the Power Christ has left in the Church, in which they seem
more honest than some Protestants, that pretend to maintain this Rite, by plain
Scripture Proof, without the least shadow or intimation of any such thing, to
the palpable Reproach of the Christian Religion.

As to the Minor, it is evident, and owned by the Learned, that those who are
enjoined to be baptized, in the Commission, Matthew. 28. are first to be taught,
or made Disciples: But Infants cannot be made Disciples, being incapable of
teaching; therefore there is nothing in that Commission of Infant Baptism: If
they have any other word of Institution or Commission, let them produce it, we
profess we know of none.

Object. Christ commanded his Disciples to baptize all Nations; Children are
part of the Nations, therefore may be baptized: Thus you see we have Authority
to baptize Children from the great Commission.

Answ. Let me have the same liberty to argue, and see what will follow, viz.
Christ commanded his Disciples to baptize all Nations; but Turks, Pagans, and
Infidels, with their Children, are part of the Nations, Ergo, Turks, Pagans,
and Infidels, and their Children, may be baptized also. Sir, I will appeal to
you, is not this Inference as good and as justifiable as yours? Come put it to
your Consciences; Can you suppose any should be baptized by virtue of the words
of Christ in the Commission, but Disciples only?

Object. Well, what though that be so? yet we affirm, that Infants are
Disciples, and therefore may be baptized.

Answ. What if we shall grant you that Infants are Disciples, (which we can
never do, it being utterly false) yet they are not such Disciples that Christ
in the Commission requires to be baptized* because they were to be made
Disciples, by being taught; and that Infants cannot be said to be, we are sure.

The Lord Jesus has plainly excluded Infants in his Commission from this
Administration, according to ordinary Rule; for in that he commands the them to
Baptize Disciples, upon preaching first to them, it follows, that none but such
who are so taught, and so by teaching made Disciples, are by virtue of the
Commission, to be baptized; Infants, after an ordinary rate are uncapble of
understanding the Gospel, when preached, and therefore are incapable of being
made Disciples thereby, and there is no other way, according to ordinary Rule,
of being made Disciples but by that means: And this the Apostles could easily
understand, as knowing that under the term Disciple, in common speech, and in
the whole New Testament, those only are meant, who being taught, professed the
Doctrine preached by such a one as John's Disciples, Christ's Disciples, and
the Disciples of the Pharisees, etc. and accordingly the Apostles administered
Baptism. And in that Christ appoints, these to be Baptized, we say, he excludes
all others; for the Institution, Commission, and Commandment of Jesus Christ,
is most certainly the only Rule, according to which we are to administer the
Sacrament of Baptism, and all other Holy Things; and they that do otherwise,
open a Door to all Innovations, and follow their own Inventions, and are guilty
of Will Worship. If you should say, Infants are Disciples seminally in and by
their Pa^ents: as if Believers could beget Believers, ^or Disciples of Christ
by natural Generation, is absurd and ridiculous, the Christian Church being not
made up of Persons by mere Humane Birth, but Spiritual Regeneration. And to say
that Infants are born Disciples by the relation to the Covenant, and so have
the Seal set on them, without any precedent Teaching, is but an unapproved
Dictate; as if a Title to Baptism were in its Nature a Seal of the Covenant,
which the Scripture no where affirms; nor is there any Rule for baptizing of
Persons because of Relation to the Covenant, since Baptism wholly depends upon a
positive Institution.

Object. But you further argue, that Infants are called Disciples, Act. 15. 10.
Because the Yoke laid upon the Necks of the Disciples, was Circumcision; and
Circumcision belonged to Infants, ergo, Infants are Disciples.

Answ. To this we Answer, That there is no color of Ground or Reason of giving
the Name of Disciples from that Text to Infants: for tho true, they are called
Disciples, upon whose Necks the false Brethren would have put that Yoke of
Circumcision; yet what is this, since Adult Believers of the Gentiles also were
required by the Jews to be circumcised, as Timothy, Act. 16. 3. And tho it be
granted that they would have had Infants, as well as the converted Gentiles, to
be circumcised, yet the putting the Yoke of Circumcision, is not actual
Circumcision in the Flesh; for that the Jews, as well as their Children, were
able to bear for many Ages. But the Yoke of Circumcision is the necessity of it
upon Men's Consciences, and therewith to oblige them to keep the whole Law of
Moses, or they could not be saved; and this was not that which they would have
put upon Children, but upon the Disciples, i. e. the faithful Brethren in
Christ Jesus.

If Faith and Repentance be required as prerequisite of all them that are to be
baptized; Arg. II.
then none but Believers ought to be baptized -- but Faith and Repentance is
required of all such; Ergo, etc.

The Major Proposition cannot be denied, without a palpable violation of
Christ's Precept, and by the same Rule that Infants may be baptized,
notwithstanding this absolute prerequisite, Unbelievers may, invalidate the
Rule of Christ, or render it defective, and you give all away to the Enemy. The
Minor has been sufficiently proved.

If thou believe, thou may, else he might not; Acts 8.
that it seems was absolutely necessary, Repent, and be baptized every one of
you, Act. 2. 36, 37. and, those of the Church of England say the same thing.

In the Rubric, What is required of Persons that are to be baptized? that is
the Question.

Answer, Repentance, whereby they forsake Sin; and, Faith, whereby they
steadfastly believe the Promise of God made to them in that Sacrament.

If there be no Precedent in the Scripture, (as there is no Precept) that any
besides such who professed Faith and Repentance, Arg. III.
were baptized; then none but such ought to be baptized: but there is no
Precedent that any besides such who professed Faith and Repentance were
baptized; Ergo, none but such ought.

Had Infant Baptism been any Appointment or Institution of Christ, we should
certainly either have had Precept or Example in the Scripture to warrant the
same; but in as much as the Holy Scripture is wholly silent therein, there
being not one Example, or the least Syllable to be found for any such Practice,
we may be sure it is none of Christ's Ordinance.

If our Brethren have any Precedent or Example for it, let them show it, for we
declare and testify, there is none as we know of.

And that there is neither Precept nor Example for Infants Baptism, we have it
confessed by many of them who were for it.

Erasmus says, Union of the Church.
It is no where expressed in the Apostolical Writings, that they baptized
Children. And again, upon Romans 6. Baptizing of young Infants was not, says he,
in use in St. Paul's Time.

Calvin also confesses, 4th Book of Instit. c. 16.
it is no where expressly mentioned by the Evangelists, that any one Child was
baptized by the Hands of the Apostles.

Ludovicus Vives says, De Civit. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 27.
None of old were wont to be baptized but in a grown Age; and who desired it,
and understood what it was.

The Magdeburgenses, Magdeb. in Cent. 1. l. 2. p. 496.
as I find them quoted by Mr. Danvers, do say, that concerning the baptizing of
the Adult, both Jews and Gentiles, we have sufficient Proof from the 2d, 8th,
10th, and 16th Chapters of the Acts; but as to the baptizing of Infants they
can meet with no Example in Scripture.

Dr. Tailor says, Lib. Proph. p. 239.
It is against the perpetual Analogy of Christ's Doctrine to baptize Infants;
for besides that, Christ never gave any Precept to baptize them, nor ever
himself, nor his Apostles (that appears) did baptize any of them: All that
either he or his Apostles said concerning it, requires such previous
Dispositions to Baptism, of which Infants are not capable, and those are Faith
and Repentance. And not to instance in those innumerable places that require
Faith before Baptism there needs no more but this one of our blessed Savior:
He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not,
shall be condemned: plainly thus Faith and Baptism will bring a Man to Heaven;
but if he has no Faith, Baptism shall do him no good: so that if Baptism,
says he, be necessary, so is Faith much more; for the want of Faith damns
absolutely, it is not said so of the want of Baptism.

If Paul declared the whole Counsel of God unto the Churches and Primitive
Christians, Arg. IV.
and yet never declared or made known to them Infants Baptism. Then Infants
Baptism is none of the Counsel of God. But Paul did declare unto the Churches
and Primitive Christians the whole Counsel of God, but never declared any thing
to them of Infants Baptism. Ergo.

The Major Proposition cannot fairly be denied: and as to the Minor, see Acts
20. 27. For I have not shunned, says he, to declare unto you all the Counsel
of God. It appears by the Context, that he concluded he could not be pure from
the Blood of all Men, if he had not been faithful in this matter, i. e. in
making known all the whole Will of God to them. Paul was the great Apostle of
the Gentiles, and he spoke these words to a Gentile Church, viz. the Church at
Ephesus, and therefore it is the more remarkable, God has by his Mouth made
known all things that are necessary for us to know or understand of his
Counsel, or our Duty. See our late Annotators on this Verse.

God's Decree to save all that believe in Christ, Pool's Annotat. on Act. 20.
27.
or the whole Doctrine of Christianity, as it directs to an holy Life;
whatsoever* God requires of any one in order to a blessed Eternity: this is
that which (say they) the Pharisees rejected, Luke 7. 30. and so do all wicked
and ungodly Men, who refuse to take God's Counsel, or to obey his Command. Now
Baptism is that part of God's Counsel which the Pharisees rejected against
themselves. Moreover in Chap. 19. it appears he opened and explained that great
Ordinance to those Christians at Ephesus, at the first Plantation of the Church
there, but not a word of their Duty to baptize their Infants; nor was there any
reason he should, it being none of God's Counsel.

If whatsoever is necessary to Faith or Practice, Arg. V.
is left in the written Word, or made known to us in the Holy Scripture, that
being a complete and perfect Rule, and yet Infant Baptism is not contained or
left therein, then Infant Baptism is not of God. But whatsoever is necessary to
Faith or Practice, is left in the written Word, or made known to us in the Holy
Scripture, etc. and yet Infant Baptism is not contained therein. Ergo,
Infant Baptism is not of God.

That the Holy Scripture contains in it all things that are necessary for us to
believe and practice in order to Eternal Life, is acknowledged by all worthy
Men both Ancient and Modern; and that Infants Baptism is not contained in the
holy Scripture we have proved.

The holy Scriptures, Athanasius against the Gentiles.
says Athanasius, being inspired from God, are sufficient to all Instructions
of Truth.

Isychius says, Isychius lib. 5. 6. 16. on Levit.
Let us which will have any thing observed of God, search no more but that
which the Gospel does give unto us.

All things, Chrysostom. on 2 These. and 2 Timothy 3.
says Chrysostom, be plain and clear in the Scripture; and what things soever
be needful, are manifest there.

If there be any thing needful to be known or not to be known, we shall learn
it by the Holy Scriptures; if we shall need to reprove a Falsehood, we shall
fetch it from thence; if to be corrected, to be chastened, to be exhorted, or
comforted; to be short, if ought lack, that ought to be taught or learned, we
shall also learn it out of the same Scriptures.

Augustine says, Aug. to the Brethren in the Wildern.
Read the Holy Scriptures, wherein ye shall find fully what is to be followed,
and what to be avoided.

And again he says, Lib. 2. of Christian Doctrine, c. 3.
In these therefore, which are evidently contained in the Scriptures, are found
all things which contain Faith, manner of living, Hope and Love.

Let us seek no farther than what is written of God our Savior, In his 198
Epistle to Fortunat.
lest a Man would know more than the Scriptures witness.

Luther says, Luther upon Gal. 1. 9.
there ought no other Doctrine to be delivered, or heard in the Church, besides
the pure Word of God, that is the Holy Scriptures, let other Teachers, and
Hearers, with their Doctrine be accursed.

Basil says, Basil in his Sermon de side.
that it would be an Argument of Insidelity, and a most certain sign of Pride,
if any Man should reject any things written, and should introduce things not
written.

Let this, Calvin. l. 4. Instit. c. 8. Sermon 8.
says Calvin, be a firm Axiom, that nothing is to be accounted the Word and
Will of God to which place should be given in the Church, but that which is
contained in the Law and Prophets, and after in the Apostolical Writings.

It is, Theoph. lib. 2. Paschal.
says Theophilact, the part of a Diabolical Spirit to think any thing Divine,
without the Authority of the Holy Scripture.

Bellarmine says, Bellarm. in his Book de Bapt. l. 1. c. 8.
that though the Arguments of the Anabaptists, from the defect of Command or
Example, have a great force against the Lutherans, for as much as they use that
Rite everywhere, having no Command or Example theirs is to be rejected; yet is
it of no force against Catholics, who conclude the Apostolical Tradition is of
no less Authority with us than the Scripture; for the Apostles speak with the
same Spirit with which they did write; but this of baptizing of Infants is an
Apostolical Tradition, etc.

And lastly, to close with this Argument, take what Mr. Ball says, Mr. Ball in
his Answer to the New England Elders, p. 38, 39.
We must for every Ordinance look to the Institution (says he) and neither
stretch it wider, nor draw it narrower than the Lord has made it; for he is
the Institutor of the Sacraments, according to his own pleasure, and it is our
part to learn of him both to whom, how, and for what end the Sacraments are to
be administered; in all which we must affirm nothing but what God has taught
us, and as he taught us. If this worthy Man speak Truth, as be sure he did, and
his Doctrine be embraced, certainly our Brethren must never sprinkle, nay
baptize, one Child any more.

If no Man or Woman at any time or times were by the Almighty God, Arg. VI.
Jesus Christ, nor his Apostles neither commended for baptizing any one Child
or Children, nor reproved for neglecting to baptize such; then Infants Baptism
is not of, nor from God.

But no Man or Woman was at any time or times either commended by the Almighty
God, etc. for baptizing any one Child or Children, nor reproved for neglecting
to baptize such. Ergo, Infants Baptism is not of, nor from God.

This Argument remains good and unanswerable, unless they can show us that
there is some Gospel-Ordinance and universal Duty enjoined on Men, that no Man
or Woman was ever commended for doing it, nor reproved for neglecting it: when
they can show that, this Argument will be invalid.

That Doctrine that reflects upon the Honor, Arg. VII.
Care and Faithfulness of Jesus Christ our blessed Mediator and glorious
Lawgiver, or renders him less faithful then Moses, and the New Testament in
one of its great Ordinances, nay Sacraments to lie more dark and obscure in
God's Word than any Law or Ordinance of the Old Testament did, cannot be of
God. But the Doctrine of Infants Baptism reflects upon the Honor, Care, and
Faithfulness of Jesus Christ, etc. or renders him less faithful than Moses, and
the New Testament in one of its great Ordinances, nay Sacraments to lie more
dark and obscure in God's Word than any Law or Ordinance of the Old Testament.
Ergo, Infants Baptism cannot be of God. The Major certainly none will deny.

The Minor is easily proved: Can any thing reflect more upon the Honor of
Christ, etc. than this? as if he should neglect to speak out his Mind and Will
to us plainly, or be so careless about it, that sorry Man is forced to try his
Wit to supply what is defective and wanting in this Matter in Christ's Word;
for he is strangely left of God and benighted, who will not confess Infant
Baptism to need much of humane Craft and Cunning to make it out from Christ's
New Testament; and when he has done all, he leaves it as doubtful as he found
it in the Judgment of indifferent Persons. Did Moses deal thus with the
Children of Israel? No, no. How careful was he to deliver every Law, Statute,
and Ordinance exactly, particularly the Law of the Passover! Do but read how
careful and circumspect he was in that, in all respects and matters relating to
it. Nay, and the Wisdom of God was such, to leave nothing then in the dark, but
gave order that all Things might be made plain, that he that run might read it,
and he that did read, might know the Duty, i. e. the Statu^e or Ordinance, (tho
in many things they might need instruction how in a right Spirit to be found in
it, and what it signified.) But I dare affirm, no Man who reads the New
Testament, from the beginning of Matthew to the end of the Revelations, a
thousand times over, shall ever from that Holy Word, or any place or part of
it, find it to be his Duty to baptize his Child; the Word of God is powerful in
convincing Men of their Duties, as well as of their Sins; but in this it fails,
it has no Power to convince Men's Consciences. The Faith of Persons must stand
in the Wit and Subtilty of Men, in respect of Infant Baptism, and not in the
Power of God, and efficacy of his blessed Word. Let some show us the Person,
who only by reading the New Testament was convinced of Infant Baptism; though,
it is true, diverse by reading of the Writings of Learned Men, and their subtle
and sophistical Arguments, (for so I must call them) have been persuaded to
believe it to be of God. -- Yet, after all, some of them have plainly signified
the great Ground and Argument they build upon, is this, viz. Because such and
such Learned, Godly, and Wise Men, assert it to be a Truth of Christ. So that
it appears very clear, they build their Faith herein, not upon the Authority of
God's Word, but upon the Credit and Authority of Men. But certainly it must
needs, as I said, reflect upon the Honor and Faithfulness of Christ, to
conclude Infant Baptism to be of God: for can any think the Lord Jesus would
leave so great an Ordinance, or Sacrament, of the New Testament, so obscure and
dark in his Sacred Word, had it been his Mind that Believers should baptize
their Children, since the Apostle magnifies Christ's Faithfulness, who is the
Son, above that of Moses, who was but the Servant? And Moses verily was
faithful in all his House as a Servant, for a Testimony of those things which
were to be spoken after, Hebr. 3. 5. But Christ as a Son over his own House,
etc. ver. 6. and therefore was counted worthy of more glory than Moses, ver. 3.

Besides, do but consider what Darkness and Confusion the Asserters of
Infant Baptism seem to be in, about the Proof and Right they say Children have
to it.

1. Some of them say, it depends wholly upon the Authority of the Church.

2. Others dare not baptize them, but as Believers and Disciples, and therefore
affirm they have Faith, etc.

3. Others cannot believe this; and therefore though they likewise baptize them
as Believers, yet get Sureties to stand for them.

4. Others say, they have a Right by the Faith of their Parents: some are for
baptizing all Children, others none but the Children of Believers.

5. One says, if either of their Parents are Believers they may be baptized;
some say both Father and Mother, both must be godly Persons and in the Covenant
of Grace, or else the Child has no Right to be baptized. No marvel when Men
have lost their way, they are thus lost in a Wilderness.

That Ordinance God has made no Promise to Persons in their Obedience thereto,
Arg. VIII.
nor denounced any Threatening or Punishment on such who slight, neglect, and
contemn it, it is no Ordinance of God. But God has made no Promise to Persons
who baptize their Children, nor denounced no Threatening or Panishment on those
who slight, neglect and contemn it. Ergo, Infant Baptism is no Ordinance of God.

Let any such who assert Infant Baptism, show us a Promise to the Obedient
herein, or a Threatening denounced against the Disobedient thereto, and we will
say no more. There are Promises made to Believers in their being baptized,
that is evident; and Punishments threatened on such who reject the Counsel of God
in that respect, the like there is in respect of any other Gospel-Ordinance,
but none of this in the Case of Infant Baptism.

CHAP. X. Wherein the great Arguments, and pretended Scripture-Proofs for
Infant Baptism, concerning the Covenant Circumcision, and Infants
Church Membership, are Examined, and Answered.
ONE main and great Argument the Pedobaptists bring for that practice is this,
viz.

Children of Believers are in Covenant, I. Argument from the Covenant made with
Abraham.
as well as their Parents. The Covenant made with Abraham was the Covenant of
Grace, or Gospel Covenant, to which the Seal of Circumcision was annexed; and
as Circumcision belonged to the Children of the Faithful under the Law, so
Baptism belongs to the Children of the Faithful under the Gospel, or else the
Privileges under the Gospel would be less than those were under the Law.

Answ. There has been enough said, over and over, by Mr. Tombs, Mr. Danvers,
and many others, to detect and utterly vanquish the weakness of this Argument.

As, first, it has been proved, that the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham
and his Seed, does not intend his Carnal Seed according to the Flesh; but his
Spiritual Seed, or such who had the Faith of Abraham. And one would think the
Apostle might be believed in his expounding that Text, viz. To Abraham and to
his Seed were the Promises made, Gal. 3. 16. He says not, And to Seeds, as of
many, but as of one, And to they Seed, which is Christ. Compare this with v.
29. If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and Heirs. according to the
Promise And again, in Romans 9. 7, 8. he says, Neither because they are the Seed
of Abraham, are they all Children; but in Isaac shall thy Seed be called. That
is, they which are the Children of the Flesh, these are not the Children of
God: but the Children of the Promise are counted for the Seed.

Could the Apostle in plainer words have detected the Error of these Men, if he
had met with them in his day? It Is true, he did meet with some, viz. the Jews,
or Abraham's natural Seed, who were so blind as thus to argue from the Covenant
made with Abraham; and concluded, they were the true Seed and Children of God,
because they were the Offspring of Abraham according to the Flesh. But as John
Baptist first endeavored to undeceive them, when he saw the Scribes and
Pharisees coming to his Baptism -- by saying, Mat. 3. 7, 8, 9.
Think not to say with in your selves, ye have Abraham to your Father, etc. So
in the next place, our Blessed Savior himself, in John. 8. likewise showed
them their great Error and Mistake herein, and that they might be the Children
of the Devil, notwithstanding they were the Seed of Abraham according to the
Flesh, and thought themselves safe as being in that Covenant made with him.

The Covenant of Grace there made with Abraham and his Seed, extends to none
but the Holy and Elect Seed, to none but the Spiritual Seed, to such who are
Christ's, or true Believers in Christ only. Now if the Covenant of Grace
comprehends none of Abraham's carnal or fleshly Seed, but the spiritual Seed
only, to what purpose is there so many Sheers of Paper printed by Mr. Baxter,
Mr. Sidenham, etc. to prove the carnal Seed of Believers to have right to the
Seal of the Covenant? Their Business is to prove all Believers Children to be
in the Covenant in the first place, or all they say is nothing.

But, Secondly, if they could prove all the Children of Believers to be in that
Covenant made with Abraham, yet it does not from thence follow neither, that
therefore their Children may be baptized, unless they can show the Lord Jesus
has injoined them so to be, because Baptism wholly depends upon the Authority
of Christ's Institution, or positive Prescription. It Is not enough for any to
say, if Children are in Covenant, they may be baptized. Who tells them so? Has
Christ any where required it? does he say they ought, or that it belongs to
them? Had it been Abraham's Duty to circumcise his Children, because they were
in Covenant with him, before God gave him a positive Law so to do; certainly,
had he done it without any Command of God, and have called it God's Ordinance,
he had ceased being called any more Faithful Abraham. Come, Sirs, your
Consequences and Conclusions you have so long made a noise of, will make no
Gospel-Precept, nor hold equal weight with the Balance of the Sanctuary.

For, thirdly, pray consider, Were there not diverse in the Covenant of Grace,
i. e. in that Spiritual, or Gospel Covenant God made with Abraham, in that very
day and time that the Law of Circumcision was given forth? and yet they were
not, from that Ground, to be circumcised, nor were they at all circumcised,
because God did not command them so to be? Was not Lot a Godly Man, and in the
same Covenant of Grace? together with Melchisedec and others I might mention?
These were in Covenant, and yet without the Seal, as you call it; we do not
read they were circumcised. And do you not think that many of the Females of
Abraham's offspring were in that Covenant of Grace? yet they had no right to
Circumcision, the Seal (as you called it) of the Covenant, because none but
Males were required or commanded to be circumcised. Suppose Abraham should have
gone without a Command or Word from God, and have Circumcised his Females, and
have reasoned after the rate you do, viz.

My Female children are in Covenant; and since the Covenant belongs to them,
the Seal of the Covenant belongs to them, which is, Circumcision, therefore I
will circumcise them also; would God have allowed him to do any such Act, think
you? You will reply, I am sure that God would never have born with Abraham in
doing any such thing, because he must have done it without a Command.

And, pray, how can you think he will bear with you in Baptizing Children of
Believers, since you have no more Command from God so to do, than Abraham had to
Circumcise his Female Children?

You reply, They are in Covenant, and therefore to them belongs the Seal of the
Covenant; even so say we, his Females might be in the same Covenant, and yet
you would have condemned such an Act in him, though grounded upon the very same
foot of an Account, which you stand upon your own Justification in, and
acknowledge no Fault, but contrariwise blame, nay, reproach us for holding an
Error, because we cannot do and practice as you do in this case, without any
Authority from God's Word.

4ly. To prove further, that the Right of Circumcision wholly depended upon the
absolute Will, Pleasure, and Sovereignty of God, as Baptism now does; and that
his Will, and not ours, nor any Consequence that may be drawn from being in the
Covenant, can give a Person a right thereto, without his Command or allowance;
it is to be considered, that there were those commanded to be Circumcised, who
were not (as there is probable ground to believe) in that holy and blessed
Covenant of Grace, God said his Covenant should not be established with
Ishmael, but with Isaac, yet he was Circumcised, Genesis 17. 20, 21, 25. Gal. 4.
29, 30. The same might be said of Esau, and thousands more of Abraham's Carnal
Seed: It was, it appears from hence, God's Sovereign Will and Pleasure that
gave right to Circumcision, and not being in the Covenant.

Quest. But was not Circumcision a Seal of the Covenant of Grace under that
Dispensation, as Baptism is now a Seal of the same Covenant under this
Dispensation?

Answ. No, for Circumcision was only a Seal to Abraham's Faith, or a
Confirmation of that Faith he had long before he was Circumcised; but so it
could not be said to be to any Infant that had no Faith. It was indeed a Sign
put into the Flesh of Infants; but a Sign, and Seal too only to Abraham,
witnessing to him that he had a Justifying Faith; but to the Truth of the
Promises, there was it is evident, a twofold Covenant made with Abraham, 1.
That he should be the Father of many Nations, and that the Land in which he was
a Stranger should be given to his Seed; these Promises seem to relate to his
Carnal Seed.

2. That he should be the Father of the Faithful, Romans 4. 11. Heir of the
World, Romans 4. 13. and that in him, and in his Seed all the Families of the
Earth should be blessed, that is, Jesus Christ, Gal. 3. 16. Now none could
receive Circumcision as such a Seal to them, but Abraham, because none before
circumcised had such a Faith, which entitled them to such singular Promises:
The Apostle in the fourth of the Ro^ans shows, that Abraham was not justified
by Works, nor by Circumcision, but by Faith, which he had long before he was
circumcised; and so but a Seal or Confirmation of that Faith he had before, and
to assure him of the Truth of the Promises made to him and to his Carnal and
Spiritual Seed.

You ought not therefore to call Circumcision a Seal to any but to Abraham,
neither ought you to call it a Seal of any other thing to him than what the
Scripture calls it a Seal of, viz. And he received Circumcision a Seal of the
Righteousness of the Faith which he had being yet uncircumcised, Romans 4. 11.

And that you may see we are not alone in this matter, Chrysostom. Theophilact.
Page 117.
see what Chrysostom and Theophilact, as I find them quoted by Mr. Danvers; It
was called a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, because it was given to
Abraham as a Seal and Testimony of that Righteousness which he had acquired by
Faith. Now this seems to be the Privilege of Abraham's alone, and not to be
tranferred to others; as if Circumcision in whom ever it was were a Testimony
of Divine Righteousness; for it was the Privilege of Abraham that he should be
the Father of all the Faithful, as well uncircumcised as circumcised, being
already the Father, having Faith in Uncircumcision, he received first the sign
of Circumcision, that he might be the Father of the Circumcised. Now because he
had this Privilege, in respect of the Righteousness which he had acquired by
Faith, therefore the sign of Circumcision was to him a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith; but to the rest of the Jews it was a sign that they
were Abraham's Seed, but not a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, as all the
Jews also were not the Fathers of many Nations.

Moreover, it is evident a Seal is a Confirmation of that which a Person has
made over to him, and it does insure him of it. Now to call Circumcision a Seal
of the Covenant of Grace, it is all one as to say all that were circumcised,
were assured of all the Blessings of that Covenant, then must all that were
circumcised be pardoned and saved; and so also would it follow in the case of
Baptism, were that acknowledged to be a Seal to all those that are baptized of
the new Covenant. But in a word, we know nothing called a Seal of the New
Covenant, but the holy Spirit, which the Saints were said to be sealed with
after they believed, Ephesians. 1. 13. and 4. 30. unto the day of Redemption; God
by setting his Seal upon us assures us that we are his, and that we shall have
Eternal Life.

Baptism is called a Figure, but no where a Seal and a Sign or Figure proper
only to such who have Understanding to discern the Spiritual things and
Mysteries that are represented thereby, and wrought in them.

Object. Say what what you will, the Promise and Covenant of Grace was to
Abraham and his natural Offspring.

Answ. Why do you not believe the Apostle who tells you the quite contrary, and
that he said not of Seeds as of many, but to thy Seed, which is Christ?

But it you will have it as you say, see what absurd Consequences will follow
and arise from your Notion: And first take what Calvin says, Calvin on Genesis
17. 7.
It Is manifest, says he, that the Promise understood of Spiritual Blessings
pertains not to the Carnal Seed of Abraham, but to the Spiritual, as the
Apostle himself says, Romans 4. 8, 9. for if you understand the Carnal Seed,
says he, then that Promise will belong to none of the Gentiles, but to those
alone who are begotten of Abraham and Isaac according to the Flesh; Estius.
Anno Genesis 17. 7.
by this it appears you go about to shut out your selves and Children too from
having any part in that Covenant made with Abraham.

Secondly, If God made the Covenant of Grace with Abraham and his Carnal or
Fleshly Offspring, and so with all Believers and their Children, then all
their Offspring must have saving Grace bestowed upon them and a new Heart,
because these things are some of the chief Blessings contained in the new
Covenant.

Now do you see that all the Children of Believers have the Grace of God
bestowed upon them, so that they are new Creatures? certainly no, for as
Abraham had his Ishmael, and Isaac his Esa^, and David his Absalom, so have
most or many Believers wicked and ungodly Children, and so they live and die to
the great Grief of their Souls: You cannot think that God fails in his Promise,
and that the Covenant of Grace is not so firm and sure as the Scripture
declares it to be, one of them will follow, or you must conclude your selves
mistaken in your Notion: But certainly they cannot miss of Grace if Mr. Blake
is right; Agr. Blake, p. 6.
for, says he, Christianity is hereditary; that as the Children of a Nobleman
are Noble, the Child of a Freeman free, of a Turk a Turk, and of a Jew; a Jew
so If he had said, Those who are born of the Spirit are spiritual, he had spoke
Truth.
the Child of a Christian is a Christian. We will grant him they are so called,
but withal must tell him, the Children of Christian People are by Nature the
Children of Wrath as well as others.

Fourthly, This would render Grace to be a Birth-Priviledg, as Mr. Danvers
observes, and Regeneration tied to Generation, contrary to the Scripture and
all good Doctrine; as if a Believer does not only beget a Child in natural
Generation, but a Saint also.

Fifthly, Then the Apostle spoke not true in saving the Children of the Flesh,
these are not the Children of God, i. e. of the Promise, Romans 9.

Sixthly, And it also would follow, that all the whole Offspring of Believers
shall be saved, without you will assert the Doctrine of James Arminius, that
there is a falling away from Grace.

Seventhly, And would it not follow also, that all the Children of Believers
know God, and need not be taught, Jer. 31. 34.
saying, Know the Lord, for (you know who says) they shall all know me, from
the least of them to the greatest of them; that is, all those who are in the
New Covenant, which you say all Believers Children are, even in the same
Covenant of Grace made with Abraham.

Eighthly, And then it follows also that the Covenant of Grace and Spiritual
Blessings made with Abraham, is tied up to Believers and their Seed only; and
if so, what will become of all poor Unbelievers and their perishing Offspring?

Object. But does not Baptism come in the room of Circumcision, the one being a
Figure of the other?

Answ. There is no ground so to believe, since the Scripture gives not the
least hint of any such thing.

1. For first, if it had, then when Baptism came in and was in force,
Circumcision must have ceased immediately: but after Baptism was commanded and
administered, we find Circumcision in being, and was not disannulled till the
Death and Resurrection of our Savior. Now it would have vanquished, as Shadows
do, as soon as Baptism the Antitype came in force, had it been a Type or Figure
of Baptism, or come in the room of it.

2. If Baptism had come in the room of Circumcision, then the Church of God
under the Gospel would have been just like the National Church of the Jews,
viz. made up of the Fleshly Seed; 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5, 6, 7.
but the Apostle shows the contrary, it consists of lively Stones, that is, a
spiritual and not a carnal Seed.

3. Then Males only and no Females would have been baptized; because none but
Male Children were to be circumcised, as God commanded.

4. Circumcision was administered on Abraham's natural Seed without any
Profession of Faith; but none are to be admitted to Baptism but by a Profession
of Faith, Repentance and Regeneration.

The first Birth, or being born in a fleshly way by Carnal Generation, gave
Abraham's natural Seed a Right to Circumcision; whereas the Spiritual Birth or
Regeneration gives a Right only to Baptism according to Christ's Commission, as
we have proved.

5. It Is evident Circumcision figured forth another thing, viz. the Destruction
of the Body of Sin by Jesus Christ, and the Circumcision of the Heart, and
therefore not Baptism, etc.

Very full and most excellently you have to this Point Dr. Tailor, Dr. Tailor
Bishop of Down, p. 228.
who says, That the Argument from Circumcision is invalid upon infinite
Considerations: Figures and Types prove nothing, unless a Command go along with
them, or some Express to signify such to be their purpose; for the Deluge of
Waters, and the Ark of Noah were a Figure of Baptism, said Peter; and if
therefore the Circumstances of the one should be drawn to the other, we should
make Baptism a Prodigy rather than a Rite. The Paschal Lamb was a Type of the
Eucharist, which succeeds the other, as Baptism does to Circumcision; but
because there was in the Manducation of the Paschal Lamb, no Prescription of
Sacramental Drink, shall we thence conclude that the Eucharist is to be
administered but in one kind? And even in the very instance of this Argument,
supposing a Correspondency of the Analogy between Circumcision and Baptism, yet
there is no Correspondency of Identity; for although it were granted, that both
of them did consign the Covenant of Faith, yet there is nothing in the
Circumstance of Childrens being circumcised that so concerns that Mystery, but
that it might very well be given to Children, and yet Baptism only to Men of
Reason, because Circumcision lest a Character in the Flesh, which being
imprinted upon Infants did its work to them when they came to Age; and such a
Character was necessary, because there was no word added to the Sign; but
Baptism imprints nothing that remains on the Body, and if it leaves a Character
at all, it is upon the Soul, to which also the Word is added, which is as much
a part of the Sacrament, as the Sign it self: for both which Reasons it is
requisite that the Parties baptized should be capable of Reason, that they may
be capable both of the word of the Sacrament, and the impress made upon the
Spirit; since therefore the Reason of this Parity does wholly fail, there is
nothing left to infer a necessity of complying in this Circumstance of Age any
more than in the other Annxes of the Type; then the Infant must also precisely
be baptized upon the eighth day, and Females must not be baptized, because not
circumcised: but it were more proper if we would understand it right to
prosecute the Analogy, form the Type to the Antitype by way of Letter, and
Spirit, and Signification. And as Circumcision figures Baptism, so also the
Adjuncts of the Circumcision, shall signify something spiritual in the
Adherences of Baptism; and therefore as Infants were circumcised, so spiritual
Infants shall be baptized, which is spiritual Circumcision; for therefore Babes
had the Ministry of the Type, to signify that we must, when we give our Names
to Christ, become Children in Malice, and then the Type is made complete, etc.
Thus far the Doctor.

Quest. But why may ^ot Infants be baptized now as well as Children were
circumcised heretofore?

Answ. Levit, 10, 1, 2.
You may as well ask, why Nadab and Abihu might not have offered strange Fire,
or why might not the Priest? carry the Ark in a Cart. -- The Reason why they
ought to do neither of those things were, because God commanded them not so to
do. In like manner, say we, Children must not be baptized, because God has
given no Command to do it. Circumcision was expressly commanded, both as to the
Subject, Time, Age and Sex, which was as you have heard, the Male Children at
eight days old, Genesis 17. 10, 12, 14.
with a severe Penalty of the Parents Disobedience.

But there is not one hint, or the least color of ground for the baptizing of
Infants in all the New Testament, as has been proved; and yet the Gospel is,
as one observes, as express in the matter of Baptism, as first, touching the
Subject Men and Woman: Secondly, As to the Time, viz. when they believe:
Thirdly, As to the Qualifications of Baptism, i. e. Faith and Repentance:
Fourthly, As to the end and use of it, to signify the Death, Burial, and
Resurrection of Christ, with our Death unto Sin, and rising again to newness of
Life. Can any think the Servant should be so careful to give Directions from
God in every case about the circumcising of Children under the Law, and the Son
of God not to be as express in all parts of instituted Worship and our Duties
under the Gospel? This cannot be thought; see what the Apostle says, which we
before hinted, Heb. 3. 5, 6.

Quest. But Children were Members of the Jewish Church as well as Adult
Persons, Mr. Smythies Unworthy Communicant, p. 88.
since Mr. Smythies, and so say other Pedo-Bap^isto, as (...) Ba^ter, and many
more; and since they were comprehended with their Parents in that Church State
(...) are so still* under the Gospel, and therefore to (...).

Answ. That Children were then admitted Members of the Jewish Church is
granted, and it is as evident that God has now quite pulled down that House of
his, (I mean that National Church State) and broke up Housekeeping, and turned
the Bondwoman and her Son, ( i. e. the Fleshly Seed, Servants and Infants) all
out of doors; the natural Branches are broken off, and God has now built him a
new, a glorious, and more spiritual House, into which he admits none as his
Houshold-Servants to dwell in his Spiritual Family, but Believers only, or such
as profess so to be: 1 Pet. 2. 5*
Ye also (says Peter) as lively Stones, are built up a Spiritual House, etc.
and that the old House, the Jewish Church State, with all the Appurtenances,
Rites, and Privileges of it, is pulled down, and a new one built, into which
Infants are not to be admitted, is very evident from what the Apostle speaks,
Heb. 7. 12. For the Priesthood being changed; there is made of necessary a
Change also of the whole Law, which must needs include Circumcision with all
the Appurtenances and Privileges belonging to it. And therefore as Infants
Church Membership came in with the Law of Circumcision, so it went out and was
disanull'd with it; they were, it is true, of the Household of old, but it was by
a positive Law: Show us the like now and you do your business, or else you say
nothing; For evident it is that what Privileges soever are given to any
Persons by an Act of Parliament, which said Law was to continue in force for so
long a time and no longer, when that time is expired and another Parliament
makes a new Law, wherein many things are contained that were in the first, but
those certain Privileges given to those Persons in the former Law, are left
out in this latter Act, it would (...) be a solly for any of them to (...)
those Privileges by virtue of a Law that is gone, and now not in force. Or if
a Man should have a Legacy bequeathed to him by the Will and Testament of his
Friend, and yet afterward his Friend sees cause to make another Will, which is
his last Will and Testament, and in the last Will leaves him quite out and
gives him no such Legacy, it would be a foolish thing for him to sue for the
Legacy left him in the first Will, which is void in Law by his Friends last
Will and Testament. Just so it is here; there was an old Law wherein Infants
were admitted to the Privileges of being Members of the National Church of the
Jews, and so also it was in the old or former Will and Testament; but that Law
was to continue but till Christ came, and now he has made a new Law wherein
Infant-Church-membership is quite left out, and the Lord Jesus has made another
Will, his last Will and Testament, wherein the old Privilege is not be queathed
to Infants: Now is it not folly in you to plead for that old Privilege that was
in the former Testament? you must find your Infant-Church-membership in the New
Testament, as must also the Seventh-day-Sabbath-Men the old Jewish Sabbath For
tho a time for the Worship of God is moral, yet the seventh day of the Week was
a mere positive Law, given only to the People of Israel.
, or else they and you too say nothing, but render your selves weak and
strangely be-clouded: and certain I am, there is now no Institution, no Law, no
Prescription, no Rule, no Example for keeping the Seventh-day Sabbath in the
new Law, in the new and last Will and Testament of Jesus Christ; nor no
Institution, no Law, no Precept, no Example contained therein for
Infant-Church-membership, no not the least hint or intimation that Infants
should be fellow-Citizins with the Saints, and of the Household, of God, neither
are they so to be accounted till they believe, and are to do Service in the
House: for though we account our Children of our Family notwithstanding they
cannot do any Service therein, yet that is no Argument they may be Members of
God's Church, unless by any Law or Institution God has made them so to be. The
Household of God is called the Household of Faith, or a Family that consists of
Believers; therefore unless you can prove Infants to be Believers, they are not
of this House; for all that are to have admission there must be Believers, or
profess themselves so to be, Baxter on Confirmation.
as Mr. Baxter acknowledges, or else no place for them there, which Infants
cannot do.

Object. But it is still objected, that as the Jews and their Children were
broken off, so the Gentiles and their Children are ingrafted in their room, as
Romans 11. 20. because of Unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand by
Faith, etc.

Answ. We answer, that the Reason why the Jews and their Children were broken
off, was not because they had not believing Parents, for Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob were still the Parents of them all, they were Abraham's Seed, according
to the Flesh, when they were broken off as well as before; but the true reason
was, because the terms of standing in the Church were now altered: For before
the Gospel Dispensation came, they stood Members of the old Jewish Church,
though as much unbelieving for many Generations, as they were when they were
broken off; but now Abraham's Church State is at an end, and all the
Privileges and Immunities cease, the Jewish Church must give way to the
Gospel Church, the Messiah being come, and about to build him up a new and more
glorious and spiritual House, into which none are of right to enter but such as
are professed Believers; for the old House or Jewish Church State was not
intended to abide for ever, but only until the time of Reformation, and then
the Law must be changed, yea the Covenant changed, which they not believing,
nor closing in with, were broken off, they being willing to abide in the old
House still, and to remain Church Members upon the account of a mere fleshly
and natural Birth, crying out, Abraham is our Father, Romans 8.
and we are his Seed, and are free, and never were in Bondage, wherefore they
were broken off, and that whether they would or not, by reason of their
Unbelief; that is, because they would not believe Christ was the true Messiah,
and that the old Covenant and all the Privileges thereof were flying away, the
Substance and true Antitype of all those Shadows being come, viz. the Lord
Jesus Christ.

So that thus they were broken off by Unbelief, and thou and thine, O Gentile
Believer, stand by Faith, mark it, thou stand by Faith; not by virtue of any
Birth-Priviledg whatsoever, but by Faith, thy standing is by Faith; yet not thy
Seed by thy Faith, but thou thy self by thine, and they by their own; Faith is
that by which (thou standing and not thy Seed) have right to stand in the
Church, and not they; but if thy Seed have Faith, and thou have none, they have
right in the Church, and thou shall be excluded.

Most certain it is, that under the Law the natural Seed or Progeny of Abraham,
were all holy with an External, Ceremonial, or Typical Holiness, and
consequently they were then all admitted to an external Participation of
Church Priviledges. But remarkable to this purpose is that Passage of the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 16. Wherefore henceforth know we no Man after the Flesh; it
seems then, that heretofore there had been a knowledge taken of Persons after
the Flesh; and it is as plain there was, that becuase the Jews were of the
natural or fleshly Seed of Abraham, they were therefore all of them admitted to
the Privilege of an external Church Membership, while others were exempted. But
we see the Apostle resolves henceforth to disclaim any such cognizance of them,
or any others upon the account of a mere fleshly Descent: And to this very
purpose immediately subjoyns in the following Verse, Therefore if any Man be in
Christ, he is a new Creature: old things are past away, all things are become
new; the old Church, and old Church Membership, Rites, Ordinances and
Privileges, and a new Church State, new Ordinances, a new Seed, and new way of
Introduction unto the Participation of the Privilege of Church Membership now
under this new and more glorious Dispensation, viz. the Gospel: Nothing but a
new Creature will serve the turn; for God expects that they that worship him,
do now worship him in Spirit and is Truth; the Privilege of being admitted into
God's House, and to stand before his Presence in the actual Celebration of
Gospel Ordinances, being now entailed only upon the Spiritual Seed, even such
who as lively Stones are built up a spiritual House, a holy Priesthood to offer
up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ; 1 Pet. 2. 3, 4, 5.
or such at least as make a visible Profession thereof.

And therefore, when this new and more spiritual Dispensation was about to be
actually introduced and established, John who was the Harbinger of it gives
sufficient notice thereof; and to this purpose deals plainly with the Jews, i.
e. the Pharisees and Sadduces that came to be baptized of him, and tells them
upon this account, Mat. 3. 9, 10. Think not to say within your selves, We have
Abraham to our Father: For I say unto you, that God is able of these Stones to
raise up Children to Abraham. And now also is the Ax laid unto the root of the
Trees: Therefore every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down,
and cast into the Fire. It cannot be denied but that they had Abraham to their
Father as much now as before, only the terms of their standing in that Church
was now changed; so that every Tree now of whatsoever natural Stock or external
Production, that brings not forth good Fruit, must be hewn down; and the
reason is rendered for that, Now the Ax is laid to the root of the Trees, mark
it, now it is so; it was not so before, the Ax was never till now laid thus unto
the root of the Trees: which must needs be understood in reference to that
Birth and Fleshly Privilege spoken of before, which they had so long boasted
of, as the whole Context shows. But now God is resolved to make other manner of
work of it under the Gospel Dispensation than he did before. Now the root of
the Trees are struck at, a Bar put, natural Descent or Extraction from a
Religious Root, ( i.e. Godly Parents) will not now serve turn, as in time past
it did, to give any true Right or Title to Church Priviledges. Moreover, if God
now will not suffer any of the natural Branches to abide on their own natural
Stock, viz. Abraham, be sure he will not admit any Gentiles, that are not
natural Branches of Abraham, to be grafted into the good Olive, without Faith
and Regeneration.

Object. But if Children may not be baptized, this makes the Privilege of
Believers Children under the Gospel less than was theirs under the Law; for
their Children were admitted Members of the visible Church by Circumcision; and
we cannot but conclude, that our Privileges for our selves and for our
Children, are at least as large, great and comfortable as theirs, and therefore
our Infants are to be baptized.

Answ. To this we reply, that we do not doubt but that our Privileges, in
respect of the Covenant of Grace, and all Spiritual Blessings are as great and
comfortable as theirs were; but the Covenant of Grace, the Blessings and Divine
Privileges thereof, were neither made to the Jews natural Posterity, nor to
ours; and although Circumcision was a Privilege in some respect to the Jews
above what the Heathens had, Act. 15. 10.
yet it is termed by the Apostle an intolerable Yoke; Now therefore why tempt
ye God to put a Yoke upon the Necks of the Disciples, which neither our Fathers
nor we were able to bear? Their Children were not circumcised as Children of
Believers, and so sealed with a new Covenant-Seal, as being made new
Covenant-Children thereby; Circumcision did not confer Grace, nor make them
Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, it was therefore no more than an external
Privilege to the natural Lineage and Seed of Abraham, as a typical and shadowy
thing, whereby his Posterity was to be marked, to distinguish them from all the
Nations of the Earth, and to keep that Line clear, from whence Christ according
to the Flesh was to come, and to be a Sign in their Flesh to put them in mind
that God would perform the Promise of the Messiah made to Abraham, and also to
oblige them to keep the Law; for he that was circumcised was a Debtor to keep
the whole Law.

Hence it was the Jewish Christians, instead of looking upon Circumcision to be
a Privilege upon a spiritual account, could not but acknowledge it a great Mercy
they were delivered from it; and hence it is the Apostle exhorts the Saints to
stand fast in that Liberty in which Christ had made them free, Gal. 5. 1, 2, 3,
4.
and not be entangled again in the Yoke of Bondage.

Neither ought such a thing (as Mr. Danvers observes) to be any more esteemed
the loss of a Privilege than our not enjoying literally a Holy Land, City,
Temple, a Succession of Highpriests, and Priesthood, by Generation or Lineal
Descent. (For you know their Children were Priests successively in their
Generations, a Levite begat a Priest or Minister, as well as they and other
Tribes begat Church Members.)

Now though all these outward Privileges are gone, yet our Privileges being
more spiritual, are greater both to our selves and Offspring; they looked for
Christ to come as held forth under many dark Types and Shadows, we are assured
he is come and has accomplished what was foretold of him, We behold in the
Glass of the Gospel as with open face the Glory of the Lord; 2 Cor. 3. 18.
all those Types are explained and spiritualized to us, viz. Circumcision, the
Worldly Sanctuary, Tabernacle, the Candlestick, Table, Shewbread, Cherubims,
Mercy-seat, etc. which things and many more were Figures for the time then
present, and were Shadows of good things to come, but the Body or Substance of
them is Christ, who has put an end to them, and must we now needs find out
some other carnal or external Rites to come in the room or stead of these or
some of these, or else think our Privileges are less than theirs? whereas
indeed our Privileges it appears are enlarged, and far greater than theirs
were, and hence they longed many of them to see those things that we see, etc.
Instead of being a fleshly Nation we are a holy (...), a holy City, a spiritual
and holy Temple, a Royal Priesthood, and holy (not carnal) Church Members;
Church Members by Regeneration not by Generation, not by the first Birth, but
by the new and second Birth; if we and our Children have not the same
Privileges don't let us complain, whereas God has been more rich and
bountiful to us, we and our Children sit under the clear and glorious
Revelation and Ministration of the Gospel, can we or ours be losers by this
Change? Alas! as far as Christ excels Moses and Aaron, the Gospel the Law, the
Antitype the Type, the spiritual Birth the carnal, the extent of all Nations
the Confines of Judea; so far, says one are we better and not worse, and our
Privileges not lesser but far greater; our Children have great advantages in
having such Parents and Ministers to instruct them, to pray for them, and to
set before them a good Example; besides, as soon as capable, they with others
have the Gospel preached clearly to them, and Grace offered and tendered
universally to all far and near, with Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to
the Waters, etc. Isa. 55. 1. The Spirit also is in a glorious manner
communicated, to enable them and others to believe now in the Gospel-days. The
Law was hard, Do this, and live; and Circumcision laid them under a Bond to do
and keep all that God in his Law required, yea and under a Curse if they
continued not in all things that were there enjoined, which brought them into
miserable Bondage and Captivity; but now it is but to believe, and thou shall be
saved: the Spirit says, the Scripture was not yet given -- to wit, in that
manner nor measure as afterward, Joh. 7. 39.
because Christ was not yet glorified.

So that it is no Absurdity to grant that the Jews might have Privileges in
some things more than we; and yet our Case and Condition with our Children, to
speak simply, better than theirs, tho the Covenant of Grace is not enlarged nor
lessened in respect of the substance of it; the Promises of Grace are still
belonging to the Elect, to those that were given to Christ, to Believers, and
to no other, nor never were; but the Privileges we have above them do
abundantly recompense the defect of those Privileges of theirs, whether real
or supposed: And the truth is, Privileges are so arbitrary and various,
depending so much upon the Sovereignty of God, that he gives them as he thinks
good, and oft-times takes them away without assigning any special Reason of it;
so that no Arguments can be drawn safely, as our Brethren do, viz. God gave
such a Privilege to the Jews, therefore we must have such a Privilege too,
except we can prove it is God's Will it should be so. This Argument therefore
is of no force, without an Institution, here we are again, and here we will
stand; Circumcision wholly depended upon a positive Law; it is in vain therefore
to attempt to prove, that because the Jews had a Privilege to circumcise their
Children, therefore we must have a Privilege to baptize our Infants, since they
had a Command to do what they did, and we have none; besides, we have showed
there is no Scripture that proves the Baptism of Infants is a Privilege granted
by the Lord in lieu of Circumcision, it being indeed no Duty or Privilege at
all.

Lastly, before I close with this, take what Mr. Danvers says, Danvers on Bapt.
p. 180.
If it should be taken (says he) for granted, that Circumcision was a Seal of
the New Covenant belonging to all the Children of Israel; then would not the
baptizing of the Children of Believers answer it, neither amount to so great a
Privilege, nor be equivalent to it for these Reasons:

1st, There were all the Families and Tribes of Israel (and all proselyted
Strangers) with their Children, without distinction of good or bad, to be
circumcisied: But here only one of a City, and two of a Tribe; for Believers
are but thin sown, and the Children of Unbelievers and wicked Men are to
receive no such benefit in the Judgment of many.

And, Besides, they are at a loss to know what to do if the Father only, or the
Mother only is a Believer.
2dly, You would be very short in another respect, as being at an utter
uncertainty when you have a right Subject; for if the Parent is an Hypocrite,
or no elect Person, which is out of your reach to understand, you cannot know
whether the Child be fit for Baptism; for the Seed of a wicked Man you must not
meddle with by any means; whereas there was not the least doubt or scruple in
Israel as to the Subject, for the Father being one of Abraham's Seed and
circumcised, it was an infallible mark they were right.

And, 3dly, neither can the Child when he is grown up have any certain knowledge
that such a Ceremony had past upon him in Infancy, he having no infallible mark
thereof; whereas the circumcised Infant had an infallible Character and Mark in
his Flesh, to assure him that he had received that Rite.

Object. But what hope can we have of our Infants if they must not be admitted
unto Christian Baptism, nor reputed as Members of the common Body and Church of
the Faithful?

Answ. We answer; First, if the hope of the Parent for the Child's Salvation be
grounded upon the Administration of an external Rite or Ordinance in Infancy,
then neither had the Patriarchs for above two thousand Years any hope of their
Children, since they had neither Circumcision, Baptism, nor any other External
Rite, which we find otherwise by Noah's Prophecy, Genesis 9. 26, 27.

Secondly, We ask, whether God has left it in the Power of the Parent to save
or destroy the Soul of his Child, which your Doctrine does import?

Thirdly, We demand what hopes are intended, and by what Scriptures the same
are annexed to the Administration of an Ordinance in Infancy?

Fourthly, We do say there is a ground of hope in Believers in behalf of their
Children, which is grounded upon plain Scripture without baptizing them.

Fifthly, Does Baptism confer Grace or regenerate the Child? Though some have
ignorantly asserted that, yet we find many of you of another mind.

Sixthly, This Argument seems to carry in it this Conclusion, i. e. That
Christian People by Infants Baptism are assured according to Gospel-grounds of
the Salvation of their Children: But there is no Proof for it, it is but a
Fancy, and we suppose it is not received as a Truth by many that oppose us in
this Point.

CHAP. XI. Wherein many other pretended Scripture-Poofs and Arguments for the
baptizing of Infants are answered, as that, Suffer little Children to come unto
me, etc. and, Except a Man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot see
the Kingdom of God, etc.
THE next main Proof that is brought for Infant Baptism, is taken from Mat. 19.
14. Suffer little Children, and forbid them not to come unto me: for of such is
the Kingdom of Heaven.

Object. Christ blessed little Children, it is not said he baptized them: Nay,
it is said he baptized not any with his own hands, Joh. 4. 1, 2. therefore no
Infants.
The Kingdom of Heaven belongs to Infants, which is the greater; therefore, say
you, Baptism belongs to them also, which is the lesser.

Answ. 1. That the Kingdom of Heaven belongs to little Children we have no
cause to doubt: But that they have a right to Baptism therefore, is denied; May
not our Brethren infer from the greater to the lesser thus as well, viz.
Infants belong to the Kingdom of Heaven, which is the greater; thererefore to
them belongs the Lord's Supper, which is the lesser: and sure we are, that
those who are fit Subjects of Baptism ought not to be denied the Sacrament of
Bread and Wine. How often must we tell you that Baptism wholly depends, as to
Subject, Time, End, and manner of Administration, on the words of Institution?
it is a positive Law, we must go to the Pleasure, and Will, and Design of the
Lawmakers: what may not Men infer after this sort?

2. Were these little Children be ye sure the Children of Believers? If you
cannot prove this, what signifies all you say? and how this can be made appear I
see not; for though Christ was then in the Coast of Judea, yet that they were
Children of Godly Parents is a great Question.

3. If it should be granted they were Believers Children, yet it does not
appear how little these Children were, we have no account of their Age. And as
the Learned observe, the Greek work does not always signify a little Child or
Infant, as appears by 2 Timothy 3. 15. where the same word is used, they might be
such who might be capable of teaching as far as we know.

But since Dr. Jer. Tailor, Dr. Tailor, p. 230.
Bishop of Down, has so fully answered this Objection, pray take what he says
upon the place.

From the Action of Christ's blessing Infants, says he, to infer that they
were baptized, proves nothing so much, as there is a want of better Arguments:
for the Conclusion would with more probability be derived thus, i. e. Christ
blessed Children and so dismissed them, but baptized them not, therefore
Infants are not to be baptized. But let this be as weak as its Enemy, yet that
Christ did not baptize them, is an Argument sufficient, that he has other ways
of bringing them to Heaven than by Baptism; he passed an Act of Grace upon them
by Benediction and Imposition of Hands. And therefore although neither Infants,
nor any Man, in p^ris naturalibus, can attain to a Supernatural End without the
addition of some Instrument, or Means of God's appointing, ordinarily and
regularly; yet where God has not appointed a Rule nor an Order, as in the case
of Infants we contend he has not, the Argument is invalid.

And as we are sure God has not commanded Infants to be baptized; so we are
sure God will do them no Injustice, nor damn them for what they cannot help,
viz. if the Parents baptize them not.

Many thousand ways there are, by which God can bring any reasonable Soul to
him; but nothing is more unreasonable than because he has tied all Men of
Years and Discretion to this way, therefore we of our own Heads shall carry
Infants to him that way, without his directions: the Conceit is poor and low,
and the Action consequent to it is bold and venturous; let him do what he
please with Infants, we must not. Thus far the Doctor.

A second Scripture brought formerly by Doctor Featly, and of late by diverse
others, is that in Joh. 3. 5. Except a Man be born again of Water and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

Object. There is no other way to regenerate and save Infants but by this of
Baptism, and so to add them to the Church, therefore they ought to be baptized.

In some, Ambros. New Birth in p. 13.
says Mr. Isaac Ambrose, the new Birth is wrought before Baptism, as in the
Eun^^h, etc. in others is the new Birth wrought in Baptism, (...) indeed is the
Sacrament of the new Birth, and Sea^ of Regeneration, but howsoever in
Pedo-Baptism, we see the outward Seal, yet we seel not the manner of the inward
working, for this also is the secret of the Spirit.

Answ. There is no pretended Proof for Infant Baptism brought by the Asserters
of it, that I wonder at more than this, especially considering how fully and
excellently they are detected by several able Men of their own Party, yet
notwithstanding it seems to abide as a standing Doctrine in the National
Church, as witness their Catechism -- Baptism, wherein I was made a Member of
Christ, a Child of God, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven. Pray see how
excellently the late famous Stephen Charnock detects this Error; Charnock on
Regener. last sol. p. 75.
It is not, says he, External Baptism (speaking of Regeneration) many Men take
Baptism for Regeneration, the Ancients usually give it this term: One calls our
Savior's Baptism his Regeneration -- this confers not Grace, but engages to
it: outward Water cannot convey inward Life. How can Water, an external thing,
work upon the Soul in a physical manner? Neither can it be proved, that ever
the Spirit of God is tied by any Promise, to apply himself to the Soul in a
gracious Operation, when Water is applied to the Body. If it were so, that all
that were baptized were regenerated, then all that were baptized should be
saved, or else the Doctrine of Perseverance falls to the ground. Baptism is a
means of conveying this Grace, when the Spirit is pleased to operate with it;
but it does not work as a physical Cause upon the Soul as a ^rge does upon the
Humors of the Body: for it is the Sacrament of Regeneration, as the
Lord's Supper is of Nourishment. As a Man cannot be said to be nourished
without Faith, so he cannot be said to be a new Creature without Faith: Put the
most delicious Meat into the Mouth of a dead Man, you do not nourish him,
because he wants a Principle of Life to concoct or digest it. Faith only is the
Principle of spiritual Life, and the Principle which draws Nourishment from the
Means of God's Appointment. Some indeed say, that Regeneration is conferred in
Baptism upon the Elect, and exerts it self afterward in Conversion; but how so
active a Principle as a Spiritual Life, should lie dead and asleep so long,
even many Years, which intervene between Baptism and Conversion, is not easily
conceivable. Thus far Mr. Charnock: others we find to agree with him herein.

Amesius says, Amesius in Bell. Enervat. Tom. 3. l. 2. c. 3.
outward Baptism cannot be a Physical Instrument of infusing Grace, because it
has it not in any wise in it self.

Our late Annotators agree directly with these; nay, Dr. Owen says, Pool's
Annotat. on Joh. 3. 5.
that the Father of Lies himself could not well have invented a more pernicious
Opinion, or which might pour in a more deadly Poison into the Minds of Sinners.
Dr. Owen in his Theol. l. 6. c. 5. p. 477.


If Baptism were meant here, then no Man can be saved without being baptized.

But none does the business better than the Learned Bishop Tailor; For, Dr.
Taylor's Liber. of Proph. p. 231.
says he, the Water and Spirit in this place, signifies the same thing; and by
Water is meant the Effects of the Spirit cleansing and purifying the Soul, as
it appears in its parallel place, Christ's baptizing with the Holy Ghost and
with Fire: for although this was literally fulfilled in the day of Pentecost;
yet morally there is more in it; for it is the sign of the Effect of the holy
Spirit, and his Productions upon the Soul: And you may as well conclude, that
Infants must also pass through the Fire, as through the Water. And that we may
not think this a trick to elude the pressure of this place, Peter says the
same thing: For where he says that Baptism saves us, he adds by way of
Explication ( not the washing away of the Filth of the Flesh, but the Answer of
a good Conscience toward God) plainly saying that it is not Water, or the
purifying of the Body, but cleansing of the Spirit that does that which is
supposed to be the Effect of Baptism. But to suppose it meant of external
Baptism, yet this no more infers a necessity of Infant Baptism, than the other
words of Christ infer a necessity to give them the holy Communion, Joh. 6. 53.
Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life
in you; and yet we do not think these words a sufficient Argument to
communicate with them: if any Man therefore will do us Justice, either let them
give both Sacraments to Infunts, as some Ages of the Church did, or neither:
for the Wit of Man is not able to show a disparity in the Sanction, or in the
Energy of its Expressions. And therefore they were honest that understood the
Obligation to be parallel, and performed it accordingly; and yet because we say
they were deceived in one Instance, and yet the Obligation (all the World
cannot reasonably say but) is the same they are honest and reasonable that do
neither: and sure the Ancient Church did with an equal Opinion of necessity
give them the Communion, and yet now adays Men do not; Why should Men be more
burdened with a Prejudice and a name of Obliquity for not giving Infants one
Sacrament, more than you are disliked for not affording them the other? Thus
far Dr. Tailor. If what these great Men say is not sufficient utterly to
invalidate this pretended Proof of Infant Baptism, we know not what to say.

A third Proof they bring to prove the baptizing of Babes, The Proof from whole
Households examined.
is taken from those places that speak of the baptizing of whole Households, as
the Jailer and his House, Lydia and her House, etc.

Object. Whole Households we read were baptized, therefore some Children were in
the Primitive Time baptized.

Answ. To which we answer, that the Consequence is not natural from the
Antecedent, unless you can prove there were no whole Households but in which
were some little Babes; make that appear, and this is the best Argument you can
bring. -- But the contrary is very evident; for how many hundred Households or
Families are there in this City in which there are no little Children, but all
Adult Persons? which being so* how uncertain is your Inference?

Secondly, But suppose there were Children in those Households (for usually in
Scripture by a Figure which is called Syn^^doche) the whole is put for part, or
a part for the whole.

Hence we read Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Regions about ^ordan went
out to be baptized of John; that is, many of those places in Jerusalem, Judea,
and in those Regions.

So it is said, 1 Samuel 1. 21, 22, 23. That Elkanah, and all his House went up to
offer unto the Lord yearly Sacrifice, etc. yet, verse. 22. it is as expressly
said, that Hannah and her Child went not up, who were part of his House, yet
it is said all his House (or Household) went up. Exodus 9. 6. it is said, All the
Cattle of Egypt died, that is, all that were in the Field, see Chap. 14. 26,
28. and chap. 9. 26. I could give you many other Examples of the same nature
wherein the whole is taken but for part; And from hence it is that Dr. Hammond
grants, that no concluding Argument can be deduced from the baptizing whole
Households, to baptize Children; and therefore, in his Judgment, Arguments drawn
from hence are better waved, than made use of by the Defenders of
Infant Baptism. And certainly the Doctor judges but rationally therein (says a
worthy and Learned Man) because a clear Word of Institution (or plain
Precedents) ought to be the ground of the practice of all Gospel Ordinances,
especially in the case of Baptism, one of the great Sacraments of the New
Testaments.

Thirdly, We will see in the next place what the Holy Ghost has left on Record
concerning those whole Households that are said to be Baptized.

First, The Jaylor's Household, Acts 16. 33. He was Baptized, and all his.
Whether he had any Children it is a great Question; [ his] may refer to his
Wife, Servants, and Domestic Friends and Relations, etc. However, it is
expressly said, that Paul and Silas spoke unto him the Word of the Lord, and to
all that were in his House; certainly they did not preach to little Babes: And,
Verse. 34. it is said, He rejoiced, believeng in God with all his House. Observe,
(1.) he and all his House had the Gospel preached to them. (2.) He and all his
House believed: And (3.) he and all his House rejoiced; as well as it is said,
He and all his were baptized.

Can there be any Reason given, says Mr. Gosnold, why [ his] verse. 33. should
be larger than [ all his House] verse. 32, 34. these two Verses being a Key to
the 33d Verse, (says he) and this Household a Key to all the other?

The second Household is that of Crispus, The Second whole Household.
Acts 18. 8. And Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, believed in God with
all his House: and many of the Corinthians, hearing, believed, and were
baptized. All that is said of his Household, is, that they believed; besides,
the scope of the Text shows, none were baptized, but such who first believed;
and they, we say, and none but they, are true Subjects of Baptism, that believe.

The third Household, is the Household of Stephanus; I baptized, The third whole
Household.
says Paul, the Household of Stephanus, 1 Cor. 1. 16. And, he says, the House
of Stephanus was the first Fruits of Acaia, and that they had addicted
themselves to the Ministry of the Saints, which little Children were not
capable to do, Chap. 16. 15.

The fourth Household is that of Lydia, The fourth Household.
Acts 16. 14, 15. Whether this good Woman was a Maid, Widow, or Wife, is
uncertain: If she had been a married Woman, it is much there is no mention made
of her Husband: Besides, she is reckoned the Head of the Family [ her]
Household; which would not have been, says Mr. Gosnold, if at this time she had
a Husband. Grant, says he, she were a Widow, yet she might have no Children;
or if any, they might be grown up; and to such Children we deny not Baptism
upon profession of Faith. Besides, she was at this time from her own Dwelling,
and that many miles distant, for she was of the City of Thyatira; but now was
at the City of Philippi, where she was a merchandising, being a seller of
Purple. Grant she had Children, how unlikely a matter is it, says he, that she
should carry them about with her, trading so many miles distant? But, finally,
to resolve the Doubt, the last Verse of this Chapter, calls them of the House
of Lydia Brethren; They entered into the House of Lydia; and when they had (...)
the Brethren, they comforted them, and departed. Who now can conclude
rationally, that any Children were in any of these Households? It Is a hand case
Men are forced to fly to such weak and unlikely grounds to prove their
practice; but as the Proverb goes, A poor Shift is better than none at all.

The next Proof they bring to prove Infant Baptism, is from Acts 2. 39. The
Promise is to you, and to your Children, etc.

The Pedo baptists would sain have this Promise to be a Promise of External
Privilege, The Promise is to (...) and to (...) Act. 2. 3^. (...)
and such as gives Children of Believers a right to Baptism: but that there is
no such thing in the least to be proved from this place, we shall make appear
by opening the Text.

First, It Is evident that Peter preached this Sermon to the Jews, and to many
of them who had a hand in mur^hering the Lord of Life and Glory: And this he
laid home, and pressed upon their Consciences very close; and they being pricked
in their Hearts, cried out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? If it be thus,
Act. 2. 37.
we are lost Men and undone. No: as if Peter should say, Do not despair, upon
your Repentance there is Mercy for you. Then said Peter unto them, Repent, and
be baptized every one of you, for the Remission of Sins, and ye shall receive
the Gift of the Holy Spirit -- For the Promise is unto you. Ay, this is good
News indeed, they might say; But what will become of our Children, our
Offspring? for we have wished that his Blood might not only be upon our
selves, but also upon our Children. Well, what tho? let not this terrify you,
neither as to drive you into despair; for the Promise is not only to you who
repent, etc. but to your Children, or Offspring also; your Posterity shall not
be lost, for the Promise is unto them as it is to you, viz. if they repent; and
not only to them of your Race or Posterity, but also to all that are afar off,
Ephesians. 2. 13.
meaning the Gentiles, who were said to be sometimes afar off. But now if they
would know who of their Children, and those who were afar off, the Promise was
made unto: In the close of the Verse, he resolves them in these words, Even to
as many as the Lord our God shall call.

The Promise therefore here evident, is that of the Spirit, and all the Divine
Graces and Blessings of it, which was promised, and first tendered unto the
Jews and their Offspring, upon unfeigned Repentance, and turning to God; or
being effectually called and brought over, to close in with the Tenders of
Mercy; and then to the Gentiles, who in like manner should be wrought upon, or
effectually called: This Promise was not made to their Children, as Believers
Seed, nor to them, or any other, uncalled by the Lord, but with this express
Proviso, Even so many as the Lord our God shall call. Which Calling, or
effectual Work of Grace upon their Souls, made them capable Subjects of
Baptism: Nor are the words, to you and your Children, mentioned as an
acknowledgment of a Privilege to them above others, being Abraham's Seed
according to the Flesh, but by reason doubtless of their Wish. Mat. 27. 25. His
Blood he on us, and on our Children.

Nor is there the least intimation given of a right to Baptism to them, or
their Children, as the Children of Believers, but as an Exhortation to them and
theirs, to repent, and be baptized, as their Duty, for their Benefit and
Soul-advantage, the Promise being not mentioned; as though of it self it gave a
title to Baptism, either to them or their Offspring, without Repentance. But
as a Motive, why both they and their Children should actually repent, and be
baptized, i. e. because in so doing, they would be in the way of obtaining
Remission of Sin, and receive the Holy Spirit, the two grand Branches of the
Promise here mentioned. Which Duty of Repentance little Children being not
capable of performing, are not therefore according to this direction of the
Apostle the proper Subjects of such an Ordinance.

By Children, here says, a Learned Man, is not meant their Infants, but the
Posterity of the Jews: And so Dr. Hammond grants it, and therefore confesses
this place a very unconcluding Argument for Infant Baptism.

And, says he, though by Children be here meant the Posterity of the Jews, yet
not the natural or carnal Seed neither, but the Spiritual; as appears by the
last words in the verse, viz. Even to as many as the Lord our God shall call.

So that it is very evident, that this Text is grossly abused, by such as infer
from hence a title to Baptism, for Children of Believers, by virtue of a
Promise to them as such; whereas it is manifest from the whole scope of the
Context, that it is only an encouragement to the Jews against Despair, by
reason of their crucifying the Son of God, letting them know that yet there was
hope of Mercy and Pardon for them and their Children, Pools Annot. on Act. 2.
39.
upon the respective Repentance of both, or either of them. And to the same
purpose our late Annotators I find give it, speaking of this Text.

A Fifth pretended Scripture Proof for Infant Baptism, The Proof for
Infant Baptism -- ( Else were your Children unclean, etc.) answered.
is taken from 1 Cor. 7. 14. Else were your Children Unclean, but now are they
Holy.

Object. From hence it is asserted, That the Children of Believers are holy with
a Federal or Covenant-Holiness, and therefore to be baptized.

Answ. To this we answer, That the same sort of Holiness which is ascribed to
the Children, is to be understood in reference to the unbelieving Husband, or
the unbelieving Wife, who are both said to be sanctified by their respective
Yoke-fellows; which cannot be meant of a federal or a Covenant-holiness, but
that which is matrimonial: For if we must understand it of a Covenant-holiness,
then it will follow, that the unbelieving Wife, or unbelieving Husband may,
upon the same ground lay claim to Baptism as well as their Children, which yet
your selves will not grant. Besides, it is evident from the words themselves,
in which the Term Husband and Wife are twice used, which shows, that the
Holiness is from the conjugal Relation, and cannot be meant of any other than
Legitimation. And the term Unbeliever is also twice used, and said to be
Sanctified, which can have no other sense but this, that the unbelieving
Yoke Fellow is sanctified, or made meet in respect of conjugal use, to his or
her Yoke Fellow: And so though the one be an Unbeliever, yet they might
comfortably enough live together in lawful Wedlock. See our late Annotators;
Pool's Annotat. on 1 Cor. 7. 14.
I rather think (say they) it signifies brought into a State that the Believer,
without Offense to the Law of God, may continue in a married Estate with such a
Yoke Fellow; for else, says the Apostle, your Children were unclean, that is,
would be accounted illegitimate. But now this being determined, that the
Husband is thus sanctified to the Wife, and the Wife to the Husband, though the
one be an Unbeliever, hence it follows, that your Children are holy; that is,
lawfully begotten, which is the only sense opposite to the Determination, ver.
12, 13. It was, it is plain, about this matter those Saints at Corinth wrote to
the Apostle, and therefore according to the scope of the place it cannot intend
any thing else. And as for the use of the word Holy for Legitimate, that it is
in this sense used elsewhere in the Scripture is evident from Mal. 2. 15.
where a Seed of God, or a Godly Seed, can be understood in no other sense than
that of a lawful Seed, in opposition to those born by Polygamy.

Neither ought any Man to infer Federal Holiness to be intended here, unless he
can prove from some other Text in the New Testament any such Holiness to be in
Children, i. e. because Parents are Believers and in the Covenant of Grace,
their natural Seed must therefore be so esteemed, and have the like Right to
Gospel-Baptism as the Children under the Law had to Circumcision, which is no
where to be found in all the New Testament, but the quite contrary, as has been
proved; and therefore this Interpretation ought not to be admitted, 2 Pet. 1.
20.
but utterly to be rejected in regard of what the Apostle Peter asseres.

How false and ridiculous therefore is that which Mr. Smythies Non-communicant,
p. 88.
Smythies has lately affirmed: Whenever, says he, God enters into Covenant
with the Parent, he enters into Covenant with the Children of that Parent; that
is, the Children were included in the Covenant, and the Blessings of that
Covenant belonged to the Children as well as to the Parent. They that will
build their Faith upon such kind of Men deserve to be deceived, who speak what
they please, and prove nothing; as if this was so because Mr. Smythies says it.
I must charge it upon him as false Doctrine, (1.) As being quite contrary to
the Nature of the Gospel Dispensation and Constitution of the New
Testament-Church, wherein the Fleshly Seed are rejected and cast out in respect
of Church Priviledges and Ordinances. (2.) What is this but to intail Grace to
Nature, and Regeneration to Generation? in opposition to what our Savior
says, John 3. 3. and Paul, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. (3.) It also contradicts all Men's
Experience. How palpable is it that Godly Men have wicked Children now adays as
well as in former times? What, wicked Children, and yet in the Covenant of
Grace! Or, were they in it, and are they now fallen out of it? What a Covenant
then do you make that sure and everlasting Covenant of Grace to be?

Besides, we have many learned Men and Commentators of our Mind upon this Text,
Mr. Danvers Treat* of Bapt. p. 165, 166.
as Mr. Danvers observes and ^uotes them.

Austin says, it is to hold without doubting; whatsoever that Sanctification
was, it was not of Power to make Christians and remit Sins.

Ambrose upon this place, Ambrose.
says, the Children are holy because they are born of lawful Marriage.

Melancthon in his Commentary upon this same Text says thus, Melanct.
Therefore Paul answers, that their Marriages are not to be pulled asunder for
their unlike Opinions of God; if the impious Person do not cast away the other;
and for comfort he adds as a Reason, The unbelieving Husband is sanctified by
the believing Wife. Meat is sanctified; for that which is holy in use, that is,
it is granted to Believers from God; so here he speaks of the use of Marriage
to be holy, and to be granted of God. Things prohibited under the Law, as
Swines Flesh, and a Woman in her Pollution, were called unclean. The Connection
of this, if the use of Marriage should not please God, your Children would be
Bastards, and so unclean: But your Children are not Bastards, therefore the use
of the Marriage pleases God: And how Bastards were unclean in a peculiar
manner the Law shows, Deuteronomy. 23.

Camtrarius in his Commentary upon this place also says, Camerar.
(for the unbelieving Husband has been sanctified, an unusual change of the
Tense, that is) sanctified in the lawful use of Marriage; for without this,
says he, it would be that their Children should be unclean, that is, infamous
and not legitimate, who so are holy, that is, during the Marriage are without
all blot of Ignominy.

Erasmus says likewise, Erasmus.
Infants born of such Parents as one being a Christian, the other not, are holy
legitimately; for the Conversion of either Wife or Husband does not dissolve
the Marriage which was made when both were Unbelievers.

What Reason now had Dr. Featly and others to contemn this Exposition of the
Text, considering what we and so many Learned Men have declared as touching
this matter? for a more fuller Answer read Mr. Danvers, p. 166, 167, 168, 169.

But after all, should it be allowed that the Holiness in this Text is indeed
to be taken for a Faederal or Covenant-Holiness, yet we cannot therefore grant
that this is a sufficient Proof for Infant Baptism; for let the Holiness be
what it will, whether Moral, Faederal, or Matrimonial, neither of these is any
where assigned to be a ground of baptizing Infants; the Institution, Baptism
only a positive Law; who the Subjects of it, are depends wholly upon the Will
of God, etc.
Commission, and Practice of the Apostolical Church being that alone that can
warrant the same: It Is God's Word only, not Men's Reason, conceited Grounds and
Inferences, that can justify a Practice, or make a Gospel-Ordinance; if all
therefore was granted which you affirm of the Covenant made with Abraham of
Circumcision and Faederal-Holiness, yet Infant Baptism is gone, unless you can
prove God has from this ground commanded you to baptize your Children, or that
they were for this Reason admitted to Baptism in the Apostles Time (for all
your Arguments from thence prove as strongly, that your Infants may partake of
the Lord's Supper, etc.) But that any thing less than a Profession of Faith and
Repentance is or can be a sufficient ground for baptizing any Person, young or
old, we do deny, since the New Testament is the only Rule or perfect Copy, by
the Authority of which we ought to act and perform all Duties of instituted
Worship, and administer Sacraments, etc. which are m^re positive Precepts, and
depend only upon the Will and Pleasure of the Lawmakers. So much to this
pretended Proof of Infant Baptism.

A sixth Proof of Infant Baptism is grounded upon Mark 16. 16. He that
believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be
damned.

Now they affirm that Infants are Believers, and therefore are to be baptized.

Mr. Smythies says, Infants are Believers in a sense, or else they could not be
saved, Mr. Smythies Argument, that Infants are Believers.
nor have right to the Promises of Christ in the Gospel; and if they are in any
sense such Believers as are entitled to Salvation, they are such Believers as
have a right to Baptism; if the Estate belongs to a Child in the Cradle, the
Indentures and Seals of that Estate belong to him likewise: the Child of a
Believer may as well be called a Believer, as the Child of a Proselyte was
called a proselyte: if God gives Children but the denomination of Believers, it
is sufficient to entitle them to Baptism. Thus Mr. Smythies.

But how does it appear that Infants are Believers in any sense? is there any
Argument or Scripture brought by this Man to prove them so to be? if he can
prove they have Faith and do believe in Christ, he will do more than all the
Men that ever lived on Earth could do, I mean Children, as such in common and
in an ordinary way, to be Believers. True, nothing is too hard for God to do:
he that can make an Ass to speak, can as well cause a Babe to believe: But how
does it appear God has given them either the Habit of Faith, or the Act of
Faith, or Faith in any sense to render them to be Believers? But it is intimated
they are Believers by their Parents Faith: why may not their Parents Baptism
serve as well as their Parents Faith, and they receive the Lord's Supper for
them in their Names also, and that be imputed to the Children by virtue of
their Parents Faith? And what though the Estate belongs to the Child in the
Cradle, together with the Indenture and Seals of that Estate; Is it required
the Child in the Cradle should therefore set his Seal to the Indenture? is that
requisite, or would it make the Estate the more firm or sure to him? But when
you can prove Grace and Salvation to be Hereditary, and that the Father's being
a Believer and a godly Person, all his Children must needs be such too, you do
your business.

Secondly, But why do you say Children must be Believers, or else they cannot be
saved? who told you so? Faith nor Baptism is not required of Infants, yet they
may be saved.
Because Faith in Adult Persons is required as necessary in them, if they are
saved. Cannot God save poor Infants without they also do believe? has God told
you he cannot, or will not save them except they believe? I must confess I
wonder at your Ignorance and daring Boldness: God, Dr. Tailor, p. 230.
as Dr. Tailor observes, may have many ways to magnify his Grace through Jesus
Christ to them which we know not of; and what have you to do with the Secrets
of God? who made you one of his Privy Council? you may as well say, unless they
repent they cannot be saved from Christ's words, Luk 13. 3, 5. and that they
must be obedient and take up the Cross, for these things are required of Adult
Persons that would be saved as well as believing.

Thirdly, Prove that God has given Children the Denomination of Believers; or
if it was granted he has, would it therefore ^ollow they may be baptized?
certainly no, for we read of many who were said to believe See Joh. 2. 23, and
cap. 8. 30, 31, 44.
, they had some kind of Faith, and so in some sense had the denomination of
(...), and yet had no right to Baptism, for such ought to have (...) Faith, or
to believe with all their Hearts, (...) Philip said to the Eunuch, Act. 8. who
are fit Subjects of that Ordinance, or have a sufficient Title to it: and would
not that believing (in any sense) you speak of, that entitles them to
Salvation, give them as good a right to the Lord's Supper as to Baptism? Come,
Sir, you cannot infer a right to an Ordinance from what grounds you please.
Baptism depends wholly, I say again, upon the Authority of a positive Law, and
express words of Institution I am forced to repeat this often, because there is
the like occasion given, and it is a full Answer to all such Inferencse.
; and none but such who are made Disciples by preaching, or who do actually
believe, ought from thence to be baptized.

I wonder what Faith it is you suppose to be in Infants? is it the Faith of the
Church, as Tho. Aquinas asserts, which is intailed upon all within the pale
thereof? Or is it an Imputitive Faith from the Parents in Covenant, as Musculus
and others maintain? Or, is it the Faith of the Gossip or Surety, as many of
your Church say, i. e. others believe for them? Have they a justifying Faith,
What Confusion is here among the Pedo-Baptists?
as Mr. Baxter intimates? or a dogmatical Faith only, as in Mr. Blake's Sense?
Some, as Mr. Danvers observes, say it is a Physical, some a Metaphysical, and
some a Hyperphysical Faith. Some say they are born Believers, others say they
are made Believers by Baptism. Now when you tell us what Faith they have, we
shall the better understand you, and give you an Answer.

A Personal and actual Faith, Dr. Tailor.
says Dr. Tailor, they have not, for they have no Acts of Understanding;
besides, how can any Man know they have Faith, since he never saw any sign
(...), neither was he told so by any that could tell. Secondly, says he, Some
say they have Imputative Faith: But then so let the Sacraments be too, that is,
if they have the Parents Faith or the Churches, then so let Baptism be imputed
also by derivation from them: And as in their Mothers Womb, and while they hang
upon their Mothers Breasts, they live upon their Mothers Nourishment; so they
may upon the Baptism of their Parents, or their Mother the Church: for since
Faith is necessary to the susception of Baptism (and they themselves confess
it, by striving to find out new kinds of Faith to daub the matter;) such as the
Faith, such must be the Sacrament: for there is no proportion between an actual
Sacrament, and an Imputative Faith, this being in immediate and necessary order
to that. This says the Bishop.

We know there are some argue stiffly for Infants having habitual Faith; but as
the said Doctor says, Are there any Acts precedent, concomitant, or consequent
to this pretended Habit? this strange Invention, says he, is absolutely
without Art, without Scripture, Reason, or Authority. But the Men are to be
excused, unless they had any better Arguments to defend their Practice; they
are forced to confess the Truth in the main, viz. That Faith is required of
Persons to be baptized, and therefore they do what they can to prove Infants do
believe. But I will conclude this with what the said Doctor further says, Dr.
Tailor, p. 242.
And if any Man runs for Succor to that exploded Cresphugeton, that Infants
have Faith, or any other inspired Habit of I know not what, or how, we desire
no more advantage than that they are constrained to answer without Revelation
against Reason, common Sense, and all the Experience in the World.

CHAP. XII. Containing an Answer to several other Arguments brought for
Infant Baptism.
Object. 1. Mr. Sidenham's Treatise.
THough there is no plain Scriptures for Infant Baptism, yet it may be proved
by Consequences; you, it appears, deny direct Consequences from Scripture to be
mandatory, and so obliging, and of Divine Authority.

Answ. We affirm, that in all positive or instituted Worship (such as Baptism
is) which wholly depends upon the mere* Will and Pleasure of the Lawgiver, it
is absolutely necessary there should be an express Command, or plain and clear
Examples, tho in other respects we allow of natural Deductions and Consequences
from Scripture for the confirming and enforcing of Duties, and for the Comfort
and Instruction of God's People. But as there is neither express Command nor
Example for Infant Baptism; so it cannot be proved by any Consequence or
Inference, that naturally and (...) r^^s from any Scripture, as we have proved,
nor does draw any such Consequences to prove it.

Object. 2. But there is nothing in all the New T^stament against
Infant Baptism, says (...)* Smythies. If indeed our Savior had declared that
Infants should not be baptized, or if we had read of the Apostles Refusal of
them; then, etc. There is no hint from any express word dropped from Christ,
says Mr. Sidenham, or his Apostles, nor any Phrase which does forbid such an
Act.

Answ. We will answer with Tertullian: For this is a certain Rule, says he, if
it be said it is lawful because the Scripture does not forbid it; it may equally
be retorted, it is therefore not lawful, because the Scripture does not command
it. That which is done in the Worship and Service of God without any express
Word dropped from Christ or his Apostles, nor any Phrase which does signify it is
his Will and Mind it ought to be done, is unlawful and no better than
Will Worship. Must Christ forbid Infant Baptism? must he declare in plain words
they ought not to be baptized, or else may they, ought they to be baptized? Is
this good Divinity with Mr. Smythies? Certainly this Man cannot long keep out of
the Romish Communion: Has our Savior declared indeed that you shall not have
Crucifixes, Beads, Altars, and that you shall not use Salt, Spittle, Oil, or
Chrism in Baptism? that ye shall not go on Pilgrimages, nor pray for the Dead?
Has Christ, I say, or his Apostles, as you read, forbid these things, and many
more of like nature? Or, did God forbid Nadab and Abihu to offer strange Fire,
who were destroyed for doing it? Levit. 10. 1, 2. Did God forbid Abraham to
circumcise his Female Children, or forbid him to circumcise his Male Children
on the ninth day? and might he therefore do these things -- because God did no
where tell him he should not do so? The like might be said concerning Bowing at
the naming of the Name of Jesus, Cross in Baptism, Surplice in reading the
Service, Kneeling at the Sacrament, set Forms of Prayer; you do these things
because not forbidden, and why not admit of other Rites and Innovations as well
as these? Moreover, what express word against Infants receiving the Sacraments?
Besides, are Bells forbidden to be baptized? has Christ said indeed, ye shall
not baptize Bells? is it therefore lawful to baptize them? You will object, May
be that Bells are not ^it nor capable Subjects of such an Ordinance? But why
are they not? wherein are they incapable? Can you not sprinkle a little Water
upon a Bell, and use the words of Institution in as solemn a manner as you do
when you sprinkle a Child (baptize it as you say)? But are they incapable
because there is no word of Institution, nothing from the Mouth of Christ or
his Apostles, to justify such a Practice? We say the same in respect of your
baptizing Children; and if you say, Bells are not capable of the use and end of
Baptism; we have proved the like concerning Infants. If God had pleased, he
could have made them by an Institution capable of some sacred usefulness, yea
capable of Relative Holiness or Consecration, as Aaron's Bells; Nay, and since
we read of Bells of the Horses that should be Holiness to the Lord, Zech. 14.
20. Why may not that Text be a Proof that Bells in Churches should be baptized,
and so made holy likewise? There are those you know who plead for that Practice
(and have baptized them for many Ages) and they say there is as much ground
from Scripture to do that, as there is to (...) Children, both depending, as
they will tell you, upon the Authority of the Church.

Sad it is that such a Gap as this should be opened to all or any Inventions or
Traditions of Men: remember who it was that said, Add thou not to his Word.
That God has in all Ages testified his Abhorrence of Will Worship, and that
from this very reason, because he commanded them not: Jer. 7. 31.
it is evident they have built the high places of Tophet, etc. which I commanded
them not, neither came it into my Heart. Ezekiel. 43. 8.
For this cause God threatened Judgments upon Israel; They have set their
Threshold by my Thresholds, and their Post by my Posts, wherefore I have
consumed them.

God discovers his severe Displeasure against them, not for neglecting any part
of his Worship that he had commanded them, but for their Presumption in adding
other things thereto, calling them his Ordinances, which he had not appointed
nor commanded them. Will Worship (Sir) is an horrible Sin, when he who is to
perform the Duty shall dare to appoint the Laws: Implying a peremptory purpose
of no further observance, than may consist with the allowance of his own
depraved Judgment and Self-Interest; whereas true Obedience must be grounded on
the Authority of that Power that commands not the liking or approbation of the
Subject. Some Men will obey so far as it consists with their Interest, and
alter, add to, or diminish from, as they see good.

1. This savours of horrible Pride: Shall Man prescribe unto God ways how he
shall be worshipped?

2. Moreover, this of Will Worship was that very Sin that overthrew the Nation
of Israel; see Isa. 24. 5, (...) the Ordinances, etc.

3. And it also is said to wound the Heart of God, Ezekiel. 6. 9. namely, their
superstitious and corrupt Mixtures in his Worship. And,

4. This renders the Service of Men abominable, when they make void the
Commands of God by their Traditions, and all they do to be in vain, for so
says our Savior, In vain they worship me, teaching for Doctrine the
Commandments of Men.

Object. 3. But is it to be imagined, says Mr. Smythies, that our Savior, who
took little Children up in his Arms, should allow no Ordinance for them by
which they should be admitted into his Church?

Answ. Must he needs baptize them because he took them up in his Arms? and
because he blessed them, must he receive them into his Church? We have proved
that they are not capable Subjects of Gospel-Church-membership, neither did our
Savior baptize any with his own Hands, Joh. 4. 1, 2. therefore not those
Children he took up into his Arms; nor is this any proof in the least, i. e.
that Christ must allow them an Ordinance, because he showed them the favor to
take them up into his Arms. It Is said he looked upon the young Man, and loved
him; must he therefore make him a Member of his Church, whether he was sitly
qualified for it or no? Christ showed many great Favors unto diverse Persons,
that we do not read he admitted into his Church. He may show one Favor to you,
and yet deny you another which you may not be capable of receiving.

Young Children, ^uther in Post^l.
says Luther, hear not, nor understand the Word of God, out of which Faith
comes; and therefore if the Commandment be followed, Children ought not to be
baptized.

Besides, they might be Children able to receive Instruction as far as you
know, for such we take some times up into our Arms. Tertullian in his Book of
Bapt. ^ap. 18.
Tertulllan, speaking of this place, says, Indeed the Lord said, do not ye
hinder them to come unto me, let them come therefore, while they grow to Years,
let them come while they learn, and while come, let them be taught; let them
become Christians, when they are able to know Christ: Why does innocent Age
hasten to the Remission of Sins? Men will deal more w^rily in Worldly Assairs;
so that they who are not trusted with an Earthly Inheritance are trusted with
an Heavenly one; let them ask for Salvation that thou may appear to have
given it to him. See our further Answer to this Text, Coap. 9.

Object. 4. But Infants were commonly baptized before. How can we, says Mr.
Smythies, imagine that our Savior sent to baptize Nations in which Infants
before had commonly been baptized, and yet intend they should be excluded?

Answ. This is a new kind of Argument, but proves nothing.

For first, It Is denied that Infants by any Command of God were ever baptized
in any Nation, no not amongst the Jews, much less among the Gentile Nations;
but if they had been baptized before, he might as well have in^erred (and much
better) Infants Right to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and have said, Can
we imagine Christ would have excluded them from that, considering they were
before admitted to the Passover (which there is no great cause to question.)

But secondly, We reason thus; If they were before baptized, either they were
baptized as it was a Jewish Rite and Custom, or else as an Heathenish one: If
Baptism of Infants before was a Jewish Rite, it was either appointed of God, or
else a Tradition of their own: If it was a Tradition of their own, can you
suppose our Savior would go about to own and establish a Jewish Innovation, or
one of their human Traditions? and if it were an Appointment of God, it is very
much that no Man ever found it out before in all the Old Testament.

But thirdly, If there had been any such legal Ordinance, it had been
abrogated, with all other Jewish Ceremonies, which stood (as the Apostle shows)
in Meats and Drinks, Heb. 9. 10.
and diverse Washings, and Carnal Ordinances imposed on them until the time of
Reformation. All those diverse Washings that were under the Law it is evident
ceased in the Establishment of the new Testament; and therefore how abominable
false is that which Mr. Smythies says concerning Gospel-Baptism?

Object. 5. Our Savior, (says he Page 88.) took this Ordinance from the Custom
of the Jews, who were wont to baptize those who forsook Heathenism and embraced
the true Religion. And whenever they made Proselytes, they did not only
baptize the Parent, but the Child likewise.

Answ. Did any Man assert till now the Baptism of Christ to be a Legal Rite, or
rather that it sprung from Human Tradition? for it is evident the Jews were not
required to baptize them by any Appointment of God: for Circumcision was the
Rite by which Proselytes (who were Males) were added to the Jewish Church.

Besides, does not our Savior plainly intimate, that John's Baptism was
directly from Heaven, and not of Men? And if Baptism had been so frequently
practiced amongst the Jews, wherefore did they say to John, Why do thou
baptize, if thou art not that Christ, nor Elias? Joh. 1. 25. But does not
Christ say, that the Doctrine he taught, he received from the Father who sent
him? not from Moses nor the Jews: John 12.
I have not spoken (says he) of my self; but the Father which sent me, gave me
Commandment what I should say, and what I should speak. Now Baptism is
positively called a Principle of his Doctrine, Heb. 6. 1, 2, 3.
it was he that instituted it and gave it forth, Mat. 28. 19, 20. as a pure
Gospel-Ordinance, as the alone Sovereign Lord and Lawgiver of his Church.
Moreover, if all those diverse Washings and carnal Ordinances amongst the Jews
are abolished, as you heard before; how came this supposed Jewish Rite to
escape? These things considered, we may perceive it is Ignorance through
Tradition that makes a Pedobaptist, or rather a No-Baptist, and not Ignorance
(as he affirms) through length of time that makes an Anabaptist (falsely so
called) Page 91. But it is the knowledge of God's Word, through the help of the
Spirit, by which they, whom he so calls, come to cast off that unwritten
Tradition of Babes Rantism, and to own no Baptism but that which Christ has
commanded, and was practiced in the Apostolical Church.

And whereas he affirms the baptizing of Children was all along used in the
Primitive Church by the Holy Martyrs, etc.

We answer, It was never practiced till the Church came to adulterate the holy
Institutions of Christ, and fell away to Error and Superstition.

For, Curcellaeus ^nstitut. Relig. Christian. l. 1. c. 12.
says Curcellaeus, in the two first Centuries after Christ, Infant Baptism was
altogether unknown; but in the third and fourth it was allowed by some few; in
the fifth and following Ages, it was generally received into Custom.

And if the Custom of the Church is enough to justify Infant Baptism, it will
oblige us as to receive many other Traditions or Ceremonies likewise.

Object. 6. But there are diverse very learned Men who hold Infant Baptism.

Answ. And are there not many very learned Men who are against baptizing them?
who say it is an Invention of Men and no Ordinance of Jesus Christ? Besides,
were not the Pharisees and Lawyers learned Men, who rejected the Counsel of God
against themselves, being not baptized? God's purpose is to confound the Wisdom
of Man. If Learning once comes to be made an Idol of, God may leave those
learned Men to themselves, and let them grope in Midday as in the Night,
notwithstanding all their Light, Knowledge, and Learning.

Besides, there are learned Men of all Opinions, many learned Cardinals,
Priests, and Jesuits in the Church of Rome, yet you will not make that an
Argument to believe Transubstantiation, and other Errors maintained by them.

Object. 6. But there are many very holy and pious Men, yea Pastors of
Churches, that are for the baptizing of little Infants* Nay, and why should so
few learned Men be of your way if it were a Truth, for most speak against those
of your Persuasion?

Answ. 1. The more cause of Grief. But what though I must tell you God's Word
is to be your Guide, and not Men: every Man must give an account to God for
himself.

Moreover, some Godly Men who have had great Light, and were glorious Reformers
too in their day, yet lay short of some great Things and Duties; as Jehosaphat,
etc. who did not remove nor pull down the high Places.

2. Light and Knowledge of Divine Truths have broken forth gradually. When
Reformation first begun, those godly Men labored to restore the doctrinal part
of the Gospel, and yet great Corruptions remained in point of Discipline (which
Errors God has since by degrees discovered.)

3. Had the best and late Reformers (for such you will find at last the
Baptists to be in point of the Administrations of God's House and holy Temple)
been generally learned Men, it is very like this Truth would have been more
readily received among such (I mean learned Persons) than we see now it is, so
hard a thing is Self-denial.

4. Moreover, the base Reproaches cast upon the true way of Baptizing, has
doubtless laid a great many of good Men under Temptations, there being hardly
any one Truth that has been rendered more odious and contemptible than
Baptizing, ( i e. dipping of Men and Women in Water) tho it is generally
acknowledged by all, that no other Action then that was practiced in the
Gospel-days in the Administration of this Ordinance.

5. Some say those Errors or unsound Principles (as I look upon them to be)
maintained by diverse Baptists (who I doubt not are godly Christians) have
likewise hindered the Reception and Promulgation of this blessed
Gospel-Institution among many worthy Persons, For the Doctrine of Free Will;
Falling away totally from a state of true Grace, etc. are not looked upon as
capital Errors, viz. such as will exclude Men out of the Kingdom of Heaven.
and kept them may be from endeavoring their Satisfaction herein; tho it is
strange that should be a stumbling Block to any, since there were many
Christians in the Apostles Times, who in many things did dissent and differ (in
as great matters) one from another: besides, there are Men almost of all
Persuasions that hold those very Principles.

6. Others think the Remisness of some of the Baptized Churches about taking
care of their Ministers has contributed something to it also: for nothing lies
more clear in God's Word, than that those who preach the Gospel, should live of
the Gospel; yea, have a comfortable Maintenance, i. e. that they may be wholly
sequestered to the Work of the Ministry (and be in a capacity to give to others,
1 Cor. 9. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
and so show themselves Examples in Hospitality); and that their poor Wives and
Children after their Decease, Matthew. 10. 10.
may not be exposed to Want and Poverty. But I am glad to see it, Luke 9. 3.
our Churches are now daily enlightened into this indispensable Duty, and do
endeavor to reform accordingly; and would they also labor to follow the
Primitive Saints in singing of Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs Ephesians. 5.
18, 19.
, I do not doubt but it would add to their Comfort and Glory, Col. 3. 16.
and many more than now do would join with us Some good Christians are not
willing to take up one Ordinance, and so join in with the Baptists, and thereby
lose another which they believe is as great, and a most sweet and
Soul-consolating one.
.

7. But to proceed: Be sure the Examples of the best Men under Heaven will
never be a Plea sufficient for any in the day of Judgment, in doing any thing
in God's Worship that he has not commanded (or given grounds for the
Observation of) or in their neglecting doing of that which he has expressly
required. Shall any be allowed at the last day to plead thus, viz. such and
such good Men and able Ministers did say this was a Truth and my Duty? surely
no.

8. When Reformation is required of Men in so great a case as this, viz. that
which tends to the razing the whole Constitution or standing of their Church,
which has been also of such a long continuation; it calls for great Resolution,
Courage, and Self-denial, which is hard for some Men to arrive at; considering
also what great Persons and Reformers have been on their side; and they not
seriously minding the words of the wise Man, Prove. 4. 18.
where he says, that the Path of the Just is as a shining Light, that shines
more and more to the perfect day; the Church as it was then looked out of the
Wilderness but as the Morning, and but as fair (comparatively) as the Moon;
Cant.
but since (blessed be God) greater Light has broken forth, yea to such a
degree that now she seems to be come forth as clear as the Sun, etc. And sad it
is to see Men content themselves to walk only in that Light those worthy
Christians had in the Morning of the Reformation, and refuse to follow and
embrace a higher and more clear, and Sun-sshining Glory. They might be accepted
then, since their Day did not afford greater Manifestations of Truth in those
respects; but it may not excuse our Brethren, nor may they be accepted in
following them, since Truth is broke forth more perspicuously in these latter
times.

Object. The People called Anabaptists lie under great Reproaches, as if you
baptized People naked.

Answ. Dr. Featly and Mr. Baxter formerly contracted no small Guilt and Shame
to themselves upon this respect; see Dipper* dipped, writ by Featly.
It Is no more than our Savior foretold should befall his own People and
faithful Followers, They shall speak all manner of Evil^ against you falsty for
my Name sake, etc. I am not ignorant what odious Lies and Reproaches have been
cast upon us in respect of baptizing Men and Women naked: whereas it is
notoriously known to be utterly false and abominable, which thousands can
testify to the contrary, who are of different Persuasions to us, who daily see
Persons of both Sexes baptized by us, always in very comely and decent
Garments, provided on purpose upon that account.

Object. You have been formerly stigmatized and accused, as if you were against
Magistrates, or refuse to obey Kings, and such as are in Authority; and refuse
lawful Oaths: What say you to the Munster-Story?

Answ. These things our Enemies know to be false and vile Slanders, our
Confessions of Faith from time to time do witness the contrary; What People
plead for Subjection to Government and Magistrates which God has set over us,
more than we always do? And as touching that old Munster-Story of John of
Leyden, etc. they that read the best Histories of that business, may find many
things to be false which are charged against those Anabaptists: besides, the
Story of them was either written (as some have very well observed) by the
malicious Papists, their old mortal Enemies; or else by envious Protestants,
who are willing to take up any base Reports, and improve those S^^ries to blast
the Reputation of the whole Party. Alas, I could here soon recite some Writings
of inveterated Spirits, who have in as base a manner vilisied and calumniated
the Episcopals, nay and the Presbyterians, and Independents also, giving
Instances both in respect of their vile Principles and Practices. Certainly
it is a shame for any good Men to take up a Charge against so great a Party of
godly Christians from the venomous Pens of such shameless Persons.

But suppose the Munster-Story as to matter of Fact were true, and that some of
those Anabaptists were very ill Men, and guilty of several immoral Actions, and
held great Errors, yet how unreasonable and uncharitable a thing is it to
render all those People of that Persuasion in those times, and also since to be
as bad and as like guilty? especially considering that the Principle and
Practice of baptizing believing Men and Women in it self is so harmless a
thing, and no ways tends to lead Persons to such Evils? For by the same Rule
might not the best and most holy Church and People in the World, or ever were
in the World, be censured and reproached, and neither the Church of the Jews,
nor the Gospel Church in the Apostles days escape, since in the first there were
very ill Persons, as Chora, Dathan, and Abiram, and many others, and in the
last a Judas, a Diatrophes, an incestuous Person 1 Cor. 5. 1, 2.
, who was guilty of worse or more shameful Fornication then what was amongst
the Gentiles, as the Apostle affirms? Besides, as Mr. Danvers observes, those
of the same Opinion in former times are acknowledged to be godly and good Men,
or have an honorable Character given them, and this too by the ample and
authentic Testimony from their greatest Enemies; he cites Rai^trus, the Bloody
Inquisitor of those in France, and Baronius, and Cassander of those in Germany;
nay, and Mr. Baxter^ himself, who, though he has been found free enough in his
Reproaches, yet to give him his due, is pleased to witness to our Innocence in
this Nation, take his own words: says he, Baxter in his Book Principle of
Love, p. 7.
That Anabaptists are godly Men that differ from us in a Point so difficult,
that many of the Papists and Prelatists have maintained, that it is not
determined in the Scripture, but depends upon Tradition of the Church: And I
know as good and sober Men of that Mind, as of theirs who are most against
them, etc. And again he says, that Augustine, and many Children of Christians
were baptized at Age; and that the Controversy is of so great difficulty, that
if in all such cases none that differ be tolerated, we may not live together in
the World or Church, but endlesly excommunicate or prosecute one another. But
blessed be God we need not the Testimony of Men, having the Testimony of our
own Consciences (which is our rejoicing) as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 1. 12.
that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not by fleshly Wisdom, but by the
Grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the World. Tho there may be some
of our Communion who may be under Guilt and gross Enormities, and mistaken
Principles and Notions, to our great Grief and Sorrow (as well as amongst other
Communities of godly Christians) but Charity will cover a multitude of Faults.

Object. 8. But you lay too much stress upon Baptism?

Answ. What some may do, I know not, but I am sure generally, we lay no more
stress upon it than we ought; we say, it is a Duty incumbent upon all Believers
-- a holy Ordinance of Christ, one of the great Sacraments of the New
Testament, and they that reject it, do reject part of the Counsel of God. Yet
we do not lay such stress upon it, as some do upon Infant Baptism. We do not
say, Men cannot be saved, unless they be baptized; provided they do not sin
against their light and clear convictions of their own Consciences. It Is
evident there are those who have asserted, That Infants that die unbaptized,
shall not, cannot be saved; which certainly is abominable to affirm: For were
it our duty to baptize our Children, yet can any think, that the omission of
our duty to them herein, can exclude them the Kingdom of Heaven? but it is
evident it is not required, they are not the subjects of it.

Object. It Is no where said, that Women received the Lords Supper, yet it is
given to them: Why may not Infants be Baptized as well, tho there is nothing
mentioned of their being Baptized in the Scripture.

Answ. To this we Answer, That there is ground enough from the Scripture, for
Women who are baptized Believers, to receive the Lord's Supper; Let a Man
examine himfelf, and so let him eat, says the Apostle, viz. Man or Woman. For
so the Greek word (...) signifies. There is one Mediator between God and Man.
Is not Woman as well as Man intended there? If there come into your Assembly a
Man having a Gold Ring, etc. A double-minded Man is unstable in all his ways.
Are not Women as well as Men, comprehended and meant in those places as well as
Men, tho not expressed?

2. Were not Women as well as Men (who believed) Baptized? Act. 8. 12.
Were not Women Disciples, and commanded to be made discipline by the preaching
of the Gospel in the Commission, Mat. 28. 19, 20.
as well as Men?

And are not Males and Femals all o^^ in Christ Jesus? Is not this a mere
trifling Vanity, and naught but a piece of Foolery and Deceit, to darken
Counsel with words without Knowledge?

Women were Baptized; we read of Lydia, an honorable Woman that was Baptized.
And when they heard this, Acts 8. 12.
it is said, they were baptized both Men and Women. And they that were required
to be Baptized, and did partake of that Ordinance, continued together in the
Apostles Doctrine, and in Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread and Prayer. This
sufficiently proves Women received the Lord's Supper.

When shall we see the like proof for Babes Baptism?

Were not Women Members of the Chur^^* and does not the Holy Supper belong to
all ^^^^lar Members thereof? This Objection seems to represent these Men like a
person almost drowned, who catches hold of any little Twig, or Flag, to help
him: But, Brethren, these things will never do your business.

Object. If we have no Scripture-Example to baptize Infants: no more have you
for the baptizing such Persons as you do baptize, viz. those of Age, whose
Parents were baptized and educated from their Youth in the Christian Religion;
for evident it is, those we read of in the New Testament who were baptized,
were such who were newly Converted either from Judaism, or Paganism, to
Christianity.

Answ. What tho we have no Example in the Scripture of any besides such you
speak of that were baptized, (that ^eing the very beginning of that
Gospel-Admini^^^ation) yet is not the Commission a perfect Rule to succeeding
Ages, as well as it was to that present Age? Evident it is that by virtue of
the Commission, none were to be baptized but such as are discipled, or first
taught, before admitted to that Ordinance. If the person be a Believer, we have
no ground to refuse him, because his Parents were Jews or Heathens; so we have
no reason to receive others at all the more, because their Parents were
Christians.

2. Can you prove that difference as to the state of the Parents (in respect of
what you speak of) does give you a warrantable ground to act contrary to the
order and nature of the great Commission? Matthew. 28. 19, 20. By the authority
of which, the Apostles did baptize (and all Ministers ought to administer the
same Ordinance to the end of the World.) The nature and order of the Commission
cuts this Objection to pieces: For if the person be a Disciple, a Believer, he
is to be baptized, let his Parents be Jews, Heathens, or Christians, it is all
one. If you had the like grounds to baptize Infants, we should contend no
longer with you.

3. When you can prove the Faith of the Parents, or their subjection to the
external Rite of Baptism, adds any spiritual advantage to their Children, or
such as gives them a right to Baptism, we will give up the Controversy. --

Object. But whereas you say, Baptism was always done by dipping the Body all
over in Water, how can that be, since some were baptized in Houses?

Answ. I answer, That is a fancy, a thing asserted without the least shadow of
ground, tho no less Men than our late worthy Annotators seem to affirm this
very thing; for notwithstanding the Jailer, Acts 16. 23.
and those of his, were baptized the same hour of the Night, etc. Yet can any
suppose they could not go out of the House so late? might there not be a Pond,
or some River near? whithersoever they went, or wheresoever it was done, it is
no matter, they were baptized; which has been sufficiently proved to be
Immersion, or dipping the Body in Water.

Object. But say what you will, the Baptism of Infants is of God; for there was
a multitude of Children of old baptized to Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea.

Answ. We have showed you that was but tropically called Baptism; and also that
Baptism is a pure New Testament Ordinance; tho it is like that (as some Learned
Men have said) might be a Type of this Ordinance, they being as it were buried
or overwhelmed in the Sea, and under the Cloud. But if that may justify Infant
Baptism, it will allow you to baptize Unbelievers also; for there was a
multitude of mixed People who went through the Sea with Israel, besides much
Cattle, And a mixed multitude went up also with them, and Flocks, and Herds,
even very much Cattle, Exodus 12. 38. All these were doubtless baptized
metaphorically and typically, as well us Children under the Cloud, and in the
Sea; therefore this can be no proof for Infant Baptism.

CHAP. XIII. Showing the evil Consequences, Absurdities, and Contradictions,
that attend Infant Baptism, as it is Asserted and Practiced.
Object. BUT what harm is there in Baptizing of Children? is it not an innocent
thing? can it do the Child any hurt?

Answ. The harm will be to the Parents and Ministers, who do that in Christ's
Name, which they have no Authority from him to do. If it do any harm to
Infants, it is not till they are grown up, and then it may be a means to blind
their Eyes, and cause some of them to conclude, they in Baptism became the
Children of God, were regenerated, made Christians, Members of Christ, and
Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven; and cause others to think they were then
rightly baptized, and so to look after no other Baptism. Whereas, poor Souls,
they are all unbaptized Persons, having never had any Baptism at all but
Rantism.

Pray see what Mr. Danvers has said upon this Respect.

1. But is it no harm to alter Christ's Order in the Commission, Mr. Danver's
Book of Baptism, p. 212, 213, 214.
who requires Faith and Repentance to precede, or go before Baptism; or first
to make them Disciples by Teaching, and then to Baptize them? And for Men to
invert this Order as to baptize them, and then teach them Repentance and Faith,
sure it must be an evil and hurtful thing so to do.

2. Is it not an evil thing to change the true subjects of Baptism, who are
Believing and Understanding Men, to ignorant Babes, who neither know good nor
evil?

3. Is it not an evil thing to frustrate the sacred and spiritual ends of
Baptism, which are many, as you have heard; and by administering it to poor
Babes, render it wholly an Insignificant thing?

4. Is it not an evil and a shameful thing to change Baptism into Rantism, from
Dipping the whole Body, to Sprinkling or pouring a little Water upon the Face,
and to pronounce an Untruth in the Name of the Lord, saying, I baptize thee in
the Name of the Father, of the Son, and holy Spirit, you not doing the thing?
nor have any Authority so to do, nor to baptize Children at all, much less to
sprinkle them.

5. Is it not an evil and harmful thing, and a great error to say, Heb. 9. 12,
13.
Baptism takes away Original Sin? whereas nothing can do that, (nor Actual Sin
neither) but the Blood of Christ. 1 John 1. 7.


6. Is it not a foolish thing and a Lie, to say, Children have Faith, and are
Disciples, who are not capable of Understanding? to assert a thing that no Man
has any ground to believe, nor cannot, without offering violence to his Reason?

7. Is it not a weak thing, to open a Door into the Church, which Christ has
shut up?

8. Is it not weak and an absurd thing to say, that Infants cannot be Saved
except they be Baptized, partly because Christ says, Joh. 3. 3.
Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, Baptism, as some
of you say, taking away Original Sin? As if it were in the power, and at the
will of the Parents to save or damn their Children. For this is intimated by
this Notion of yours; If the Parents or Friends baptize the Child, it shall (if
it die in its Infancy) be saved; but if they, nor no other, endeavor to get it
Baptized, the Child is lost, and must perish. -- How can outward Water, Charn.
on Regenerat. p. 75.
says Mr. Charnock, convey inward-Life? How can Water, a material thing, work
upon the Soul in a Physical manner? Neither can it be proved, That ever the
Spirit of God is tied by any Promise, to apply himself to the Soul in its
Gracious Operations, when the Body is applied to the Water. (He says, Water
applied to the Body.) Because the adult Person (who sat under the preaching of
the Word) cannot be saved without Regeneration. Cannot God save poor dying
Infants, unless the same change by the Spirits Operations pass upon them? Is
not God a free Agent? may he not do what he pleases, and magnify his Grace to
poor dying Infants, through the Blood of his Son, in other ways than we know
of? Do not secret things belong to him, what Vanity is there in the minds of
some Men?

8. Has God ordained Baptism to be an Ordinance to save the Souls of any
Persons, either the Adult or Infants? is the Opus operatum of Baptism, think
you, a likely way or means to beget or bring forth Children to Christ, or make
Disciples of them? Baptism signifies no thing (it being but a Sign) where the
inward Grace signified by it is wanting.

9. Is it not strange that you should say, That none but the Children of
Believers ought to be Baptized? And that Baptism is absolutely necessary to
Church Communion, or an initiating Ordinance? And yet commonly take into your
Churches, such Persons (that are converted) whose Parents were very wicked and
ungodly Persons as any in the Parish, and so lived and died (as far as you
know); and yet do you not account their Baptism to ^e sufficient?

10. Is it not an hurtful and evil thing, to defile and p^lute the Church, by
bringing in the Fleshy Seed which Christ has cast out?

11. Is it not an evil and dangerous thing to lay a foundation of Ignorance and
Profaneness, and to confound the World and Church together, which ought to be
separated? and to make the Church National, which ought to be Congregational?

12. Is it not an harmful and evil thing to establish Human Traditions, and
make them of equal Authority with Christ's sacred Institutions, and reproach
them who will not against their Consciences, do the same things?

13. Is it not an evil and harmful thing to plead for In^ant Baptism, or rather
Rantism, and make it a bone of Contention amongst Christians, and so ^inder the
Unity of Churches and godly Christians? For was that Rubbish gone, what a
glorious Harmony would follow, even such a Day as would make all our Souls
rejoice? for he is blind who cannot see that that Relick is the cause of our sad
Divisions*

14. Is it not an evil and false thing to say, Persons may have Grace and
Regeneration before they know God, or are called by his Word and holy Spirit?

15. Is it not a strange thing to say, Persons may be visible and lawful
Members of the Gospel Church before Conversion; and to deny them one Sacrament,
and yet give them another?

16. Is it not a false thing to say, Persons may believe and be saved by the
Faith of others?

17. Is it not an evil thing and a contradiction to say, Baptism is a Symbol of
present Regeneration, and yet apply it to Ignorant and Unconverted Babes,
wholly incapable of Regeneration, in whom none of the things signified thereby,
do, or can appear?

18. Is it not a false thing and a contradiction to say, that Baptism is a
lively Figure of Christ's Death, Burial, and Resurrection, and yet do nothing
but sprinkle, or pour a little Water upon the Face; by which act, all must
confess nothing of such things can thereby be represented?

19. Is it not a strange and foolish thing to say, Baptism is an Ordinance of
the Solemnization of the Souls Marriage with Christ, and to say, it is a strange
Marriage where nothing is professed of a Consent; and yet administer it to
Babes wholly incapable so to do?

20. Is it not a foolish thing to cry out against Traditions, and all
Inventions of Men, and yet strive to uphold and maintain them? And does not
these things hinder that glorious Reformation we all long for, and encourage
Papists?

21. Is it not strange Men should say, all the Children of Believersare in
Covenant, and that there is no falling from a State of Grace; but that the New
Covenant is so well ordered in all things, and sure, that it will secure all
that are indeed in it unto Eternal Life; and yet many of these Children, who
they say, were in this Covenant, perish in their Sins, dying Unregenerate?

22. We will conclude this Chapter, as Mr. Danvers does with the words of Dr.
Tailor. And therefore, Dr. Tailor Lib. Proph. p. 244.
says he, whoever will pertinaciously persist in his Opinion of Pedo-Baptism,
and practice it accordingly, they pollute the Blood of the everlasting
Covenant; they dishonor and make a Pagentry of the Sacrament; they
ineffectually represent a Sepulcher into the Death of Christ, and please
themselves in a Sing without effect: Making Baptism like the Fig Tree in the
Gospel, full of Leaves, but no Fruit. And they Invocate the Holy Ghost in vain,
doing as if one should call upon him to illuminate a Stone or a Tree.

CHAP. XIV. Proving Baptism a great and glorious Ordinance, and that it is
initiating or an Inlet into the Church.
THE last thing I shall do, is to prove Believers Baptism a very great and
glorious Ordinance, though much despised by Men, nay by many Professors of this
Age.

First of all, It Is a Principle of Christ's Doctrine, nay, a
Foundation-Principle, viz. of a true Gospel-Church-State; so that according to
the Apostolical and Primitive-Institution, a Church cannot be truly gathered
without it.

Secondly, It appears to be a great Ordinance, if we consider the Commission of
Christ.

1. Consider with what Authority our Savior gave it forth; All Power is given
to me in Heaven and Earth: Go ye therefore, teach all Nations, baptizing them,
etc.

2. In that it was one of the last things he gave in charge to his Disciples
before he went to Heaven. And,

3. In that he joins it to Teaching, expressing no other Gospel Ordinances
besides, though he gave other Commandments to them, Act. 1.

4. In that no Ordinance is to be administered in a more solemn manner than this
is, viz. in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Spirit.

We are hereby obliged to believe in, adore, and worship the whole Trinity.

Thirdly, No Ordinance in all the New Testament was ever so graced, nor
honored with such a Presence as this was at the Baptism of Christ; the three
Persons manifest their Presence at this Solemnity, the Heavens were opened, and
a voice heard, Mat. 3. 16.
saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; 1. The Father seals
it and honors it. 2. The Son is there, and subjects to it, showing what an
honorable respect he has to it; nay and came many Miles upon no other Business
but to be baptized (as we read of.) 3. The Spirit also descended like a Dove,
and rested upon him; the Holy Ghost puts his Seal upon it, and in a glorious
manner owns it.

And then our Savior says, it became him to be obedient to it; it is, it
seems, a becoming Ordinance, it became the Master, and does it not become the
Servant to submit to it? It was not too low for him, and is it too low for thee?

He said also it was a fulfilling of all Righteousness; that is, it became him
to fulfill all the Commands of his Father, or do his whole Will, which it
appears he could not have done unless he had been baptized.

And in that of being a Pattern or Example to us, those who neglect it, neglect
a most righteous thing, and do not fill up after their Master.

Fourthly, It Is called a justi^ying of God, and our Disobedience herein a
rejecting the Counsel of God, Luke 7. 29, 30.

Fifthly, It appears a great Ordinance, in that the highest, nay the
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit cannot exempt a Person from his Obedience
hereto, as appears in Cornelius's case. Nay, the greater Gifts and Graces a
Person has, the more fit a Subject he is of this Ordinance (as Peter's words
do import. Act. 10. 47.
)

Sixthly, Consider the great things and Mysteries held forth hereby, viz. the
Death, Burial, and Resurrection of Christ, and our dying to Sin, and Duty to
walk in newness of Life, it preaches the Gospel to our very sight in a very
lively Figure; and therefore a great Ordinance.

Seventhly, It Is a Badg of Christian Profession; and an Ordinance, as Mr.
Baxter observes, of the Solemnization of the Souls Marriage-Union with Christ.

Eighthly, Consider the great Promises made to those who are obedient to it,
amongst other things, Mark 16. 16.
Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the World. And again, He that
believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. If a Prince shall offer a Rebel his
Life in doing two things, would he neglect one of them, and say this I will do,
but the other is a trivial thing, I Will not do that? Surely no, he would not run
the hazard of his Life so foolishly.

And then in Act. 2. 38. Repent, and be baptized every one of you for Remission
of Sin, and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Spirit: See what great
Promises are made to Believers in Baptism.

Ninthly, Nay, and Cornelius was warned from Heaven to send for Peter, and,
says the Lord, he shall tell thee what thou shall do. Now one thing that is
expressed, and I think it is all that Pet^r told him he should do (besides
believing on the Lord Jesus) was to be baptized. Certainly these things
demonstrate Baptism to be a great Ordinance; it is miraculously confirmed from
Heaven (as it were) so to be.

Tenthly, and lastly; Baptism is an initiating Ordinance, no regular or orderly
coming into the Church of God but at this door; and this we shall make appear,
therefore a great Ordinance.

First, Acts 2.
It Is said they that gladly received the Word, were baptized; and the same day
there were added to them about three thousand Souls: those who were added unto
this Church were first baptized; and observable it is, that as this was the
first Gospel Church that was gathered after the Ascension of Christ: so it is
set forth as a Pattern to all other Churches; 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14.
for as others were enjoined, so they were commanded for following the Church
of God that was in Judaea.

Secondly, All along in the New Testament, where we read of the first
Plantations of the Churches, we find that all those who became Members
respectively, were first upon their Profession of Faith baptized before they
were received as Members thereof; as Act. 8. Act. 10. Act. 16. and Act. 18.

Thirdly, We read of none that were received into the Fellowship of any Church
that were not first baptized.

Fourthly, Because those who were baptized, were said to be baptized into
Christ; Gal. 3. 27.
Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Christ, etc. Romans 6. 3.

That is, into his Church or Mystical Body, as our late Annotators intimate,
Pool's Annotat. on Romans 6. 3.
incorporated, ingrafted or planted into Christ, and so to be made Members of
his Mystical Body by Baptism.

By one Spirit we (are said) all to be baptized into one Body, 1 Cor. 12, 13,
By one Spirit, that is, by the Authority and Appointment of the Spirit, and by
the Guidance, Conduct, and Leadings of the Spirit; not that all that are true
Members of the Church are baptized with the holy Spirit, since the Baptism of
the Spirit denotes (as we have elsewhere proved) the extraordinary Gifts or
Effusion of the Holy Ghost, which was received in the Apostles days, and which
continued not in the Church. And have been all made to drink into one Spirit.
In these words he alludes to the Ordinance of the Supper, which you may as well
say, is a spiritual eating and drinking only, as so to speak of Baptism;
because it is said by one Spirit we are all baptized, it is not said with one
Spirit. Besides, should any assert that the Apostle means the Baptism of the
Spirit, and that the ordinary Gifts and Graces of the Spirit is the Baptism of
the Holy Spirit; then it would follow that there are two Baptisms left in the
Church, which seems to be contrary to what Paul says. Ephesians. 4. 5.


Fifthly, Because the Lord Jesus has joined Faith and Baptism together in the
Commission, and both were taught as beginning or fundamental Principles of his
Doctrine, or part of those first Rudiments that belongs to every Babe in
Christ, or Christian Man and Woman, Heb. 5. 12. and 6. 1, 2. and all those six
Principles, Pool's Annotat. on Heb. 6. 1, 2.
as our late Annotators affirm, are initiating, and so they must be; for if
they are Fundamentals, they must either be Fundamentals of Salvation, or else
of Church Communion: Now Baptism cannot be a Fundamental of Salvation,
therefore of Church Communion, how necessary it is to lay a sure Foundation no
Man can be ignorant.

Object. It is objected from Romans 6. 3. that but some only of the Church of the
Romans were baptized, because the Apostle says, as many of^ you as were
baptized, etc. from thence they would conclude some of them were not.

Answ. Did the whole Church of the Romans reckon themselves, think you, to be
dead to Sin, and bound to live no longer therein? If so, then Baptism, which
was a Symbol of those things, belonging to them all; As many as are baptized
into Christ, were baptized into his Death, etc. i. e. in token of it: And that
they all should become New Creatures, it is as if he should reason thus;

As many of us as are baptized, must know this, that we were baptized into
Christ's Death, and therefore must die to Sin, and live a new Life. But we have
all been baptized or buried with Christ in Baptism into his Death; therefore we
must all die to Sin, and live a new Life.

Did the Apostle intend hereby, do you think, to press them all to die to Sin,
and live to God? if so, that Argument he uses (you may assure your selves)
reached them all, which it could not do if they had not all been baptized.

Sixthly, Baptism is an initiating Ordinance, appears, because the way of
inchurching Disciples, or Men and Women, was one and the same in all the
Churches of the Saints; if some were not received till Baptized, there were no
unbaptized Persons ever received at all. But some were not received till
baptized, Ergo. The Reason is not only, because the way and order of the
Administration of that Ordinance were one and the same in every Church, and so
Confusion avoided; but also because there is the like parity of Reason, why all
should and ought to be baptized, as there is for some, since the Ordinance is
initiating, and so a great Privilege, and all have right to the thing signified
thereby: Besides, those who believe, are required and commanded to be baptized;
and that which is the Duty of one Disciple as a Disciple, is the Duty of every
Disciple; and by that Argument you may excuse one Man from one Sacrament, viz.
Baptism, you may excuse another from the Lord's Table, upon a pretense he does
not see it to be his Duty, and yet admit him, and continue him a Member.

And that Baptism is an initiating Ordinance, we have all Christians of all
Persuasions one with us, they generally assert the same thing.

Justin Martyr, Second Apology to Ant. Pius the Roman Emperor, c. 8.. 5.
speaking of the Lord's Supper, says, This Food we call the Eucharist, to
which no Man is admitted, but only he that believes in the Truth of our
Doctrine, being washed in the Laver of Regeneration for Remission of Sins, and
lives as Christ has taught. That is, none were admitted to the Lord's Supper,
but such who were first baptized.

The same is hinted by a late famous Writer concerning Cyprian, and other
eminent Fathers, about the 2d and 3d Centuries, viz* No unbaptized Persons were
admitted to the Communion of the Church.

Let them, August.
says Austin, (that is, the Catecumens) pass through the Red Sea; that is, be
baptized: and let them eat Manna, that is, the Body and Blood of Christ. This
shows the practice of the Church in his Days.

Vrsinus says, Ursin. in his Catechism.
Baptism is a Sacrament of entrance into the Church, whence it comes, that the
Supper is presented to none except first baptized.

Dr. Cave, Antiq* Christianae, p. 374.
speaking of the Lord's Supper, says, From this Sacrament are excluded all
unbaptized Persons, and such who live in any known Sin, etc.

Baptism is, Marrow of Div. p. 181 Elton on Col. 2. 11. p. 291.
says Dr. Ames, a Sacrament of Initiation.

Elton on Col. 2. 11. says also, That Baptism is the Sacrament of Incision, or
engrafting into Christ, sealing up our setting into Christ, which is only once
done, never after to be done again, etc.

Mr. Strong says, Discourse of the Covenant, p. 226
Baptism is a Sacrament of Initiation, and the Ordinance of visible admission
into the Church: And as it is a Sin, says he, to keep them out whose Right it
is; so it is a Sin also to admit them that have no Right, because the Ordinance
of Christ is abused and misplaced.

The Assembly say in their Catechism, Assemb. Catechism.
That Baptism is a Sacrament of the New Testament, ordained by Jesus Christ; --
for the solemn admission of the Party baptized into the Visible Church, etc.

Every Soldier that must be admitted into an Army, Plain. Scripture* Proof, p.
24.
says Mr. Baxter, must be admitted, by listing, as a solemn engaging Sign --
So every one that has right to be solemnly admitted into the Visible Church,
must orderly be admitted by Baptism.

And again he says, We have no Precept or Example of admitting visible Members
any other way; therefore all that must be admitted visible Members, must be
baptized.

I might write a Book of things of this Nature, as touching the Sentiments of
worthy Writers, being generally all of the same Belief and Practice; howsoever
in other things they may differ from us, and one from another; nor will those
of the Church of England, Presbyterians, or Independants, admit any as Members
into their Communions, as to partake of the Lord's Supper, except they have
been baptized in their sense, they calling Sprinkling, or Pouring, Baptizing;
which we deny to be the Ordinance.

Object. How dare you deny a Man admittance into the Church, who is truly
Godly, and has a lively Faith? If he has a right to Christ, who is signified
in the Lord's Supper, may be be denied the Sign, because he is not baptized?

Answ. How dares any Man, who fears God, attempt to do any thing contrary to
the Holy Pattern left in Christ's New Testament? If Baptism was appointed to be
an Initiating Ordinance into God's House, it is not only a Man's Piety that will
serve the turn, he must come into the Church at the Door Christ has ordained,
or not come in at all. If Lot should have offered himself to come into
Abraham's Family, (which was then God's Church) do you think Abraham would have
admitted him, (though he was a Righteous Man) unless he would first consent to
be Circumcised (which was an Initiating Ordinance at that time)? Certainly, no;
though he should say he was not convinced of Circumcision, yet that would not
have excused him: God's Laws are not to be dispensed with to gratify the
Ignorance of Men. It Is a Question whether Vzzah knew he ought not to put forth
his Hand to support the Ark: Yet for doing that thing, God smote him with
Death. Ignorance will not be a sufficient Plea for doing God's Work, 2 Samuel 6.
6, 7.
in other manner than he has appointed.

How dares any Man, who loves and desires to honor the Lord Jesus, violate his
Holy and Great Commission, Matthew. 28. or act and do contrary thereto, who
requires all Disciples to be baptized? derogating from the Rule in one thing,
opens a Gap to other Disorders, and it renders Christ's Institution a petty and
indifferent thing: you may as well dispense (with the neglect, or) with the
ignorance of Men in the Lord's Supper, as well as so to do in respect of
Baptism; and let them abide Members who refuse to break Bread with the Church,
and yet would continue Members, pretending ignorance; perhaps they will tell
you, they can answer the End of that Ordinance in breaking their common Bread,
etc.

Object. Romans 14. 1.
But does not the Apostle say, Such as are weak in the Faith, receive you, etc.

1. It cannot be meant received into the Church, because they that the Apostle
there speaks of, were in the Faith, or visible Profession of the Gospel, and
were Members of the Church, tho they were weak ones, or but Babes in Christ.

2. The weakness there meant, was about eating Meats, and observing days, etc.
which were in themselves but indifferent things: And will you render the great
Sacrament of Baptism like to them? It was no Sin to eat, or not to eat, but so
it is not to be subject, or not subject to Christ's Ordinances.

3. The receiving there intends doubtless no more than this, to let them abide
in their Affections, or receive them as poor weak Children to nourish and pity
them, and not to censure and judge hardly of their doubtful thoughts.

But to conclude, since my honored Friend and Brother, Mr. William Kiffen,
has but lately wrote so excellent a Book upon this very Subject, I shall say
no more to it, but refer the Reader for his further satisfaction to that
Treatise. But to proceed to a little Improvement: If Baptism be so great an
Ordinance as it seems it is, this may reprove all such who slight and despise
it, and may stir up all to an honorable esteem of it, and to move such who are
convinced of it, speedily to submit thereunto.

Let me conclude all with one use of Caution to my Brethren, that are baptized
as Believers, and yet take liberty to walk in Communion with such Churches as
dissent from them, in respect of this Ordinance, and sprinkle Babes.

I am more concerned about you, than any other People; because you seem to pull
down with one Hand, that which you Build with the other. Our Brethren with whom
you Walk, may be more Excusable than you can be, because they are faithful (I
would hope) to their Light; they will not have communion with any Persons, whom
they judge in their Consciences are Unbaptized; but you believe those who have
been only Sprinkled in Infancy, are all Unbaptized Persons, or otherwise why
were you Baptized afterward? Who can justify you in this Practice? I am
persuaded our Brethren cannot, will not do it, if they rightly consider the
light or dictates of your Consciences in this Matter: it is not what they are in
their own Sense, but what they are in your Judgment. Speak, are they Baptized?
Or, is not that they call Baptism, in your Consciences a Nullity? Nay, worse, a
Tradition of Men? nay, a profanation of the Sacrament of Baptism? How then can
you justify your selves in such a Practice? I have as much charity for our
Brethren, I hope, as most of you have, and love and honor them, yet dare not
transgress or invert Christ's holy Laws, and Gospel Order; and therefore take
heed what you do. If there were no Baptized Churches with whom you might have
Communion, somewhat might be said in your Justification. (For upon a case of
necessity that may be lawful, or be permitted to be done, which otherwise is
utterly unlawful.) Besides, I hear some of you (daily confess) they believe
they are not such Orderly Churches as the Baptized Congregations are, (and that
is the sum of what I say and believe concerning them) why then do you choose to
have Fellowship with them? Ought you not to follow the best and highest
Reformation, and clearest Discovery of God, and to be in the most perfect and
complete Order of the Gospel you are able to arrive to the knowledge of? Yet are
not you contented to lie short in doing this according to the Sentiments of
your Minds and Understandings? Is this the way to that longed-for Reformation?
Is not Truth and Righteousness to be joined with Peace and Love? Nay, and does
not my Love run out to our Brethren in a cleaner Channel than yours, (who
resolve my Affections shall never pilot my Judgment or Understanding?) I have
as great reason to love and honor some of the Congregational Way, as any one
Man this day in England; it pleasing God to work upon my Soul, I hope,
effectually, when very young under the Ministry of one that is of that
Persuasion, who is yet living, and none of the meanest Ministers, now Preaching
near this City; whose Name is dear to me, and one I do honor, (and ever shall)
as long as I live in the World. Yet nevertheless, my blessed Lord and Savior,
and his Truth, lies nearer my Heart. I speak the more upon this account, not
only to deliver your Souls from Temptations, and disorderly Walking; but also,
because I know it grieves many very gracious Persons, and weakens the hands of
those who carry on the Work of God amongst us; and seems to me to obstruct the
further Glory and Reformation of the Church. Yet I am for such Communion with
our Brethren, as we may warrantably promote, as to Pray and Preach together,
and to love and encourage Grace and Holiness in one another.

I Will say no more, I have done; only remember that excellent saying of the
Apostle, Now I pray you, Brethren, that ye remember me in all things, and keep
the Ordinances as I delivered them to you. Would to God I could say so of you.
It Is not enough to keep the Ordinances of Christ, but so to keep them as at
first delivered to the Saints. Let us go forward, and not decline, or seem to
draw back in our Zeal and Testimony for the Truth. Let us walk as we have
attained; God may bring our Brethren to see wherein they come short, as well as
wherein they know they are got before others. I hope, what I have written will
be received in good part, and none will be offended; for I can appeal to God,
the searcher of all Hearts, I have done all that I have done or writ in this
Treatise, in the integrity and uprighness of my Heart, and in sincere love to
Christ and his despised Ordinances, and to discharge my Conscience; hoping a
Blessing will attend it, and that it will redownd to his Glory, and the profit
of his Church; and if so, I matter not what Censures I lie under: For, my
Record is on high, and my Witness is in Heaven. I am contented to be any thing
or nothing, (if I know my own deceitful Heart) that God may be All in all; to
whom be Praise and Glory, by Jesus Christ, now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
The Table of the Contents.
Chap. I. BAptism of Water only intended in the Commission, proved, by Eight
Reasons, from Page 1, to p. 6. Water Baptism to continue to the end of the
World, from p. 7, 8, 9. Baptized in the Name of Christ, proved to be according
to the Commission, p. 11, 12. The Objection, that the Baptism in Water was
John's Baptism, Answered, p. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Object. That Paul was not sent
to baptize, Answered, p. 20, 22 Chap. II. Opening the true genuine, literal,
proper signification of the word Baptizo, p. 24, 25, 26 Chap. III. Baptism is
Dipping, etc. proved from the practice of the Primitive Church, p. 32, 33, etc.
Chap. IV. Baptism, Dipping, or Plunging, proved from the Spiritual
signification of the Ordinance, p. 42, 43, etc. Chap. V. Baptism proved
Immerging or Dipping, from the Typical and Metaphorical Baptisms, spoken of in
Scripture, p. 56, 57, etc. Chap. VI. Believers the only subjects of Baptism
from the Commission, p. 63, 64, etc. Chap. VII. Baptism of Believers proved the
only Subjects of it, from the practice of the Primitive Church, p. 76, 77, etc.
Chap. VIII. Believers the only Subjects from the ends of Baptism, p. 78. Seven
ends of Baptism, p. 80 Chap. IX. Containing Eight Arguments, proving Believers
the only Subjects, p. 86, to p. 99 Chap. X. The Arguments for Infant Baptism,
Answered, p. 100, to 124 Chap. XI. Other Objections and pretended Proofs for
Pedo-Baptism, Answered, p. 125, 126, etc. Chap. XII. Answer to several
Arguments, p. 146 Chap. XIII. Showing the evil Consequents of Infants Baptism,
p. 165, 166, etc. Chap. XIV. Baptism a great Ordinance, and Initiating, p. 171,
172, etc.



