M Vendor ^ucht scul:

Printed for J Tailor and J. Eueringham



A NEW Family-Book; OR, THE True Interest OF FAMILIES. BEING Directions to
Parents and Children, and to those who are instead of Parents; showing them
their several DUTIES, and how they may be Happy in one another. Together with
several PRAYERS for Families and Children, and GRACES before and after Meat. To
which is annexed a DISCOURSE about the Right Way of Improving our TIME,

By JAMES KIRKWOOD Rector of Astwick in Bedfordshire.

With a Preface, by Dr. Horneck.

The Second Edition Corrected and much Enlarged.

LONDON: Printed for J. Tailor at the Ship-in St. Paul's Churchyard, and J.
Everingham, at the Star in Ludgate Street. 1693.

To my Honored Friend and Patron, Thomas Brown of Arlsey Esquire and to Mrs. Mary
Brown his Wife.
ALL who have a right Sense of Things, and understand but a little of the State
of Religion in the World, cannot but see and lament the great decay thereof
every where amongst us. Atheism and Irreligion are become too much in fashion,
and have too many Votaries and Followers. It has not been known in any Age,
that such sort of Men (or rather Monsters, for Man is too Honorable a Name for
them) have been so numerous, so daring and impudent, and so successful. Who
could imagine that in a Christian State there should be such Persons, who are
at great pains to propagate Atheism, and to run down, if they were able, our
most Holy Religion!

As the neglect of Educating Children aright, contributes too much to this
degeneracy; so the most likely Remedy of this dangerous and spreading
Distemper, is, a due care in Parents and others who have the Charge of
Children, to train them up in the Knowledge, Fear, and Love of God; To do what
in them lies, to fortify their Minds against those Snares and Temptations to
which they are exposed; and to shine before them, in the Practice of sincere
Piety themselves.

Though too many, on whom God has bestowed Children, are so far from doing their
Duty for their Souls, that they corrupt and utterly ruin them, which Chrysostom.
one of the Ancients calls a greater Cruelty, than if they killed their Bodies.
Yet, blessed be God, there are some, who consider it as their main Business,
with Relation to their Children, to make them wise and good, Lovers of God, and
Haters of every Evil Thing.

Amongst those who are governed by this Religious Principle, God has made you,
my most Honored Friends, great Patterns. As he has blessed you with a
numerous offspring, so he has given you of the Wisdom from above, to know how
to Train them up in Piety and Virtue. The happy mixture of Kindness and
Severity which you use toward them, makes them not only to stand in awe of
you, but to love you.

I might be allowed, on this occasion, to say somewhat in Commendation of those
Excellent Qualities which God has blessed you with, and which appear not only
in your way and manner of Educating your Children, but in other things
likewise. The many and great Expressions of your kindness for me, ever since I
had the Honor to be known to you, require the most public Testimony of my
grateful Resentment thereof. But it is one of your Virtues, that you choose
rather to be concealed, than to make any great noise in the World. I shall
therefore restrain my self from what otherwise not only Gratitude, but the
great and just Esteem and Affection I have for you, do mightily tempt me unto;
And shall conclude this Address with my Prayers to God for you, That he would
increase his Grace in you more and more, that you may abound in all the Fruits
of Righteousness and true Holiness, until you obtain the End of your Faith, the
Salvation of your Souls. I am,

Tour most Affectionate Friend, and most Faithful Servant. James Kirkwood.

THE PREFACE.
THE Author of the ensuing Treatise, having thought fit to recommend his Papers
to my perusal, I was willing to usher them into the World, with some remarks
upon his pious design.

The Welfare of a Common Wealth does in a great measure depend upon the Duties
of the Relatives here treated of, Plat. l. 2. de Republ. Aristot l. 6. Politic.
c. 1.
and did Parents and Children conscientiously discharge all the Ob^igations
incumbent upon them by the Law of God, and Nature, the World could not be so
wicked as it is. Education makes the first impressions upon the Souls of Men,
and were care taken, that the Ground be impregnated with good Seed, such a
Harvest might be expected from it, that Posterity might be the better for it.

I am sensible that Conversation and the Humor of the Age, is apt to make
strange alterations in the Principles we imb^be, yet something will stick, and
when the thoughts are cool, and Men come to reflect, the Principles they have
learned when the wax was soft, will recoil, and oblige them to return to their
Duty.

Of this we have experience; and though there is no Rule so general, but admits
of exceptions, yet it is enough that this effect does frequently appear, which
is no inconsiderable Motive to the serious consideration of a thing of this
importance.

It was a wise answer, which one of the LXXII. Interpreters gave to Ptolemaeus
Philadelphus, who asked him, what was the greatest negligence? The neglect,
says he, of the good Education of Children. It is so, and the hurt that is done
by it, both to them, and to the Public, is unspeakable.

Whence is it that there are so many Prodigals, that so many come to an
untimely end? that so many run into excesses, which destroy both Soul and Body?
From want of pious Education.

It was a severe Censure, which Carneades the Philosopher passed upon the
Children of Rich Men, that they learned nothing but to ride well.

Indeed it is to be wondered, that Rational Creatures should be so careful to
breed up their Progeny to sensuality, and neglect the cultivation of that which
makes them differ from Bruits, and shows, they are Creatures of a nobler
extract: Can any thing be more reasonable, than Virtue and the fear of God? Is
not this it, which both Scripture and Philosophy teaches? Do not we our selves
confess so much, and do not most Men acknowledge it when they come to dye? And
yet that we should make this the least part of our care in the Education of
Youth, is wondrous strange!

Some seem to fancy, that sending their Children to School, or to teach them
their Catechism, is all the Care that is incumbent upon them. Though I cannot
say, but that this is a Duty, yet it is so imperfect, that I can scarce honor
it with the Title of doing it by halves, it being but the beginning, or the
least part of it. Instruction, Precept, and Example are the mighty Engines and
Instruments in the promoting and accomplishing this Work; and perhaps nothing
has a greater influence than Example; for all the Moral Precepts of the
Parents, are like Water spilt upon the Ground, where Example does not
concomitate the instruction.

How shall the Child learn Sobriety, where the Father is often drunk? Or how is
it possible, the young man should be meek and patient, where the Father is
Choleric, and has no command of his passion? I do not restrain the Grace of
God, and am sensible, that the very impiety of the Parents has sometimes
contrary Effects upon certain Children, and they learn to be good by the
Wickedness of their Superiors; but this is an extraordinary Providence, which
God exerts sometimes to manifest his Omnipotence, and to let Men see that he
can bring light out of darkness, but the ordinary way of Edifying those under
our Charge, is to teach them by Example.

And though even this proves ineffectual sometimes, yet it is enough that it is
our Duty, and that we have discharged it, and have taken that way which was
most rational, and of God's prescription.

I am so pleased with St. Jerome's Advice to Laeta concerning the Education of
her Daughter, Hierom Ep. 7. ad Laetam.
that I cannot forbear to transcribe part of it.

I will let you see, says he, what Education you are to give to a Daughter,
whose Soul ought to be the Temple of God. Let her hear nothing, learn nothing,
speak nothing, but what may inspire the fear of God into her. Let her not
listen to profane Discourses, nor be enamoured with Love Songs or am^rous
Ditties. Let her use her self at certain hours, to sing Psalms; let none be
about her, but sober Servants, and keep her from running into Company light and
vain, where she will learn more ill than good. Use her to reading, and to work,
and labor, and promise her Rewards, and incite her to Emulation; excite her to
Virtue by praises and Commendations, and make her ambitious to excel others in
Virtue and good Works. Let her learn Scripture Sentences by heart, and choose
her a Master, that may not only teach her to read, but instruct her in good
manners. Give her a Nurse neither debaucht nor tatling, nor given to strong
Liquors; and let her Habit be modest, and such as becomes her Christian
Profession. Let her not bore Holes in her Ears for Pendants, neither let her
use any Paint or Wash to beautify her self. Let her not be nice in ordering
the Hair of her Head, neither suffer her to adorn her self with Gold or Pearls,
or precious Stones, except you design her for Hell fire: When she comes to
riper Age, let her go with her Parents to the Temple, but let her not return to
the Gayeties of the World. Advise her to keep her self in her Chamber, and let
her not go to Feasts, and merry Meetings. I would not have her use too much
Fasting and Abstinence, which may hurt her health, at least till she be
stronger, and better able to bear it. Let her use God's Creatures for
necessity, and not for voluptuousness sake. Suffer her not to be at Musical
concerts, nor to be fond of Fiddles, and Lutes, and Harps, but let her repeat
every day some passages out of the Word of God. Let her not go abroad any where
without her Mother, nor be very familiar, or enter into intreagues with any
Servant. Appoint her a Governess that is sage and wise, and who may teach her to
rise at midnight, to sing Praises to her God. Let her pray and work Day and
Night. Teach her to handle her Needle, to Spin and to Exercise her self in
turning the Spindle. Suffer her not to employ her self in Imbroideries of Gold
and Silver. Let her Clothes be plain and decent, and let her eat soberly and
temperately, and let her not take pleasure in common Baths.

I know what will be objected here, that this is the advice of a Hermit, and to
teach a Daughter how to be a Nun. But still I appeal to any unprejudiced
Person, whether this be not the most likely way to Salvation, and whether these
Precepts be not agreeable to the Gospel of Christ? And though I will grant,
that all are not under the same Circumstances, and all cannot give the same
Education; yet as to the principal part of the advice, which is to teach
Children by Word and Example, how to die to Sin and to the World, it must be
granted it is very practicable. This Age indeed has learnt to shake off these
stricter Rules, but they should show us too, what Warrant they have from the
Word of God to do so.

It was judiciously observed of Fabius, that a soft and effeminate Education,
breaks the strength of Body and Mind, and whilst we breed up Children to all
the Arts of Vanity and Luxury, they continue strangers to God and to themselves.

The Vine grows wild, if it be not cut; so does Youth, if they be not betimes
curbed in things which war against the Soul.

Understand this, ye Parents, and be instructed, ye to whom God has committed
the care of Education; ye are God's Stewards, and your Children are the Goods
you are to manage to your Master's Glory. Their blood God will require at your
hands. Have not ye read the Curse God pronounced against Eli for his
negligence, and are not ye afraid of the same Judgment? Ye are the persons by
whom your Children must be taught to serve God in their Generation; ye are the
persons from whom they are to learn their Duty to God and Man; at your door the
fault will lie, if they miscarry through your carelessness. Are their Souls so
contemptible in your eyes, that you will let them perish for want of
Admonition? Did Christ think them worth purchasing with his own Blood, and will
ye let them lie without fence or wall, or cultivation?

You take care that they may live comfortably in this World: Is it not a
greater Duty to bestir your selves, that they may enjoy God for ever? It is joy
to you to see them do well here, and ought it not to be a greater joy to find,
that they are like to reign with Christ and his Saints in a better World? You
love them, but how does it appear you do, while you let their Souls die? Is
this your Love, to provide for their flesh, and to neglect enriching their
better part with religious Principles? You would have them go to Heaven when
they die; but how is it possible they should, when you are loath to be at the
trouble to show them the way that leads to that Paradise? Was ever any Man
saved without Holiness, and do you hope they will be, without this
qualification? If you teach them not by Word and Example to practice that
Holiness, how can you or they hope to ascend into the Mount of God, or dwell on
the everlasting Hills?

Do you believe a future Account, and do not ye enquire, whether you discharge
your Duty to your Children? Or is this no part of the Account ye are to give?
Ye are the Persons who are to breath^ goodness into them, and to give them life
and happiness. Ye are their Gods, as it were, and from you they receive their
motion; and their spiritual as well as their natural life must begin from you.
Ye are Magistrates in your Families, and it is your Province to be a terror to
evildoers, and Encouragers of those that do well.

If by your indulgence they sin, and by your connivence they grow wicked, will
not the supreme Judge be avenged on such Officers? You blame Governors of a
Commonwealth, if they do not animadvert on Offenders, or are regardless of the
reins of Justice; and do not you blame your selves, who are Commanders in your
Families, for suffering the fear of God to decay there, which is the only thing
that can make them happy?

How is it, that you will not understand your Interest? Is it not your interest
to educate them into the Practice of Virtue, and Goodness, and Self denial? If
they love God, they must needs love you, that love will constrain them to
express their Duty to you. The Presence of God will overawe them, and they will
obey you, not with eye-service, but when your eye is off from them. The fear of
God will make them conscientious of obeying your Commands in secret; and if
your good Counsels and Examples prevail with them, they will be not only your
Children, but the Children of God; and you will have this satisfaction, that
you do not only love them, but that God loves them, and dwells in them, and
they in him.

Remember this, ye that are Children, and let this encourage you to a faithful
discharge of your Duty. Your Parents, that under God gave you life, have a just
Right to your Services and Obedience. You are born Servants to them, and to be
at their beck and Command is the obligation you bring with you into the World.
As the Authority of Parents was the first Government in the World, so your
subjection to them is the first Service that was ever known in the World. Can
you think any thing too good for them, who are the great Instruments of
conveying to you all the goods you possess, and all the endowments you are
invested with?

If you follow not their good Instructions and Admonitions, ye are the greatest
Rebels in the World, and the sin is as great a Treason in the Family you live
in, as Sedition in a Kingdom is against the State. You have the noblest
Promises made you to reward your Obedience; and though it is a natural Duty
bound up with your very Being, yet God will reward it as if it were a
deliberate self-denial; and because you shall not stay for the recompense, God
will bless you here, and your lives shall be comfortable on this side Heaven.
It is the first Commandment in the Law with Promise; and to let you see how God
delights in your honoring your Parents, and obeying their wholesome Counsels, he
has singled out that Precept, and dressed it with more than ordinary
encouragements.

But then, the Honor you show them, must not spend it self in some outward
Civilities, but must be expressed in Actions, in Speeches, and in Patience,
according to the Advice of the Son of Syrach, Ecclesiastic. 3. 12, 13, 14.

In Actions, so as to execute their lawful Commands with great alacrity and
fidelity, to labor, and to take pains for their mainnteance and support, if
they are fallen to decay, and to relieve their necessities, according to your
ability.

In Words, and Speeches, so as to speak honorably of them, to answer them with
humility, to comfort them when they are in trouble, and to pacify them with
soft language, when they are angry and displeased.

In Patience, so as to bear their anger patiently, and to endure their
frowardness and pettishness without contradiction; to receive their severer
Commands, and such as are contrary to your genius and inclination, with
gentleness, and to do them without murmuring.

These are Duties which draw more than ordinary Blessings upon you, God that
sees you do so, will have thoughts of peace toward you; he will be concerned
for you, and you may be confident, he will not leave you, nor forsake you.

In honoring your Parents, you honor your selves. It Is that which will not
only procure you favor with God, but with Men too. It Is upon this account,
that Wise Men have recorded the Dutifulness of some excellent Children, and
make them Immortal by their Writings; and there are such Examples of this
filial Respect, even among the Heathen, that it would be odious and dreadful,
if the Children of Christians should fall short of their Duty.

God lays so great a stress upon it that as he promises the kindest things to
it, so he threatens as severe punishments, where it is neglected; and that he
does not only threaten, but execute these Judgments, any Man may see, that will
take notice of his Providence. But all this the Reader will be more fully
convinced of, by reading the following Discourse, which, that God may bless
with success and edification, shall be my hearty Prayer.

A. Horneck.

THE CONTENTS Of Advice to Parents.
PART I.
THE Introduction, showing the great Importance of the right Education of
Children. Page 1 How Parents ought to be affected, while Children are yet in
the Womb. 2 How they ought to be affected when their Children are born. 3
The Duties of Parents for their Childrens Souls.
1. Duty, To Consecrate them to God in Baptism. 4 The Right of Children to
Baptism. 8
2. Duty, to season their Minds betimes with good Impressions. 13 Children are
to be acquainted with Scripture Histories. 14
3. Duty, to teach them to pray. 18 4. Duty, to observe carefully their Temper
and Disposition, and to endeavor to reform what is amiss therein. 22 What is
to be done if they are sturdy and proud. 22 If they be given to lying. 23 If
they are Cunning and Deceitful. 24 If they are peevish and passionate. 25 If
they are Revengeful and Malicious. 26 If they are Jealous and Suspicious. 28 If
they are too Credulous. 28 If they are Envious. 29 If they are very Impatient
30 If they love their Belly too well. 32 If they discover any tendency to
Unchaste and Immodest actions. 33 If they are very Changeable and Unconstant. 36
If they are surly and morose. 37 If they are disrespectful to Aged Persons. 39
If they quarrel much with one another. 40 If they are over curious to know
their Lot and Fortune in the World. 42 If they are unthankful to those who do
them good and kind Offices. 46 If they are of too Prodigal a Temper. 49 If they
are Covetous. 50 If they are naturally melancholy. 51 If they are of too gay
and airy a Temper. 51 If they are Rash and Froward. 52
5. Duty, to see that they be taught to Read. 55 About keeping them at School.
56 Great care ought to be taken, what Books they read. 61
6. Duty, to bring them to the place of public Worship, so soon as they are
fit for it. 64 What they should do before they go to Church. 65 How they should
carry themselves at Church. ib. What they should do when they come from Church.
66 Why the Lord's Day ought to be kept. 67 Children are to be possessed with a
great regard for the Ministers of the Gospel. 68
7. Duty, to make them understand their Baptismal Covenant. 73 8. Duty, to
encourage them to come to the Lord's Table. 77 9. Duty, to take care that they
accustom themselves to self-Examination. 79 10. Duty, to observe what
Providence they meet with, and to acquaint them therewith in due time, as also
with some of the most remarkable Providence, which either they (to wit the
Parents) themselves, or others have met with. 86 Some Directions to Parents,
how to render their Endeavors effectual. 95 1. They must give their Children
good Example. 95 2. They must choose good Company for them. 98 The great Danger
that Children are in from Flatterers. 99 Advice to those who send their
Children abroad to travel. 102
3. They must, as need requires, reprove and chasten their Children, and how?
106 Parents ought in correcting their Children, to follow the Example of our
Heavenly Father. 111 Parents must be careful not to oppose one another, when
they correct and reprove their Children. 112

4. They must carefully improve the Time of their Childrens Sickness, or of any
other Afflictions they meet with, toward the making of them wiser and better.
113 5. They must daily pray to God for them. 115 Against those who curse their
Children. 118

Some Motives to excite Parents to do these things.
1. Motive from the Divine Command. 120 2. Motive, from its being a work worthy
of the utmost care and pains of Parents. 122 3. Motive, from the Rewards which
attend those, who faithfully do these things. 123 4. Motive, from the great
Benefit which comes both to Church and State by the good Education of Children.
127 5. Motive, from the sad Effects which attend the neglect of these Duties.
135
PART II.
The Duties of Parents as to their Childrens Bodies.
1. DVty, it belongs to the Mother to give suck to her Children. 141 2. Duty,
about Childrens Diet. 145 3. Duty, about Childrens Apparel. 146
The Duty of Parents as to the outward Estate of their Children.
1. Duty, to choose a fit Trade for them. 148 Advice to those who have great
Estates and Riches, to bestow on their Children. 150 Advice to those, who
intend to set apart one or more of their Children for the Holy Ministry. 157
2. Duty, about disposing of them in Marriage. 162 The sad Effects of Marrying
very lewd and profligate Persons. 164
3. Duty, about providing somewhat that may be the foundation of their
comfortable subsistence in the World. 167 Great Prudence and Caution ought to
be used in bestowing their Worldly Goods on their Children. 172
4. Duty, to have their Will and Testament in Readiness. 174 The great
Inconvenience of delay in this matter. 174 Great care to be taken in the choice
of Guardians for Children. 178 The above mentioned particulars earnestly
recommended to Parents. 180

Concerning the Duty of Parents when God removes their Children by Death.
1. They ought to consider that it is the Lord who does it. 187 2. They ought
to consider that their Children were born mortal. 189 3. They should consider
from whence, and whither they are gone. 197 4. They should consider that there
will be a Resurrection. 202 5. They should consider that their giving way to
excessive Grief and Mourning, can do no good, but will certainly do a great
deal of hurt. 205 The Duty of Parents on their Deathbed. 209 1. Duty, to give
their Children good Advice. 210 2. Duty, to pray to God for them. 212 3. Duty,
to commend them to some Faithful Friends. 212
Concerning the Duties of Step-Fathers and Step-Mothers. 214 Some Motives to
stir them up to do their Duty. 218 The Duties of Guardians. 223 Some Motives to
excite Guardians to do their Duty. 225
A Morning Prayer for Parents, or Masters of Families, with their Family. 232
An Evening Prayer for Parents, or Masters of Families, with their Family. 237 A
short Prayer for the Morning or Evening, when through Extraordinary Occasions
there is not time for the other. 242 A Prayer to be taught Children, when hey
begin to speak. 245 A Prayer for Children when they come to be four or five
Years old. 246 A Prayer for Children, when they come to twelve or fourteen
years of Age; sooner or later, according to the ripeness of their
understanding. 247 Grace before Meat. 251 After Meat. 252
ERRATA.
Page 16. line 26. read intelligible. p. 22. l. 22. for when, r. whom. p. 44.
l. 9. r. infallibly. p. 45. l. 2. for having, r. have. p. 68. l. 22. r.
Ministrations. p. 87. l. 24. r. stir up. p. 97. l. 22. r. And besides the
influence. p. 101. l. 21. r. Attia. p. 126. l. 12 r. luster p. 154. l. 1. r.
of. p. 159. l. 13. point thus; early and late, to be. p. 178. l. 7. for are, r.
is. p. 187. l. 25. point thus; sees fit. He is the great Potter, and. p. 193.
l. 28. for has, r. had. p. 215. l. 1, point thus; account: They. p. 238. l. 4.
point thus; Counsels, and despised.

As to some other mistakes in the Printing, they will not much hinder the
Reader.

ERRATA in Advice to Children.
Page 3. l. 18. r. Disposition. p. 9. l. 12 and 13. r. tho Canaan. l. 29. for
ye, r. thee. p. 29. l. 16. for Cat, r. Cock. p. 114. l. 5. r. Servant. p. 139.
l. 4. r. has called. p. 150. l. 15. and 16. r. according.

ADVICE TO PARENTS.
PART I.
IT has been always reckoned by the best and Wisest men, a thing absolutely
necessary toward a Reformation in the World, to begin with the Instruction and
Education of Children; those of elder Years being ordinarily so rooted and
hardened in their sinful habits, that, for the most part, there is very little
can be done to reform them, and make them better. So sensible were some ancient
States of this, that they made particular Laws for Educating Children; thinking
it too great a Trust, to leave it altogether in the Power of Parents, to train
up their Children according to their Humor and Fancy. Amongst Christians,
there are few restraints upon Parents; in most Countries it being in their
Power to Educate their Children as they think good: It is therefore of no small
Importance for them to know what their Duty is, that they may approve
themselves to God, in doing whatever he requires toward their Children, for
their Souls, their Bodies, and their outward Estate.

The Design of this Treatise, is, to furnish those, who want such helps, with
some plain and easy Directions, that they may know how to act the Part of
Christian Parents.

First, while Children are yet in the Womb, How Parents ought to be affected
while Children are yet in the Womb.
it is the Duty of Parents, to endeavor to bring their mind to an
indifferency, as to the Sex which shall be born; not to prescribe to God, by
their impatient desires, and their bold asking of him, a Child of this or that
Sex; but to leave it entirely to his Will and Pleasure, to do what he thinks
best. The happiness of Parents does not consist in having Children of this or
that Sex: Sometimes Sons (who are most desired ordinarily) may prove useless in
the World, yea very hurtful in many regards; they may occasion great grief of
Heart, and lasting Anguish and Vexation to their Parents, by their mad and
foolish Courses, and wicked doings: And on the other hand, Daughters may prove
great Blessings in the World, great Comforts to their Parents, and great
Examples of Piety and of Zeal for the honor of God: On which accounts Parents
ought to resign their will to God, and be ready with all gratitude to accept
whatever he bestows.

Secondly, How they ought to be affected when their Children are born.
When a Child is born, Parents ought with all thankfulness to return Praise to
God, who has bestowed such a blessing upon them, giving them a living Child,
sound and perfect in all its parts and proportions, without either defect of
necessary parts, or excess and deformity thereof. They ought to admire and
adore the Powerful and Wise Providence of God, which appears in framing and
fashioning their Infant, so curiously and wonderfully in the Womb; in
preserving it, and making it grow up from a very small and imperfect beginning,
to such a bigness, with all those comely shapes and proportions which they
behold; and at last in bringing it safely from the Womb, which is one of the
great and wonderful Works of the Power and Goodness of God; tho it be little
regarded, because it is so common.

They ought to look upon their Children as given them of God, to be taken care
of both as to their Souls and Bodies; to be bred up in his fear, for his Honor
and Glory; to be made fit to serve him here, and to live with him for ever
hereafter.

The Soul being the chiefest part o^ the Charge committed to Parents, ^ shall
first show what they ought to d^ for their Childrens Souls.

The first Duty of Parents for the Souls of their Children, is, to Consecrat^
them to God in Baptism.
First, They ought to Consecrate their Children to God in Baptism, so soon as
conveniently they can: They cannot better express their gratitude to God for
blessing them with Children, than by presenting them to him again in this holy
Ordinance; that he may set his Seal upon them, and admit them into his House
and Family; that he may bestow upon them the Privileges of his Children, and
give them a Right and Title to the Blessedness, the Grace and Glory purchased
by Jesus Christ. It is for this End that Baptism is instituted; not only to be
a Ceremony of Admission into the Church, but to Seal unto us the Pardon of our
Sins, to assure us of the Divine Favor, to make us Members of Christ, Heirs of
God, and Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven, if we by wilful impenitency and
unbelief, do not afterward hinder and frustrate the Virtue thereof.

It is not necessary for Parents to enquire how such things are done by
Baptism; it is enough for them to know, That God has appointed Baptism for
those Ends, and we are sure that He appoints nothing in vain: Our Savior is
said, Ephesians. 5. 26. To sanctify and cleanse his Church with the washing of Water
by the Word. And, Tit. 3. 5. he is said to save us by the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. And in the 22 d. of the Acts and
the 16. it is said by Ananias unto Paul, Arise and ^e Baptized, and wash away
thy Sins: And St. Peter, having spoken of Noah's being saved with his Family in
the Ark, he adds, 1 Epist. 3 21. The like Figure whereunto, even Baptism does
now also save us. And St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. For as the Body is
one, and has many members, and all the members of that one Body, being many,
are one Body; So also is Christ. For by one Spirit are we all Baptized into one
Body. And Gal. 3. 26, 27. He says, For ye are all the Children of God by Faith
in Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put
on Christ: Which words import not only our owning and acknowledging him as the
Savior of the World, who alone is able to wash and cleanse us with his Blood,
but also our Professing our resolution to live holy lives, to walk in newness
of life according to his Example; in token of which in the Ancient Church, they
who were baptized, were presently clothed with White Raiment, to testify their
resolution to live in holiness, and to put off the Old man, that is, all their
former Wicked deeds and Customs, and filthy Practices. Likewise, Romans 6. 3, and
4. it is thus written, Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into
Jesus Christ, were baptized into his Death? Therefore we are buried with him by
Baptism into Death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the
Glory of the Father; even so we also should walk in newness of Life. These
words import not only our belief of a Crucified Savior, who dyed and was
buried for sin, to save us from it; but also our Repentance, whereby we
renounce Sin, as dead and buried to it for the time to come.

The general Design of this Sacrament, being sufficiently plain and clear from
these and other Scriptures; it is to little purpose, (and oftentimes it proves
to very ill purpose) to enquire any further as to particulars; for by so doing,
a great many persons judging of Divine things by their own weak and foolish
apprehensions, have reasoned themselves (if I may so speak) both out of their
Reason and Religion.

As to the Right of Children to Baptism, The Right of Children to Baptism.
It will appear, if you Consider, that the Covenant Blessing of God's being the
God of Abraham and of his Seed, Genesis 17. 7. is not only continued, to those of
the Jewish Nation who are converted to Christianity, (for if the first Fruit be
holy, the Lump is Holy; and if the Root be Holy, so are the Branches, Romans 11.
16.) but is likewise extended to the Gentiles, who by Faith in Christ are made
one Body with the Jews, and so have a Right to the Blessings promised to
Abraham and to His Children Romans 4. 9, 10, 11, 12. Comes this blessedness upon
the Circumcision only, or upon the uncircumcision also? For we say, that Faith
was reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness. How was it then reckoned? When he
was in Circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in Circumcision, but in
uncircumcision? And he received the sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the
Righteousness of the Faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised: That He might
be the Father of them that believe, tho they be not Circumcised, that
Righteousness might be imputed unto them also: And the Father of Circumcision,
to them who are not of the Circumcision only, but also walk in the Steps of
that Faith of our Father Abraham, which he had being yet uncircumcised. From
which Words it appears, That all who believe, not only Jews or Persons
Circumcised, but Gentiles also, or Persons uncircumcised, are accounted the
Children of Abraham, and capable to partake of that Happiness and Salvation,
which was Promised to him as the Father of the Faithful. To the same purpose
says the Apostle, writing to the Galatians, Chap. 3. 9. They which be of
Faith, are blessed with Faithful Abraham. And v. 29. If ye be Christ's, then
are ye Abraham 's Seed, and Heirs according to the Promise. Again, 1 Cor. 7.
14. he says, The unbelieving Husband is Sanctified by the Wife, and the
unbelieving Wife is Sanctified by the Husband: Else were your Children unclean,
but now are they Holy. Which intimates, that the Children of all Believers,
whether they be Jews or Gentiles, are within God's Covenant, and have a Right
to those Favors and Privileges which he has annexed thereto. Likewise, Acts
2. 39. it is said, The Promise is unto you, and to your Children, and to all
that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. So that, all
who are called by the Preaching of the Gospel, and do believe in the Lord
Jesus, are both themselves and their Children within the Covenant of Grace. If
it were not so, Then the Blessing of Abraham, were not come on the Gentiles,
through Jesus Christ, as it affirmed, Gal. 3. 14. For how could the same
Blessing be come on the Gentiles; if their Children were not comprehended
within the Covenant of Grace, which was a part of the Blessing of Abraham? And
how could Christians be Heirs according to the Promise, if their Children have
no Right to it, as Abraham's Children had? Or can it be imagined, that the
Condition of Believers under the Gospel, is worse than the Condition of those
who believed under the Law? Are God's Mercies and Favors to Mankind impaired,
by Christ's coming into the World? Has the great Lover of Souls, the Redeemer
of the World, been the occasion of our loseing great and considerable
Privileges, by his Tabernacling amongst us? And yet all this must needs
follow, if now under the Gospel the Children of Believers are excluded from the
Covenant of Grace, which they were admitted to under the Law; which is very
inconsistent with the Divine Goodness, and contrary to the Love of our Lord
Jesus, which he manifested in his Blessed Gospel; where we find, he Commanded
the Children to be brought unto him, and blamed those who would have kept them
from him; He took them into his Arms, laid his Hands upon them, and Blessed
them, and declared that he accounted them Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven. Mat.
19. 13, 14, 15. and Mark 10. 13, 14, 15. 16. From all which, both Words and
Deeds of our Savior, we may see very plainly, he was far from hindering their
being admitted Members of his Church and Kingdom.

The Right of Infants to Baptism will further appear, if you consider more
particularly the Institution of Baptism. The Jews were wont to admit into their
Church, not only Aged Persons who were converted to Paganism, but likewise
their Children, which they did by Circumcision, Sacrifice, and Baptism. Our
Savior being to determine the manner of admitting Disciples and Proselytes
into his Church that he might make his Yoke: easy to those who would come
after him, laid aside Circumcision, (which was a painful Rite) and Sacrifices,
(which were very Costly) and only retained Baptism, to be the Sacrament of
Initiation or Admission of Disciples into his Church. Go ye, said he to his
Apostles, Mat. 28. 19. and teach (or, as the Words may be Translated, Disciple
or make Disciples of) all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Now, this Command being given to Men,
who knew that the Infants of those who were Converted, were admitted into the
Jewish Church, as well as the Parents themselves, is there the least Ground to
imagine any other, but that our Savior's Design was, that the Children of
Believers should still be admitted into his Church, as well as formerly into
the Jewish? And no doubt, if he had thought fit to discontinue the Jewish
Practice, he would have expressly signified his Mind about it, to prevent an
otherwise unavoidable mistake.

To all which might be added, that the Catholic or Universal Church, not only
at this Day, but in former Ages, has observed this Custom, of Baptizing the
Children of Christian Parents.

Now, if Children have so good a Right to Baptism, what shall be said of those
Parents, who ^light and neglect it, and so deprive their poor Children of that
which God, their Heavenly Father, has ordained for so great and excellent
purposes? We see how careful Parents are, if their Children have a Title to
Houses and Lands, or other Temporal Things, to use their utmost Endeavors, to
make their Title as sure unto them as is possible. And yet how sad is it to
think, that they are not at all careful, to have their Children Baptized, though
God has appointed this Sacrament, to be the Seal of his Covenant, and an
Evidence of that Right which Believers and their Children have to the Kingdom
of Heaven.

2. Duty, to feason their Minds betimes with good Impressions.
Secondly, When Children begin to speak and to discover some dawnings of
Reason, it is fit to season their Minds with some good Thoughts, with some
divine Impressions, that Religion betimes may catch hold of their tender and
innocent Minds, before they are corrupted and defiled with bad Principles, and
vain and unreasonable Opinions, which they are apt to learn too soon from evil
Company. Teach them who made them; who dyed for them; for what end they were
made; whither good Children go when they dye, and whither naughty Children go;
what a place Heaven is, and Hell, etc.

Amongst other Things, 'twill be very useful to tell Children, some of the most
remarkable Histories in Scripture, Children are to be acquainted with Scripture
Histories.
as so many Arguments and Motives to excite them to be good Children, and to
avoid all wicked and naughty Courses: For Example, tell them the Story of the
Deluge, how God punished the Old World, because they were wicked, but saved
Noah. Thereby take occasion, to show them the Danger of being wicked; that
sinning with Company, will not preserve from Punishment; what a Happy thing it
is to be good; and how kind the Lord is to such who keep his Commandments, as
Noah did.

To this purpose tell them also the Story of Sodom and Gomorrah, etc. How those
Cities were consumed by Fire from Heaven, for their great Wickedness; and how
Lot was preserved from that dreadful Destruction.

Tell them the History of David and Goliath, that they may learn not to be proud
of their Strength, but may put their Trust in God, who is able to save them
from their mightiest Enemies.

Tell them the Story of the naughty Children at Bethel, how they mocked the Old
Prophet Elijah, and how 42 of them were torn in pieces by two Bears. By this
Example show them, what a dangerous thing it is to be in the Company of naughty
Children; and what an Evil thing it is to be Mockers and Scorners, especially
of Holy Men, of Aged Persons, or of God's Ministers.

Tell them what happened to Ananias and Saphira for their lying; that they may
be afraid to lie.

Tell them how Daniel was preserved, when he was cast into the Den of Lions:
And how the three Children were preserved in the Fiery Furnace. That thereby
they may learn, never to be afraid to do the Will of God, though by doing it they
should be exposed to never so great Dangers.

Tell them how Daniel, Hananiah, Mishacl and Azariah chose to eat Pulse only,
and to drink Water, and yet, by the Blessing of God on their plain Diet, Their
Countenances appeared fairer and fatter in Flesh, than all the Children that
did ^at the Portion of the King's Meat. That thereby they may learn to be well
pleased with the most Plain and Ordinary Fare, and may consider that the
Blessing of God is able to make the coursest Diet very sweet, Refreshing and
Nourishing, even beyond the greatest Delicacies.

In this manner it is sit to entertain your Children sometimes, according to
their Age and Capacity, with such Scripture Histories, as tend to make the most
lively Impressions upon them.

In teaching Children such matters, it is necessary to condescend to their weak
Capacity, to speak to them softly and gently, and in a plain and intellgible
manner. It is not fit to talk with them of such things at all times, nor yet to
say too much to them at any one time: Such Instructions are to be dropped into
their Minds leisurely and by degrees, so as not to oppress them, but to
recreate them; not to be a Burden to them, but a Pleasure.

It cannot be expressed how great Advantages attend such early Instructions;
these are the Seeds of Virtue, which take root infensibly, and spring up
sometimes very unexpectedly; the Impressions which they make continue a great
while, as Earthen Vessels retain the favor of that Liquor which was first put
into them a long time after: So powerful are these f^r^t Instructions, that
they are able to conq^^r even Nature it self. Plutar^ in Lycurgo.
The famous Lycurgus made this appear, by bringing into the Marketplace two
Dogs of one Litter, and presenting before them a Pot of Pottage and a Hare; one
of them (which was trained up in Hunting) run after the Hare; and the other
(which was brought up in the House) sell to the Pottage.

What a wonderful power may we daily observe in those early impressions which
are made on Men's Minds? Thereby in comes to pass, that the most abs^^d and
extravagant Opinions, which have been sucked in, when one was young, can hardly
be removed by the clearest and strongest Reasonings.

3. Duty, to teach them to pray.
Thirdly, Teach them, so soon as may be, to pray to God Morning and Evening; To
say after you, or others whom you appoint for that purpose, two or three short
Petitions, which are easy to be understood; and as their Understanding and
Capacity increases, teach them the Lord's Prayer; and after that some larger
Form of Prayer, which they may say after you, till they can read it themselves,
or get it by heart.

You are to have a special care, that they perform their Devotions in as grave
and serious a manner as their years can admit: You are to keep them from all
sorts of indecent Actions and Postures, when they say their Prayers: For this
end, you are to teach them who it is they speak to when they pray, and what
those things mean, which the pray for.

Choose the sit times for them, wherein to say their Prayers: As in the
Morning, whenever they arise; while their Spirits are most vigorous, and their
Thoughts most free. At Night let them say their Prayers rather before Supper
than after; because after Supper, they are more apt to be very dull and sleepy,
and thereby less fit for such a performance. God is not to be served with the
refuse of our Thoughts, and with sluggish sleepy Desires; but with our best and
most lively Affections, and with the strength and fervor of our desires.

You are to prevent their omitting their Prayers at any one time; because doing
so once or twice, they are apt to neglect them wholly, or to return to them
with great aversness: Whereas Custom and Constancy in performing their
Devotions, will make them much more easy and pleasant to them.

When they are possessed with more perfect and solid thoughts about Religion,
with stronger and more lively impressions of Divine things, and are able
without great difficulty to express the sense of their Souls; They may do what
they find serves best the great purposes of Devotion: If praying without
restraining themselves to any particular Form of Words, contribute more to
their Fervency and Elevation of Mind in Prayer, let them pray without using a
Form: But, if they find that their Minds are more stayed and fixed, and their
Fervency and Devotion greater in the use of a Form than without it, let them do
that which they find best.

When they pray for outward and temporal things, teach them to do it with an
entire submission to the Will of God, who has promised perishing things
conditionally, that is, so far as he sees the bestowing of them will be for his
Glory, and the good of his Children: Therefore they must not be peremptory,
vehement, and importunate in their desires and Prayers for such things, but
ought to pray for them with great Humility and Resignation to the Divine Will.

As for spiritual Blessings, to wit, the pardon of Sin, the direction and
assistance of the Spirit of God, his Grace to help them in time of need, power
and strength to fight against the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, etc. These
things are to be prayed for with all the importunity and earnestness that is
possible. The more vehement and fervent their desires and Prayers are for such
things, the more acceptable are they to God, and the more likely to obtain from
him the desires of their Souls; for he has promised, to satisfy the longing
Soul with good things.

As it is the Duty of Parents to teach their Children to pray Morning and
Evening, so they ought to teach them, always to bless God before and after
Meals. You ought at first, when they begin to speak, to cause them to say after
you, or after those who attend them, two or three words, before and after Meat.
And when they come to greater Capacity, teach them a larger Form. This will, in
due time, be a means to excite in their Minds a Sense of the power and goodness
of God, of their dependence upon him for all needful things, both for Soul and
Body, and of their own weakness and indigence.

4. Duty, to observe carefully their temper and disposition, and to endeavor
to reform what is amiss therein.
Fourthly, Observe carefully their Temper and Disposition, what Vices they are
most inclined to; If they are sturdy and proud, peevish and passionate,
Malicious and Revengeful, False and Deceitful, rash and unadvised, etc.
Endeavor, all you can, to reform them, and to bend their Minds the right way.
For Example,

If they are sturdy and proud, What is to be done if they are sturdy and proud.
strive to humble them, to break them, to tame their proud Spirits; accustom
them to the doing Acts of Humility; do not gratify them in those things which
are apt to make them Proud; cause them to yield and submit to your Will, or to
the Will of others whom you think fit they should obey. Accustom them, now and
then, to a refusal of what they would have, especially when you see them too
eager to have it. This you may do in small matters, which they may be without
very safely: By which means you will prepare them to bear with a refusal in
things of greater moment, (which are either inconvenient for them to have, or
for you to give) and to be willing to have them, or want them, as you shall
think fit.

If once this Foundation is laid, it will make the rest of your work a great
deal more easy, in the Education of your Children. If you once take their will
from them, you may then do with them what you please. But if, instead of this,
you gratify them in whatever they have a mind to, and suffer them to live
according to their own Will and Humor, whether it be right or wrong, you may
then expect, that when they are grown up, they will improve to their own hurt
and your grief, the Excessive Liberty they had when they were young. As then
you left them to do their own will, so now they will do it, whether you will or
not.

If they be given to Lying, If they be given to Lying.
show them the Evil of it, that a Lying Tongue is an Abomination to the Lord,
Prove. 6. 16, 17. and Chapter 12. 22. That the Devil is the Father of Liars; and
that they are in the Number of those that are shut out of the new Jerusalem,
and have their part in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, Rev. 21.
8. and 22. 15. Show them how great hurt it will do them, and what shame it will
bring upon them; That if they be found Liars, People will not believe them,
even when they speak Truth. Encourage them to confess their Faults, if they
have done any thing amiss; be apt to pardon them when they confess, and tell
the Truth; and commend them for doing so: But if you find them in a Lie, be
sure to Chastise them for it, especially if they have done it oftener than once.
Nothing tends more to the spoiling of Children, than their getting into such a
habit: This is a Vice that grows up apace, if not timely cured by good
Education; Thereby they learn to grow so false and disingenuous, that they are
not fit to be trusted or employed.

If you observe them to be Cunning, If they are Cunning and Deceitful.
and full of little Arts and Wiles, to deceive those who are simple and good
natured; strive to temper this Wisdom of the Serpent, with the Harmlesness and
Innocence of the Dove. Teach them to use their Wisdom, in doing their Duty as
well as they can; in carrying on such good and useful Designs, as are suitable
to their Age; and in taking heed lest others deceive them. Endeavor to make
them understand, that Golden Rule, which our Savior gives us, Mat. 7. 12. All
things whatsoever you would that Men should do to you, do ye even so to them.
Show them, that, at last, Honesty will be found to be the best policy. That
they that walk uprightly, walk surely. Prove. 10. 9. That God will be a Buckler
to them that walk uprightly, ( Prove. 2. 7.) That is, he will protect such
Persons, and save them from Mischief and Destruction. Endeavor, all that is
possible, to make them Lovers of Sincerity and of Godly simplicity; and strive
to possess them with a just abhorrence of any thing that looks like cheating
and deceiving.

If they are of a peevish and passionate Temper, If they are peevish and
passionate.
easily put out of Humor with every little thing, and apt to fly out into
Passion for a small matter; endeavor to make them of a calm and mild Temper,
Meek and Gentle, and of a well governed and composed Spirit. Teach them to
bridle their Passion, to restrain the inward boiling of their Anger, and not to
suffer it to break forth into indecent Words and Actions. Show them, what an
excellent thing it is, for one to rule his Spirit, which, Solomon says, is
better than to take a City, Prove. 16. 32. Show them, what sad consequences
attend an unruly Passion; and what mad and foolish things some have done, when
they were angry. 'Twill not be amiss, to take occasion to show them, how one
looks, and what he does, when he is transported by his Passion; and endeavor
thereby, to possess them with a great abhorrence of this Vice, which renders
those who are guilty of it, such sad and deformed spectacles. Often suggest to
them the Example of our Blessed Master; who, when he was reviled, reviled not
again; who, endured the contradiction of Sinners against himself; and who
commanded us, to learn of him, who was meek and lowly, Mat. 11. 29.

If you perceive them to be Naturally very Revengeful and Malicious, If they
are Revengeful and Malicious.
ready to do all manner of mischief to those, who have crossed them or vexed
them in any thing; endeavor all that you can, to deliver them from so woeful
and unhappy a Temper; and to make them love those, who have done or said
somewhat that was uneasy to them, and to embrace all occasions of doing them
kind Offices, that so they may learn to overcome evil with good. Do not
encourage them to say ill of those, who have said ill of them; for this were to
feed and cherrish their Revengeful Humor. Show them the Example of our Blessed
Savior, who Loved his Enemies, yea Died for them; and requires of all his
Followers, to love their Enemies. Show them, what a Noble Victory it is over an
Enemy, to overcome him with the Weapons of Kindness, by doing him good Offices;
and what happy effects attend this Christian Temper. Acquaint them likewise,
with the many sad consequences of Revenge, whereby such Persons who give way
thereto, seldom fail to bring upon themselves, if not their whole Family, utter
Ruin and Destruction.

Parents ought so much the more, to strive to beget a mighty Sense of this Duty
upon their Childrens minds, because it seems, most of all other thing to be
neglected by the generality (...) Christians.

If you find your Ch^^dren apt to be very Jealo^^ and Suspicious, If they are
Jealous and Suspicious.
endeavo^ to free them from so bad Temper, which will lay the foundation of
perpetual uneasiness and disquiet, (...) it be not speedily cured. Strive (...)
make them think favorably, and (...) hope and believe the best of ever^^body.
Show them, how much bett^ it is, to be mistaken often in their f^^vourable
construction, than to jud^ amiss of any body, though but once; the this is a Sin,
which the other is not.

But though Parents oug^ thus, If they are too credulous.
to endeavor to fr^ their Children from the Jealous and Uncharitable Temper,
y^ care must be taken, that they be n^ too credulous, apt to believe whateve^
is spoken, without any regard to the Authority and Credibility, the Trut^ and
Sincerity of the Speaker: For, (...) being of such a Temper as this, the are in
danger perpetually of being imposed upon, and betrayed to a gre^ many
inconveniences, both in the^ Words and Actions: Any body who has but Wit
enough, to find out their Temper, may very easily make a prey of them, and by
false Relations, and cunning Insinuations, may occasion their saying and doing
a great many things, very hurtful to themselves or others, or at least very
silly and impertinent, which will expose them to a great deal of Contempt and
Scorn. Parents therefore, ought to look upon it as a matter of no small
importance, to preserve their Children from being too credulous; they ought to
Teach them to enquire into the Truth of what is spoken, and to consider who the
Person is that speaks. For if it be manifest, that he who speaks, is
ordinarily given to Lying, and that he makes no Conscience of his words; it is
so far from being a fault, not to believe him; that, on the contrary, it is a
piece of very great silliness, to make any account of what he says, until it be
confirmed by Persons of known Truth, and of unquestioned Integrity.

If they are of an Envious Temper, If they are Envious.
and cannot endure that others be Loved as well as they, or that others should
have better and fine things than they, or even as good: Endeavor to cure them
of this Distemper, by all such Arguments and Methods, as their years are
capable of Show them how great mischief their Envy does them; how it robs them
o^ the Happiness and Comfort of their Lives, and eats out all that Sweetness
and Pleasure they might otherwise ta^^ in what they enjoy. Show them, what a
foolish thing their Envy is; it cannot affect or hurt others, it only hurt^
themselves, which it does with a witness; for, as Solomon says, Prove. 14. 30.
Envy is the rottenness of the bones; That is, it wastes and consumes to the very
Bones, those who entertain so unlucky a Guest; it makes their Life most
miserable.

If you perceive them to be very impatient, If they are very impatient.
when they have not presently what they desire, or when any uneasy thing
happens unto them; for example, when their Head aches a little, or when any
other part of their Body is affected, more or less, with somewhat that is
painful and smarting, etc. Endeavor to make them of a patient Spirit; teach
them to bear their burden without much complaining or making an indecent
noise. Make them sensible, that all those things, which are so painful and
afflictive to them, are ordered by the wise and just Providence of God, to try
them, to humble them, to raise their Hearts to Heaven, to purify them from
their dross, to prepare them for greater sufferings, to stir them up to call
upon him, and to learn to depend upon him, and to resign themselves entirely to
his Holy Will and Pleasure. Show them, that whatever they suffer, is far less
than they deserve; that a great many Excellent and Holy Persons, have endured
much more severe things without complaining or murmuring; yea, that even some
Heathens have, with great firmness and constancy of mind, endured a great deal
of pain and torture. Above all, suggest unto them, what our Blessed Lord and
Master suffered, in his Soul, and in his Body; and how, for our sakes, he
endured all with wonderful patience, and with an entire submission to the will
of his Father; How, He was led as a sheep to the slaughter; How, He was
oppressed and afflicted, and yet opened not his mouth. Show the^, how it
becomes them, who by Profession are Christ's followers, to run with patience
the race set before them, looking unto Jesus. Encourage them also, with the
hopes of an exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, which attends those who
endure these ligh^ Afflictions which last but for a moment.

If you see that they love their Belly too well, If they love their Belly too
well.
and are apt to Eat and Drink more than is meet, and that they are too desirous
of such food as is most costly and chargeable; endeavor to restrain their
Gluttonous Appetite, and to keep them within the bounds of Moderation and
Sobriety; Xenophon ^^lls us, that the Diet of the Persian Boys, till they were
16 or 17 years old, was Bread and Cresses; their Drink was Water. Paediae Cyr.
lib. 1.
Teach them, to be well pleased with plain and ordinary fare; to consider, that
any thing, though never so course, is better than they deserve; that a great many
excellent Persons have been reduced to such straits, as to think it a Feast, to
have enough of Bread and Water. Tell them, how meanly a great many People, both
Young and Old, live at this very instant; and therefore, that they ought to be
content with such Food as is provided for them, to use it soberly, and to be
heartily thankful to God, from whom they have Meat and Drink, and all other
things, which are for the comfort and convenience of their Lives.

If you observe in them any thing that looks like a tendency to an Unchaste
Behavior, If they discover any tendency to Unchaste and Immodest Actions.
delay not to admonish them; show them the evil of such things, and the
dreadful consequences thereof, both to Soul and Body. Endeavor to prevent
their falling into so horrible a pit, out of which very few escape, who have
once fallen thereinto; and of which, the Wiseman says, Prove. 22. 14. He that is
abhorred of the Lord, shall fall therein; and again, chapter 2. 18, 19. Speaking of
the Adulteress or Whore, he says; Her House inclines unto death, and her
paths unto the dead; none that go unto her return again, neither take they hold
of the paths of Life. Show them, into how great shame and disgrace, and into
how much Misery, such Persons ordinarily bring themselves. Sugge^ to them, how
many other Sins attend this Vice, as its inseparable Companions; whereby the
Soul is so deeply corrupted, as to lose all Sense of any thing that is truly
excellent, and worthy of a Rational Creature. Strive to make them sensible, of
the miserable bondage of those, who are under the Power and Tyranny of their
unruly Lusts and Appetites, who are enslaved to the Pleasures of the Flesh.
Endeavor to make them taste of those solid and manly Delights, which are only
to be found in the ways of true Virtue and unfeigned Piety, which are
infinitely more pure and lasting, than those brutish Pleasures which
Sensualists pursue And do what in you lies to preserve them from seeing and
hearing any thing that is Unchaste and Impure, Nil dictu^ f^dum visuq^e, haec
limina ^angat, intra quae (...) est. Proc^^ hinc proc^l inde (...) L^^^num, and
Cantus per^^^^^ parasit^. Maxima debet^r p^ro Reverentia, etc. Juven. Sat. 14.
or has the appearance of it.

If you find that at any time they Curse and Swear, If they curse (...).
and take the Name of God in vain, endeavor to rescue them from so horrid and
dangerous a Sin. Show them, that they who practice this Vice, have no profit
nor pleasure to tempt them thereto; that they sell their Souls to the Devil for
nothing; and that they are so far from having any real gain thereby, that they
must needs, at some time or other, find no small inconvenience by it, as to
their Temporal Concerns; for they that are wise, and have any sense of
Religion, cannot choose but avoid having much dealings with them, whom they see
to be utterly void of the Fear of God Pythagoras forbad his Followers to Swear
by the Gods, and required them (...) to live, that they might be believed
without an oath. Diog. Laert. in Pythag.
Show them what a great dishonor it is to God, their great Lord and Master,
their Creator and Preserver, for poor Worms thus to dare to rend and tear, as
it were, Clinias, one of his Followers, chose rather to pay a Fine of 3
Talents, than to violate the Precept of his Master, though he could have made
Oath very innocently.
his most Sacred and Blessed Name; and how much he is provoked thereby, to
inflict his most heavy and severe Judgments upon such bold Sinners, He will not
hold him Guiltless that takes his Name in vain. Ex. 20. 7. That is, though Men
pass by such Offenders, and do not punish them, yet God will look after them,
he will call them to an Account, and be avenged upon them; he will not fail to
punish them. This is reckoned up, Hos. 4. 1, 2, 3. as one of the crying Sins,
for which God had a controversy with the Israelites, and for which he
threatened that their Land should mourn, and that every one that dwelt therein
should languish, etc.

If they are of a very unconstant and unsettled Temper, If they are very
Changeable and Vaconstant.
so that they can never fix at any thing, nor continue in their Purpose and
Resolution; strive to fix them and to render them of a more staid and settled
Mind. If what they have resolved or* begun to do, be not contrary to the Laws
of God and men, nor any way* Prejudicial to themselves or others; it is very
advisable for you, now and then, to keep them close to their Resolution or
Undertaking. Though the thing be not worth a rush in it self, which they
purpose or undertake, yet their being accustomed to do what they have once
resolved, disposes them to be constant and firm in more useful and excellent
Purposes* and Designs; and besides, it makes the performance of any thing a
great deal more easy, when the Spirits can fix at it, until it be
accomplished. Whereas, if way be given to a fickle and changeable Humor, it
gets strength daily, and at last grows so very Powerful and Tyrannical, that
they who are under its unhappy influence, are like a feather driven to and fro
with the wind; they are never able to settle to any thing, though never so
necessary and important, and so, very ordinarily, prove good for nothing.

If you perceive them to be surly, If they are surly and morose.
of a rough and morose, an uncivil and disobling Carriage: Strive to cure them
of such an unhappy Temper. Teach them to be Courteous and Affable, Civil and
Obliging to every body, and carefully to avoid whatever looks like neglect and
contempt. Show them how useful and serviceable, or how hurtful and dangerous,
the meanest person may be to them, at some time or other. This way of
instructing Children by Fables, was very much used in Ancient Times by the
Wisest Nations; see Plato Dialog. 2. de Repub. and Strabo, lib. 15. Geograph.
Tell them the Fable of the Lion and the Mouse, How, when the Mouse troubled
the sleeping Lion, and disturbed him, the Lion was ready in great Wrath to have
torn it in pieces; but the Mouse begged of him to spare him, for he was but a
poor Mouse, not worthy of his Wrath, and might live to do him some Service. The
Lion was prevailed with to let him go: Afterward it happened, that the Lion
was entangled in a Net, out of which, as great and mighty as he was, he could
not deliver himself. But the Mouse, remembering the Lion's Generosity, ate
a^under the Net, and so set him at liberty. Hence you may infer to them, how
fit and advantageous it is, by a courteous and civil behavior, to oblige the
poorest and most inconsiderable Person, who once in Seven Years, may be able to
do them, either a very great kindness, or a great deal of mischief.

As you ought to take care, that your Children be very Civil and Courteous to
all, If they are disrespectful to Aged Persons.
so in a more especial manner to Aged Persons, whom God has commanded to be
Honored and Respected, Levit. 19. 32. Thou shall rise up before the hoary
Head, and honor the face of the Old Man. Parents ought to consider, that they
may live till they be Old, if they be not so already; and therefore they ought
to Teach their Children to Honor Aged Persons, lest by permitting them to
carry themselves disrespectfully and insolently toward them, they themselves
should meet with neglect and contempt from them; which falls out but too often.
How worthy of Praise were the Noble Spartans, who Honored all Aged Persons
very much? Plutarc. Laco^^. Apop^^.
One of them being asked, why their Young People rose up to the Aged, gave this
Answer; That, by being accustomed thus to Honor others, they might so much the
more Honor their own Parents. And here I cannot but mention another very
notable instance, concerning these Spartans; which is this. Plutarc. Laco^^.
Ap^p^^.
When an Old Man came to see the Olympic Games, he went about to look for a
Seat; but the Graecians neglected and mocked him, till at last coming where the
Spartans fate, all the Children rose up to him, and several more Aged Persons
gave place to him. When the rest of the Graecians, (who had been themselves
disrespectful toward him) applauded the Custom of the Spartans, and highly
commended them for it; the Old Man stroking down his Beard, said, Alas! what a
sad thing is this? All the Graecians know what is Good and Honorable, but the
Spartans only practice it.

If you observe your Children, If they quarrel much with one another.
to be very apt to quarrel and contend with one another, and to fall by the
Ears together; be careful to remove their debates, and to make them love one
another. By no means wink at their Contentions, especially if they be grown up
a little. When such Relations are at variance together, they are of all others
the most violent in their Hatred against one another. Witness the Rage and Fury
of Cain against Abel, of Esau against Jacob, of Joseph's Brethren against him.
A Brother offended, says Solomon, Prove. 18. 19. is harder to be won than a
strong City, and their contentions are like the bars of a Castle. The Learned
Philosopher and Historian Plutarch, De Fraterno Amore.
reckons it among the things which are next to impossible, for Brethren once at
variance, to be afterward thoroughly reconciled to one another. As one Member
of the Body, torn or cut off from the other, can hardly be glued and joined
together again; So, says he, when Brethren have once fallen from their Natural
Affection, and are possessed with bitterness and wrath against one another,
they seldom unite closely any more; their Reconciliation is ordinarily but
skinned over; whereas, there still remains under the appearance of Friendship,
a grievous sore ready to break out. How much is it therefore your Duty, to
prevent all manner of strife and division among your Children, and if debates
arise among them, to do your utmost to remove them. Teach them to yield and to
condescend to one another, to take pleasure in gratifying, rather than in
overcoming one another, to rejoice in the Company of one another, to be
mightily concerned for one another's Happiness and Welfare, to be upon all
occasions ready to help and assist one another, to sympathize very tenderly
with one another, in any Pain, Grief, or Loss; and in a Loving and Friendly
manner, to tell one another of their Faults, without publishing of them. Do not
encourage them to speak ill of one another, and to report every little thing,
whereby they think to lessen one another in your Esteem and Affection. Such
things use to be the Seeds of Discord and Contention amongst Children, and
therefore Wise Parents ought to prevent them, as much as may be.

If you find them over Curious to know what may be their Lot and Fortune, If
they are over curious to know their Lot and Fortune in the world.
as it is called, in the World, and therefore apt to hearken to Gypsies and
Fortune Tellers, to consult with Divinatory Books, and to use such other
Wicked, though but too common Arts, for gratifying their Curiosity; do what in
your lies, to deliver them from such dangerous and unlawful Practices. Show
them what is written, Levit. 20. 6. The Soul that turns after such as have
familiar Spirits, and after Wizards, to go a whoring after them, I will even
set my fave against that Soul, and will ^ut him off from among his People. And
Isa. 8. 19. When they shall say unto you, seek unto them that have familiar
Spirits, and unto Wizards that peep and that mutter: should not a people seek
unto their God? Likewise, Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11. There shall not be found among you
any one that uses Divination That is, who foretells what is to come, and
discovers what it secret, by unlawful Arts.
, or an observer of times That is, who judges one day lucky, and another
dismal and unlucky, and therefore begins or forbears his Designs accordingly.
, or an Inchanter, or a Witch, or a Charmer, or a Consulter with familiar
Spirits One that being in Covenant with Evil Spirits, calls upon them by
certain Words and Rites, to get their assistance in some vain or bad Design or
other.
, or a Wizard, or a Necromancer One that calls upon the Dead, and enquireth
of them, as the Witch of Endor did. 1 Samuel 28. 8, 9. etc.
. For all that do these things are an abomination unto the Lord.

Show them, that they who follow such courses, do thereby provoke God to leave
them, and to deliver them over to the Wicked one, that he may bring upon them
those Calamities and Judgments which they deserve, and which perhaps they were
told should happen to them: Not, as if those Pretenders to Prophecy did
infallibl^ know what would come to pass, which most certainly they do not; but
God in his Righteous Judgment, does often punish with some remarkable stroke,
such curious Persons, who presume to enquire into those things which he has
thought fit to conceal from them: It Is said of Saul, 1 Chronicles. 10. 13, 14. That,
he died for his Transgression, and also for asking Counsel of one that had a
familiar Spirit, to enquire of it, and enquired not of the Lord: Therefore he
slew him. And though they who have been guilty of such impious Enquiries, shall
be delivered from Eternal Condemnation, and possibly from some great
punishments in this Life, if they sincerely Repent of their Sin, and Folly; yet
oftentimes, they suffer not a little from the impressions which are made on
their fancy, by their having heard that some Tragical thing or other should
befall them. How many, even good People, having found unspeakable uneasiness,
almost all their Life time, only by having heard it said, without their own
asking, by such impious pretenders to Divination, that thus or thus it should
happen to them: Though they abhorred and despised such things, and did what they
could to be delivered from having any Reflections upon them, yet now and then,
of a sudden, their fancy has been struck therewith, which did not a little
disquiet and disturb them.

From all which, it appears, how necessary it is for Parents, to prevent their
Childrens doing such things. Show them, that their only safe way, is, to be
always careful to do what is good and right, to make the Laws of God their
Rule, to seek his Glory as their chief end, to depend on him for direction and
assistance, never to be anxious about what is to come, but to leave all Events
to his Wise and Good Providence; humbly to resign themselves to his Holy Will
and Pleasure, and to be always ready to be disposed of as he shall see fit.
Tell them, (which you may do with great assurance) that if they do these
things, they may be confident, that all shall be well; for God will not fail,
according to his Promise, to make all things, even the greatest Afflictions,
work together for good to them that Love him. Romans 8. 28.

If you perceive them to be unthankful for Favors and Benefits, If they are
unthankful to those who do them good and kind Offices.
so as not to take notice of those who help and assist them, and who have done
them, or are always ready to do them good Offices; endeavor to cure them of
this very ill Quality. Cause them to thank those who are kind and serviceable
to them; strive to make them retain a lasting Sense of Kindnesses, and to be
ready when there is an opportunity, to make some fit acknowledgment and return:
For which end, 'twill be convenient now and then, to give them some small
matter, according to your Quality, for a present to those who have been at some
pains to serve them, or who have been very Bountiful or Generous to them. And
when they make an acknowledgment for Favors received, advise them to do it with
a cheerful Countenance, so as to express thereby the inward Sense of their
Minds, that they, to whom they make the return of Kindness, may see how hearty
and real they are, that they do it, not grudgingly, but very willingly.

There is the greater need, to instill into your Childrens Minds, Principles of
Gratitude, because it is so very common amongst Men to be unthankful. For, what
is there more common, than to see those neglected and slighted, who have been
very kind and serviceable? How many root up those, by whom themselves have been
planted? How many basely betray their truest Friends and greatest Benefactors?
How many think it a disparagement, to be so much as thought to be beholden to
others, though their Obligations be very great? Now, what can there be more base
and abominable, than such a Temper as this? What Villainy and Wickedness seem
they not likely to commit, who have no Sense of Benefits? The Apostle Paul
reckons unthankfulness amongst the great Sins, which make the last days
perilous and difficult. 2 Timothy 3. 2.

To excite your Children to be thankful; show them, how great an abhorrence the
very Heathens had of Ingratitude; they thought it one of the worst things you
could say of them, to call them unthankful Dixeris maledicta cuncta cum
ingratum Hominem dixeris.
; they reckoned that this Name, included all the bad things that could be
imagined; that unthankfulness was the Fountain, from whence the greatest Vices
did spring. See Sen. de Benef. l. 1. c. 10.

'Twas a very Excellent and Commendable Custom amongst the Persians *, See
Xenoph. Paed. Cyr. l. 1.
, that they who were over their Children, amongst other things, taught them
Gratitude; so that if any of the Boys was able to make a grateful return, but
did it not, they punished him severely; for they judged, that they who were
unthankful, would also neglect their Duty to God, to their Parents, their
Country, and Friends.

Amongst other things to be suggested to your Children, to stir them up to be
Thankful, you may represent to them, what a shame it is for them to be
unthankful, when the very Beasts, both Tame (as may be seen every day) and
wild, (as several Authors See Plin. Hist. l. 8. c. 16. and Sen. de Benef. l. 3.
c. 19. Aul. Gel. l. 5. c. 14.
tell us) do things which look like a grateful acknowledgment to their
Benefactors.

If you find them to be of too Prodigal a Temper, If they are of too pr^digal a
Temper.
apt to be too profuse in their Expenses; ready to throw away their Money upon
Trifles, and when there is no reasonable occasion for it; you ought by all
prudent and proper Methods to endeavor to make them a little more discreet and
careful; That they waste nothing in vain, that may be of use to poor People;
That they do not throw away that which may do good at some time or other.
Suggest often to them, that we are Stewards of whatever God bestows upon us,
that he will call us to an Account; and that therefore we ought to employ to
good purpose all those good things he gives us. Show them what our Savior said
to his Disciples, after he had fed five thousand men with five Loaves and two
Fishes, Joh. 6. 12. When they were filled, he said unto his Disciples, Gather
up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost. He would not have any thing
lost, (...) thrown away unnecessarily, whi^ might be useful afterward to one
(...) other.

If you find them of a Covetous Temper; If they are Covetous.
endeavou^ to enlarge their thoughts b^ the Principles of Christian Charity
Show them what an excellent thi^ it is to do good; to show mercy an^ kindness;
to make Peoples hearts glad^ Accustom them to the doing such kin^ and
charitable Offices; for which en^ give them now and then money, an^ other
things, to bestow on those wh^ are poor and needy. Show them the evil of
Covetousness; that it is the ro^ of all evil, Inde fere scelerum causae. Juven.
Sat. 14.
that it taken the heart off from God, an^ rendereth it unfit for the
consideration of Divine things, and for all worthy and useful designs; that it
disposeth^ man for the basest and vilest action^ and undertakings, as it did
Judas to betray his Lord; That it bereaves him of true repose and satisfaction
of mind, and pierces him through with many sorrows. 1 Timothy 6. 9. 10.

If you perceive them to be naturally melancholy, If they are naturally
melancholy.
and fearful of every little thing, endeavor to cheer up their Spirits:
Suggest to them such considerations, and possess them with such Maxims and
Principles, as tend to fortify their minds against those things which are apt
to make them uneasy, and are the occasion of their fear. If their distemper
proceed from some bodily indisposition, as oft-times it does, use such helps as
are necessary: When such evil habits of body are once rooted and strongly
fixed, and when the blood and spirits are deeply infected therewith, they are a
very grievous clog to the Soul, and a great hindrance to that cheerfulness and
liberty of Spirit, wherewith people ought always to endeavor to serve God.

If you see them to be of too gay and airy a Temper, If they are of too gay and
airy a Temper.
so that they cannot fix and be stayed at any time; you are to use a great deal
of prudence and discretion to compose and settle their Spirits; See that they
use their Wit and Fancy without giving offense, and that they hurt no body by
indecent reflections: Let them by no means take liberty to indulge their humor
in jesting about things that are Sacred, or that have any relation thereto. But
you are to take heed lest your endeavoring to cure one fault, occasion
another; lest your striving to deliver them from one extreme, drive them to the
contrary; that is, lest instead of their being too gay, you make them
melancholy and dull: Their Wit and Spirit is not to be rooted out, but reformed
and rightly managed; for this may be of use, for seasoning and sweetning
Conversation.

If you observe them to be rash and forward, If they are Rash and Forward.
ready to speak and act without due consideration; strive to make them more
cautious and circumspect; to reflect and think a little more, on what they say
and do; lest otherwise, they fall into a habit of speaking and acting
impertinently and indiscreetly. When they say or do a foolish thing, for lack
of consideration, then take occasion to make them sensible what a shame it is
for them to do so; what a reproach to those who are reasonable Creatures, to
speak and act like Fools without Reason and Understanding: Show them some of
the bad consequences which attend speaking and acting in this manner.
Particularly, that such Persons not only expose themselves to Contempt and
Scorn, but likewise to a great deal of danger and trouble. Tell them, how a
great many, by their rash and unadvised, though not ill intended, Speeches and
Actions, have not only highly exasperated their Enemies, but also provoked
their Friends, and forfeited their kindness, which thereby has been changed
sometimes into the utmost Indignation and Hatred. Show them, how some, by this
means, have lost their Estate, their Honor, and Life it self: and not only
have ruined themselves by their rashness and folly, but likewise a great many
of their best Friends and dearest Relations. A due sense of these things ought
to excite all Parents to do what they can, to render their Children very
considerate and wary in whatever they say or do. And because, for lack of
knowledge and experience, they are in hazard to fall into many miscarriages,
and to commit great absurdities, if they govern themselves wholly by their own
fancy and apprehension, or by their inclinations and desires, therefore direct
them to ask you, or to ask others, whom you recommend to them, whether it be
fit for them to do this or that, which they have a mind to do. It will be of
unspeakable advantage to them all their Life long, to learn this piece of
Wisdom betimes, to wit, to be jealous, and not too confident of their own
Apprehensions and Opinions, and to have a great regard for the Judgment and
Opinion of others. Solomon makes this a distinguishing Mark betwixt a wise Man
and a Fool, that the way of a Fool is right in his own Eyes, (and therefore he
scorns to ask the opinion, or to follow the advice of others;) but he that
hearkeneth unto Counsel is wise. Prove. 12. 15.

Thus you are to make it your Business to watch over your Children, and to
consider what are their defects and faults, and to do all that you can to cure
them thereof, and to direct them in the ways of Wisdom and Virtue. You are
careful to pluck up the weeds in your Gardens, while they are yet young, and
not deeply rooted, lest otherwise the good Seeds should be choked up with
them. How much more careful ought you to be, lest the Souls of your Children
should be overrun with vicious Qualities?

If your Childrens Limbs are crooked and very deformed, you are at great pains
and sometimes at no small charge likewise, so long as there is hopes of
Success, to make them straight and comely. Ought you not to be at as much pains
at least for their Souls? Ought you not to do what in you lies, to shape and
frame them to Virtue and Piety, that they may become amiable and acceptable in
the sight of God?

5. Duty, to see that they be taught to Read.
Fifthly, When once they are of an Age fit for it, see that they be taught to
read. And if you have not leisure, or perhaps have not skill to teach them your
selves, you must be careful to make choice of a skilful and discreet Person to
do it; About choosing a fit Person to teach them to read.
who by his teaching and Example, may train them up both in Knowledge and
Virtue; who may not only tea^ them to know the Letters, to spel^ exactly, to
read distinctly, to write well, etc. but also to know themselves to remember
their Creator in the days (...) their Youth, to hate every evil way, and to
take delight in the ways of God's Holy Commandments. If a careful choice be
made of a wise and faithful^ Schoolmaster for your Children, i^ will render
your work so much the more easy.

Having sent your Children to School, About keeping them at School.
you must keep them there, and not by your too great fondness make them long to
be at home, and grow weary and uneasy at School. A great many indiscreet
Parents ruin their Children by immoderate kindness; they cannot endure that
they should be out of their sight one day. They are afraid, lest they that
teach them should correct them, and therefore they give them a strict charge
not to do it; and if they do it never so gently and discreetly, without more
ado they remove their Children from them, and discharge their Passion against
them as the greatest Tyrants in the World.

It Is true, some, who have the Charge of Children, are very indiscreet in
correcting them, they pass beyond all Bounds of Moderation; and by their
Tyrannical carriage toward them, they do them a World of Mischief in many
respects. As for such Schoolmasters, Parents ought, if it be possible, to
avoid sending of their Children unto them. But when once they have made choice
of those, who are not only Pious, but Wise and Discreet Persons, who are
skilful in the way of Teaching, and are of a calm and mild Spirit; they ought
to be so far from restraining them, that they should rather encourage them to
correct them whenever there is any necessity for it. And if, at any time, their
Children complain to them of their having been Corrected, they ought to let
them know, that they are very well pleased that they have been corrected for
their Faults, and that they will thank their Schoolmaster for having done so.
Unless such a Power as this be given to those who teach Children, there is no
great probability of their doing much good to the far greatest part of them:
For, as Solomon says, Prove. 22. 15. Foolishness (...) bound in the Heart of a
Child, and therefore there is need of the Rod of Correction to drive it far
from him. 'T^ but too manifest, that Children wh^ know their Parents Fondness,
prove unruly and untractable, and do generall^ become very wicked and naughty.
When once they find themselves a Liberty, and see that they are in (...) great
danger of being curbed and restrained, they are apt to follow the Biass of
their corrupt Inclinations* And then it often comes to pass what is said by
the Wise Man, Prove. 29 15. A Child left to himself brings (...) Mother to
shame. The Mother only (...) mentioned, because ordinarily, she (...) more apt
to exceed just Bounds in he^ Indulgence, and consequently has (...) great Hand
in spoiling her Child: An^ besides, when her Child brings hurt an^ disgrace
upon himself, by his wicked and foolish Courses, she uses to be more deeply
affected therewith, through the tenderness of her nature, and the strength and
violence of her Affection and Passion.

Now, to stir up Parents to take care their Children be taught to read, at
least the Holy Bible; let them consider, that this Sacred Book will instruct
them in the Art of being happy; how to be saved; how to obtain a Crown of
Glory; how to purchase an enduring Substance, a Pearl of great price, and a
Kingdom which cannot be shaken: It will teach them true Wisdom; how to avoid
Sin, and to escape Danger; how to resist the Devil, to stand against his Wiles,
to quench his fiery Darts; how to overcome the World, and to mortify the Flesh
with its Affections and Lusts; how to subdue their natural Corruption, and to
conquer all their wicked Habits and Customs; how to redeem the time; how to
carry themselves as they ought to do in their several Capacities and Relations,
wherein God has placed them in the World; how to enjoy satisfaction and
contentment in every state and condition of Life; How to use aright the things
of this World; how to improve Prosperity, and how to reap advantage from
Adversity; how to dwell at ease, and to enjoy real Peace and Comfort amidst the
greatest Vexations and Confusions that can happen. All these things the Holy
Scriptures will teach both you and them, if they are read as they ought to be,
to wit, with a serious and humble mind, with an earnest desire to know the Will
of God, and with a firm and sincere Resolution to do it. And therefore, how
careful ought you to be, in so considerable a part of your duty toward your
Children? If your condition in the World is such, as disables you from doing
much for them as to their outward Estate, yet if you do this, it may prove
(unless it be their own fault) of unspeakable advantage to them, and, in some
sense, better than a great Portion, or than a gainful Trade, as may appear from
what has been said.

When once they can read tollerably well in the Holy Bible, be careful that
they do it more or less every day: See that they do it with great Reverence, as
being the Word of God: Cause them to consider who it is that speaks to them
therein; and what it is that he commands, promises, or threatens; direct them
at first to read such places, as are most easy to be understood, and which are
apt to make the deepest Impressions: After they have read, see what they
remember; cause them to tell you what they can call to mind: Explain to them so
far as you are able, what they do not know; especially in such things as are
most useful to make them wiser and better. Appoint them now and then a verse or
two, to get by heart; cause them to repeat them with due Gravity; let them not
do it in a trifling manner, as if they were telling a silly Story. Do not
appoint them too many things to be got by heart, for this will do more hurt
than good: A few things well understood do better than a great many by rote.

Be careful lest they read any Books which tend to poison their minds, Great
care ought to be taken what Books they read.
to fill them with false Opinions, or to lead them to bad practices: Their
tender minds are apt very quickly to be corrupted by such Treatises. Even they
who are of a more fixed and solid Virtue, are in danger of receiving hurt by
reading such Books; especially when they are writ with great Art, and when
their Notions are represented in fair and Beautiful Colors; They are apt to
impress on the Fancy some Images of no good consequence to the Soul: How great
need therefore have Parents to restrain their Children from reading such Books
as tend to pollute their innocent and chaste minds, which are capable of
receiving any sort of impressions either good or bad?

As for Books of Devotion; great care is to be taken, that only such be put
into their hands as are writ in a plain and easy style; which treat of things
fit and needful to be known by them; and which are most likely to make them
Wise and Good. They are to be accustomed to the Writings of those who are Men
of greatest Moderation; who do not impose their own conceits, as necessary
Rules of Devotion; who do not require such things as absolutely needful to be
done, which God has not declared to be so; nor yet who shorten the Rule, by
cutting off such things as God has enjoined us: All Books which lead Men to
extremes, are carefully to be avoided; and such Treatises are to be made use
of, as contain the plain and necessary Doctrines of Christianity; which tend to
inspire Men with the Spirit of Purity, of Truth, of Peace and Love; which
promote Sincerity, Justice, Temperance, Charity, Meekness, Humility, Patience,
Resignation to the Will of God in all things, Zeal for his Honor and Glory, a
firm Belief and Trust in him, etc.

When it is requisite to acquaint them with the different Opinions amongst
Protestants, that their minds may not be unfixed and unsettled, when they go
abroad into the World; be sure not to put into their hands such Tracts as are
writ with a fiery uncharitable Spirit, and in a Dogmatick and Magisterial
manner; but such as are writ with great Temper and Moderation; which tend to
heal the Church of all Contentions and Divisions, and not to kindle and
increase them; which do not load Men's Opinions with unjust, extravagant, and
impious consequences, which never entered into the minds of those who vouched
them; but such as make fair and favorable Constructions, and just allowances.
Such Treatises are chiefly to be chosen for them, which dispose Men to be
humble and modest; not to be stiff and pertinacious in their own private
Sentiments; not rashly and severely to condemn others who have different
thoughts; and never on the account of any such particular Opinions to break the
Peace of Christian Society; nor to grow more cold in their respect and
affection toward those who have not the same thoughts with themselves in
lesser matters. They are, as it were, to feed upon Books of this sort, and
carefully to digest them.

6. Duty, to bring them to the place of public Worship so soon as they are fit
for it.
Sixthly, You are to bring them to the place of public Worship so soon as they
are fit for it, that they may have the benefit of the Prayers of God's People,
and may learn, as they are capable, somewhat that may make them wiser and
better. Thus we find, when Joshua read the Law before the Congregation; the
little Ones are mentioned as present amongst the Men and Women. Josh. 8. 35.

Teach them to pray to God before they go to Church, What they should do before
they go to Church.
and to beg of him that he would fit them and assist them, to join in the
public Worship with unfeigned Devotion, and to hear the Word in a right
manner. Teach them also to pray for all those whom God employs to Preach his
Word, and particularly for his Servant whom they are to hear; that he would
Sanctify him, and direct and enable him to teach others the true way to Life
and Blessedness.

And as you ought to direct them what to do before they go to Church, so you
must take heed how they carry themselves in the House of God, that it be with
all possible silence and reverence; and that they perform their public
Devotions in a decent manner.

See that they do not spend their time in gazing upon others, How they should
carry themselves at Church.
in observing their Dresses and Modes, their looks and Gestures; nor yet in
bowing and making Courtesies to every body of their Acquaintance they happen to
see in the midst of their Prayers. Though this be too common a Practice, yet it
ought carefully to be avoided, as unsuitable to that seriousness, that fear and
Reverence, that Fervency and Devotion, which true Worshippers of God ought to
be possessed with, when in the most Solemn manner they are, or ought to be
employed, either in paying their Homage to the King of Heaven and Earth, their
Lord, their Maker, and Savior; or in hearing the Message that is delivered in
his Name, by his Ambassadors.

When they come from Church, What they should do when they come from Church.
see what they remember; if they have got any thing by heart, encourage them:
If they remember nothing, you may tell them somewhat or other of the Sermon
which is fit for them to learn.

Stir them up so soon as their Years are fit for it, to meditate more or less
on what they have heard, that so the Word of God may profit them. Show them,
that as their Food cannot nourish them, if their Stomach do not concoct and
digest what they Eat and Drink, so neither will the Word of God nourish,
quicken, and strengthen their Souls, if they do not, by serious Meditation,
digest what they read and hear.

Endeavor by their constant attendance on the public Worship, to beget in
them a mighty regard thereto, as being one great means appointed of God to
increase in them true Knowledge and Piety. Let them not spend the rest of the
Lords Day in rambling about; but, so far as their Age can bear it, let them be
employed usefully.

Show them why they should observe this Day, Why the Lord's Day ought to be
kept.
to wit, because on it Our Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, rose from the Grave,
Triumphed over Death, and finished the work of Our Redemption. As He was
delivered (and died) for our Offenses, so He was raised again for our
justification. Romans 4. 25. To us the Lord's Day, says One of the Ancients,
Ambr. de Pentec. Ser. 61.
is therefore venerable, and to be observed in a Solemn manner, because thereon
Our Savior, as the rising Sun, having dispelled the darkness of Death, shone
forth by the Light of His Resurrection.

'Twill not be unfit, to acquaint them with some instances of God's righteous
and dreadful judgments, against prophaners of this Day; and particularly, how a
great many, who have come to an untimely End, confessed and acknowledged,
before their Death, that their slighting and profaneing this Day, made way for
all those Villainies, and Impieties, which at last brought God's heavy Judgments
upon them.

That your Children may attend the public devotions of the Church, Children
are to be possessed with a great regard for the Ministers of the Gospel.
and the preaching of the Gospel, with greater profit and advantage; it is
necessary that you endeavor to possess them with a great regard, for those
whom God employs in so Holy a Service, that they may esteem them very highly in
Love for their Works sake. 1 These. 5. 13. When the Persons employed in Divine
Ministraitons are loved and esteemed, their Doctrine is apt to make the greater
Impression, and to be the more successful: Whereas, if People are prejudiced
against them, though never so unjustly, what they say will be slighted, or very
little regarded for most part, even though what is spoken be most excellent in it
self, and expressed in such a manner, as might otherwise very much affect and
excite the dullest Hearers. The Truth of this, did not only appear in the Holy
Prophets, but in our most Blessed Master Himself, who, though He spoke as never
Man spoke, yet what He said was but very little regarded by most part of the
Jews, and even by his own Brethren and Kinsmen, who were possessed with most
unjust and groundless prejudices against him. The Consideration of this, ought
to make you Careful, to beget in your Children a due Sense of the Dignity and
Excellency of the Pastoral Office, and likewise a just value for the Persons
themselves, whom God makes use of to Minister unto Him in Holy Things, whom He
calls to be the Guides of Souls and Stewards of the Mysteries of God.

If Men have a great Respect for Ministers of State, and for the Ambassadors of
Earthly Princes, who are employed to manage the Concerns of the Kingdoms or
Principalities of this World; shall they account the Ministers and Ambassadors
of Jesus Christ, unworthy of the least regard and esteem? Whom the King of
Kings and Lord of Lords, has chosen out of the rest of Mankind, and whom He
has set apart for His own immediate Service, to publish His Will, and to offer
Life and Salvation to the Sons of Men, to rescue them from their evil Courses,
to direct them what they must do to be saved, and to show them, not only by
their Doctrine but Example, the way wherein they ought to go.

And though some of those who are of this sacred Employment, are far from being
what they should, yet you must be careful what you say concerning them before
your Children; you ought to keep from their Knowledge, such faults and
blemishes as are not obvious and notorious. Beware of taking occasion of
reproaching them, and thinking meanly of them, for their Infirmities. And when
their miscarriages are very heinous and such as cannot be concealed, you ought
to take care, not to aggravate them or make them worse, but to speak of them
so, as your Children may see, you are only Enemies to their Vices, and not to
their Persons or Holy Office.

That you may fortify your Children against the danger they are in from such
sad Examples, show them, that our Holy Religion is not the worse, because some
of those who are Ministers do not live suitably to their Calling and
Profession; that it is Men (the best of whom are Imperfect and Sinful, and
subject to the like Passions with others) and not Angels, who are put by God in
the Office of the Ministry: That amongst the twelve Apostles of our Blessed
Master and Savior, one of them was a Thief and a Traitor; that the Holy
Doctrine which such Persons Preach, is not in it self the less excellent, and
worthy of acceptance, because it is delivered by those who do not live as they
Preach; that there were many such Teachers in the days of our Savior, and yet
he for had not the Jews to hear them, only he gave them a caution to beware of
their ill Example. The Scribes and Pharisees, says he, Mat. 23. 2, 3. sit in
Moses Seat, and therefore whatever they bid you observe, that observe and do;
but do not ye after their Works, for they say, and do not.

I thought it so much the more necessary to suggest this Direction, because
it is none of the least Sins of this Age and Kingdom, that too many are very apt
to despise and speak ill of the Ministers of Jesus Christ; to listen to all
Reports which are to their disadvantage, to believe them too readily, and to
repeat them in all Companies, and even before their Children with a great deal
of pleasure. And there want not those who have a very fruitful Invention on
this Subject, who contrive a great many Stories, to bespatter them, and to
lessen and destroy their Reputation; whereby they too successfully promote the
Kingdom of Satan, and show themselves to be his Ministers. When once the great
Enemy of Souls has gained this point, to make the Persons of Ministers
contemptible, 'twill be no hard matter for him to make Men undervalue and
despise the very Office it self: And what can be the consequence of this, but
the rise and growth of Heresies, of Factions, and Schisms, of Atheism and
Irreligion, and of all that can be thought of, that is any way dishonorable to
God, and destructive to the Souls of Men? Of all which there are but too many
sad Instances at this day, which are a most certain Evidence of the great decay
of real Piety and Christi^nity, and that there is but very little of true
Religion to be found amongst us.

And as this so common Contempt of the Clergy is a sign of the great Wickedness
of the Age, so it is a Presage of heavy Judgments. When the Messengers of God
were mocked, and his words despised, and his Prophets abused, the Wrath of the
Lord arose against his People, till there was no Remedy. 2 Chronicles. 36. 16.

7. Duty, to make them understand their Baptismal Covenant.
Seventhly, Do all that you can to make them understand their Baptismal
Covenant; and if there be opportunity to own and renew it publicly and
solemnly, fail not to encourage their doing it. It Is of great Importance for
them, to make a Solemn Profession of their Faith, and to declare their
Resolution of performing their Baptismal Promise: It is of great advantage to
them, at such an occasion, to have the Prayers of the Church, and particularly
of those, who are appointed of God, to bless the People. It is true, the great
abuses which have been committed in the performance of this Ancient Ceremony,
have made many People to slight and neglect it; but (...) Confirmation were
performed with that care and seriousness, which ought to be used on such an
occasion, it is a Custom which might be of mavelous benefit in the Church;
both to stir up Parents to instruct their Children, and Ministers to Chatechise
them, and acquaint them with those things that are needful for them to know, to
believe, and to do. The careful and Religious use of it, would tie Children
more strictly to mind the great concerns of their Souls; it would afford them
occasion to consider what it is to have been Baptized, and to be a Christian:
It would work in them a more Powerful Sense of the Obligations of Christianity;
and make them more careful to live up to that Holy Religion, whereof they made
so public a Profession: It would make them more afraid to do bad things,
against which they had protested so solemnly. And not only fear, but shame in
this case, would restrain them from doing wickedly. This would be to young
People a great defense against Temptations: Bad Men would not so boldly ask
them to sin, if they knew they had openly and Solemnly disowned and renounced
them, and all their wicked Courses; and if they were tempted, they would be
more apt to say in their own minds, Shall we do such wicked things, and run the
hazard of being Covenant-breakers, and Perjured Persons? Shall we commit such
Villainies, and practice such Abominations, and thereby break our Solemn Vow and
Engagement? Shall we by our Folly and Impiety give occasion of Offense and
Scandal to the Church of Christ, which he has purchased with his Blood? Shall
we renounce the Captain of our Salvation, and prove Deserters, who have so
lately vowed to renounce the Devil and all his Works? What a mighty defense
would this be to your Children, when Assaulted by the fiery Darts of the Devil,
the Vanities of the World* and the Lusts of their own Deceitful Hearts? to
consider, that by their own actual Consent, they have renounced all these, and
given up themselves into the Hands of God, to be kept by his Mighty Power,
through Faith unto Salvation; They have Vowed, and they ought to perform it, to
keep his Righteous Judgments.

These things being impartially considered, should mightily excite Parents to
see that their Children do openly and Solemnly pro^ess their Faith in Christ
Crucified; their Resolution to Obey him, to Serve him, and Love him, to fight
under his Banner, against Sin, the Devil, and the World, and to continue his
Faithful Soldiers and Servants unto their lives end. Is not this your Glory,
that your Children are Christians? And do you think it a Shame or Dishonor for
you or them, if they make a Solemn Profession of their Christianity; that they
avo^ their Religion, and will by God's help make good the Promise which was
made in their Name in Baptism? Of so great Importance is this Custom, that the
greatest Men amongst the Reformers did highly commend it, and did earnestly
wish that it might be restored as a thing of great use toward the reviving the
true Spirit of Christianity.

8. Duty, to encourage them to come to the Lord's Table.
Eighthly, When they are fit for it, you should encourage them to come to the
Table of the Lord, that they may be strengthened in their most Holy Faith, and
further assured of the Love of God; that they may make a public Profession of
their Christianity, of their Love to their Lord and Master Jesus, of their
Charity to all Men, and of their sincere Affection to those who are Christ's
Members and Followers: They ought to make use of this Holy Sacrament, that
their Love to their dearest Lord and Savior may be kindled and enflamed, by
remembering his Love, and showing forth his Death; that they may bind themselves
more strictly to Serve and Obey him, and to fulfill their Baptismal Engagement.

How glad should Parents be to see their Children advanced to this Honor, to
eat and drink at their Lord's Table, to partake of so great a Testimony of his
Kindness and Friendship? How earnestly should they encourage them to embrace
this opportunity, of renewing their Covenant with the Lord, to live and to die
his Faithful Servants? Do you not desire to have them saved, to have them
delivered from their Lusts and Passions, their Pride and Vanity, their
Bitterness and Wrath, their Malice and Envy, and from all manner of Sin and
Folly? To be made pure and clean in Heart and Life; to be made meet for that
Holy Place, where no unclean thing can enter? Do you not desire that their Sins
may be blotted out, that they may be washed with the Blood of their Savior?
And yet do you not advise and entreat them, for their Souls Health and Safety,
to come to the Holy Communion? which is designed as a means for these excellent
and great Ends and Purposes, to as many as are qualified according to the Terms
of the Gospel, that is, who unfeignedly repent of their Sins, and believe in
the Lord Jesus with all their Heart. But, alas! how far are too many Parents
from doing this for their Children? How many do either wholly, or for the most
part, neglect and slight this Holy Ordinance themselves, as if our Lord had
without any just or necessary ground appointed it? How can such Persons expect
the precious Fruits of the Death of Christ, who will not remember his Death,
when he so lovingly and kindly calls and invites them to do it? Do this, says
he, in remembrance of me.

What a great Argument is it, of a wonderful decay of true Piety and Religion
in the World, when Men do thus despise and set at naught the kindness of their
Lord and Savior? When they refuse to do a thing, so just and reasonable, and
so easy as this is; which tends so much to his Glory, and their own true
Happiness and Welfare, both here and hereafter.

9. Duty, to take care that they accustom themselves to Self-Examination.
Ninthly, When they are fit for it, see that they accustom themselves to
Self-Examination, that they spend a few Moments every Night (if another time of
the Day be not more convenient for them to do it in,) in calling themselves to
an account; that they may see what good or what evil they have done; that they
may give Praise and Thanks unto God for any thing they have done, which was
good and right; and that they may confess their Sins and Follies, begging his
Gracious Pardon, and renewing their Purposes and Resolutions to do better for
the time to come.

But besides these daily short Reviews of their Heart and Life, it is fit to
call upon them, when they are well advanced i^ Years, to a more strict and
Solemn Examination of themselves; to Prayer and Fasting, as their Age and
Strength can bear it. This may be done at first once a Month, or once i^ two
Months, or once a Quarter at least; but after some time, it may be done oftener,
according as your necessary Affairs and your Circumstances in the World will
permit. They who are Great and Rich, ought so much the more frequently, to call
upon their Children to those private extraordinary Excrcises of Devotion,
because their outward Estate in the World does, ordinarily, afford them enough
of time and leisure for such Performances, if they will but redeem it from
Idleness, and from a great many vain and unnecessary Actions.

As to their Abstinence from Food on such days, there is no Rule can be given to
serve all Persons; if they can fast one Meal or two it is well; if not, then
they may eat less at a time, and of such things as are less apt to be a
hinderance to their Devotion: That is to be done that serves most to render
them fit for Prayer and Meditation.

It will be convenient, in order to their doing this to good purpose, to be
directed to a method, that so their thoughts may not wander and be unfixed: For
which end, it will be of good use, to have the direction of their Minister, if
he be a discreet and good man, or of some other pr^dent serious Christian
Friend: Or you may recommend to them some plain and easy short Treatise on
this Subject, such as you shall find written discreetly with due moderation of
Spirit.

There is not any one method can be prescribed for all Persons, nor fit for all
times: But in general, upon such days, it is fit for them to begin with Prayer
to God, humbly begging the Divine Assistance and Direction; that he would open
their Eyes, to see their Sin and Folly, and to discover his Mercy and Kindness,
his long Suffering and Patience toward them, that they may be thereby led to
Repentance.

They may next enquire particularly and strictly into their ways and doings;
which they may do, by considering what have been their Thoughts, their Words
and Deeds; each of which they are to examine according to the Rule of God's
Word: Or, (which comes to the same thing) they may go over the Commandments,
and see wherein they have broken any of them: Wherein they find themselves
Guilty, they are with unfeigned Sorrow and inward Contrition, to confess it, to
mourn for it, and earnestly to beg Forgiveness of God; resolving with full
purpose of Heart, to do so no more; but to cease from Evil, and to learn to do
well. They are to consider what Temptations they are most in danger of; that
they may avoid them: They are also to consider what course they must take, and
what Christian methods they must use, to overcome their Evil Inclinations and
^oolish and bad Customs; and they are to resolve to govern themselves
accordingly; and sincerely to endeavor to go on unto Perfection.

After this, they may reflect on the kind Providence they have met with; that
their Souls may be filled with a grateful Sense thereof; that they may return
all Praise and Thanks to God for his Mercy and Love; and may be excited for the
time to come, to trust more firmly in him, and to depend upon him.

They may particularly consider, wherein God has been pleased to answer their
Prayers, and to grant them the good things they have asked of him for their
Souls and Bodies, for themselves or for others; that their Piety and Love to
God may be thereby the more kindled, and their Devotion excited; that their
Faith and Hope may be made more strong and lively.

They may take notice likewise of the Corrections and Chastisements, wherewith
God has thought fit to exercise them; that thereby they may be awakened from
Sin, and made wiser and better for the time to come.

It will be very useful for them to have a Note in Writing of those various
particulars; that they may on such days review them, and with the more ease
make such Reflections on them, as tend to their Improvement in real Piety.

Besides these Acts of Devotion, which concern themselves immediately; it will
be fit on such days to make earnest and hearty Prayers to God for all Mankind;
For the Conversion of Jews, Turks, and Pagans, For the Reformation of those
Christian Countries that are corrupted with Superstition and Idolatry; For
Union amongst those that are divided in their Opinions about lesser matters;
For deliverance to those who are persecuted for Righteousness sake; and for
these Lands, (that God may inspire us with a Spirit of Peace, of Love, and of
true Piety;) For our King and Queen; For all Judges and Magistrates; For all
the Ministers of the Gospel; For all their Friends and Relations; For all their
Enemies; and for all who desire their Prayers, of whom it is not unfit to keep
a particular Note in Writing, that this Christian Office may be performed
toward them with all Faithfulness and Kindness.

They are next to consider, what may be done by them for the Honor of God and
the good of Men; and are to resolve to do some Act or other of Piety or
Charity, which may be of real Advantage to Men's Souls or Bodies.

One thing more I shall mention, which may be very useful on such days; and
that is, That they consider what are the things wherein they desire more
earnestly the Divine Assistance and Direction; which they may write down
distinctly, that they may renew their Petitions therein every day. And
thereafter, especially on such Days as they appoint for more Solemn Reflection
and Humiliation, they may consider what Answers God has been pleased to afford
them.

These are a few General Heads on this Subject, which may be of great
advantage, in Order to the promoting of true Devotion. But the designed brevity
of this Treatise does not permit the enlarging upon them.

10. Duty, to observe what Providence they meet with, and to acquaint them
therewith in due time, as also with some of the most remarkable Providence,
which either they (to wit the Parents) themselves, or others have met with.
Lastly, Consider what Providence they meet with, what signal Mercies and
Favors their Merciful Father bestows upon them; what Dangers and Hazards
they have escaped; wherein God's Kindness and Mighty Power has appeared toward
them, in preserving them, and keeping them alive: Keep a Note thereof in
Writing; that so when they come to Age, you may acquaint them therewith, that
they may therein read the loving Kindness and tender Mercies of the Lord, and
his wonderful Goodness and Favor toward them; and may be excited to be
thankful, and to put their Trust and Confidence in him, whose Mercies are over
all his Works.

But, alas! How far are most Parents from doing this? Very few do any such
thing for themselves; the Mercies of God are renewed to them every Morning,
they live at his cost and charge, he gives them richly all things to enjoy; all
their good things are from him alone: But how little do they consider, and take
notice of the Hand of God, in those many and great Benefits he loads them with
every hour and moment? they do not reflect upon the great and mavelous things
that he does for them; they live as if they were altogether insensible of God's
Mercies and loving Kindnesses; and no wonder, if they take little thought to
possess their Children with any Impressions of that, whereof they have no sense
themfelves.

But if Parents did, as they ought, acquaint their Children with God's
Providence toward them in their Infancy, and in the days of their Youth, when
they were not so capable themselves to reflect thereupon, it would have a great
force upon Ingenuous minds, to stir in them Pious and Religious Dispositions.

It would likewise very much serve this end, if Parents would often reflect on
God's kind Providence to selves, and now and then talk They who join with us
in the public Worship, ought to think of their Obligation to this Duty, when
they hear these words of the Litany, ^O God we have heard with our Ears, and
our Fathers have declared unto us the Noble Works that thou did in their
days, and in the old time before them. See Ps. 44. 1.
of them to their Children, and acquaint them sometimes with one Instance of
God's care and kindness toward them, and sometimes with another; this would
insensibly make an Impression on tender minds, and in due time might bring
forth good Fruits.

Show your Children therefore, How God was pleased to provide for you, when you
were in great necessity and want; How he raised up Friends to help you, in the
day of your Distress; How he preserved you from Danger; How he delivered you
out of many and great Afflictions and Troubles: How he comforted you in the
days of your mourning; How he raised you up, when you were brought very low;
How he defeated the designs of your malicious Adversaries; How he disposed a
great many uneasy and afflictive things, sometimes for your Temporal, and
always for your Spiritual Advantage; How he assisted and seconded your
endeavors to serve him, with great and unexpected Success; How he rewarded and
blessed you, when you did those things which were good and right before him;
And how he punished and chastened you, when you omitted your Duty, or did and
said a bad and wicked thing; How he heard your Prayers, and Granted you the
desires of your Souls; How he prevented you with his loving Kindness and tender
Mercy; How he satisfied your longing Souls with good things; And how he deals
with you, exceeding abundantly above all that you could think or ask. In this
manner, according as you have met with particular Instances of the good and
kind Providence of God, you ought, at some times, when you find it most likely
to do good, to talk thereof to your Children, that thereby they may be awakened
to observe and consider the Powerful, Just, Wise, and Kind Providence of God;
and may be excited, together with you, to bless his Holy Name, for his great,
his mavelous, and undeserved Love toward you.

You ought also, to discourse sometimes to them, concerning some of the most
Signal Instances of Divine Providence toward others, which either you have
observed your selves, or which you have received an account of from Persons of
very good Authority: For Example,

Show them, how God has brought down proud and lofty Persons, when their Hearts
were lifted up; How he covered them with Shame and Reproach, and made them
Loathsome, Vile, and Contemptible, almost to every body; And how he raised up
humble and lowly Persons; How he followed them with the Expressions of his
Mercy and Love; How he turned Peoples Hearts toward them, inclining them to
love and honor them, and to do them many good and kind Offices. This will tend
to teach your Children Humility, and to restrain them from Pride and
Self-conceit.

Tell them, what has befallen many Passionate and Impatient Men; How they have
run into the Pit of Destruction, when they gave up themselves to to the Conduct
of their own violent and unruly Passions; And how the meek and patient Ones
have been directed, assisted, and preserved by the good Providence of God; And
how they have enjoyed a great deal of Peace, Joy, and Happiness, amidst the
many Afflictions and Troubles they met with in the World. This will tend to
teach them to be meek, to restrain their Passion, and to beware of Impatience.

Tell them, How God has punished those who have got Wealth and Riches by false,
unjust, and indirect means; How he has cursed their Estates, and sent a moth
into them, which has in a short time insensibly wasted and consumed them; And
how he has blessed the Estate and Substance of those, who have got their
Wealth by honest and lawful means. This will tend to make them honest and
sincere in their dealings in the World, and to hate false and crooked ways.

Tell them, how God has punished Cursers and Vain and False Swearers, how the
Curse has followed them, how often it has happened to such Persons according to
their mad and horrid Imprecations.

Tell them, how God, by very unexpected and surprising ways and means, has
discovered and cut off Traitors, Murderers, Adulterers, Thieves, and Robbers,
False Witnesses, etc.

Tell them, how he has appeared, sooner or later, in behalf of his Servants and
Children; How he has wonderfully defended and preserved sincere and upright
Men; How he has avenged Innocent Blood; How he has defended the Widow and
Fatherless; How he has heard the cry of the Stranger, of the Desolate and
Oppressed, etc.

Such things as these, being seaso^^bly and frequently suggested to Children,
may, at some time or other, work upon their minds, and cause thee to take
notice of the Power, Wisdom, Mercy, and Justice of God; which they cannot do in
good earnest, but th^^ must needs be thereby stirred up to fear him, to love
him, to obey him, and to walk in his ways. And though these things do not produce
their effect at the very time when they are told, yet some time or other they
may catch hold of the minds of your Children* and have a very powerful and
lasting Influence upon them.

The Example of Faithful Abraham ought to excite you to do these things. For
this end did God acquaint him with what he intended to do to Sodom, because he
knew that he would improve all his Providence, that he would not smother them
in his own Breast, but acquaint his Children and Family therewith, that thereby
they also might learn to be wiser and better; that they might see the
terribleness of the Divine Justice against Incorrigible Sinners; and his
Infinite Compassion toward those who fear and love him; that they might know
the Power and Efficacy of Prayer, and see how ready the Lord is to hear all
those who call upon him in earnest, not only for themselves, but also in behalf
of others. And the Lord said, (Genesis 18. 17.) Shall I hide from Abraham that
thing which I do? and v. 19. For I know him, that he will command (or instruct,
as the word is used sometimes) his Children, and his Household after him, and
they shall keep the way of the Lord to do Justice and Judgment, etc.

Suitably to this Example, we find a general Command given to the Jews, Deuteronomy.
4. 9, 10. Take heed to thy self, and keep thy Soul diligently, lest thou forget
the things which thine Eyes have seen, and left they depart from thine heart
all the days of thy Life; but teach them thy Sons and thy Sons Sons: Especially
the day that thou stoodest before the Lord thy God in Horeb, etc. To the same
purpose we find a Direction given them touching the Passover, Ex. 13. 8. Thou
shall show thy Son in that day, saying, This is done because of that which the
Lord did unto me, when I came forth out of Egypt, etc. And v. 14. And it shall
be when thy Son asks thee in time to come, saying, What is this? (to wit,
that is said about setting apart unto the Lord the Firstborn) That thou shall
say unto him, by strength of Hand the Lord brought us out from Egypt, from the
House of Bondage. And it came to pass when Pharaoh would hardly let us go, that
the Lord slew all the Firstborn in the Land of Egypt. -- Therefore I Sacrifice
to the Lord all that opens the Matrix, but all the Firstborn of my Children
I redeem. Likewise Josh. 4 6, 7. It Is said, When your Children ask their
Fathers in time to come, saying, What mean you by these Stones? Then ye shall
answer them, that the Waters of Jordan were cut off before the Ark of the
Covenant of the Lord, when it passed over Jordan. -- And these Stones shall be
a memorial unto the Children of Israel for ever. See also Exodus 10. 1, 2. Joel.
1. 2, 3, 4.

From all which it appears, how important and necessary a Duty it is, for
Parents to acquaint their Children with the Providence of God; a due sense
whereof will, above all other things, tend to make them wise and good.

Some Directions to Parents, how to render their Endeavors effectual.
Now, to render your Admonitions and all other Endeavors effectual, 1. They
must give their Children good Example.
for the good of your Children; First, you must give them good Example; when
you bid them read, or pray, or partake of the Holy Sacrament, or attend the
public Worship, you must (so far as is needful and fit) do the same things
your selves: When you exhort them to be humble, to be of a mild and gentle
Temper, to bear patiently uneasy things, to be sober and temperate, to be
Charitable to the Poor, to judge favorably of those who differ from them in
small matters, not to be unkind or uncivil to any, though they agree not in their
Opinion with them in some lesser points of Religion, but to love all those who
fear and love God, and who are Followers of Jesus Christ. I say, when you
direct and exhort your Children to do such things, you must join with your
Instructions a suitable Example; let it appear to them that you your selves are
Humble, Mild, Patient, Sober, Charitable, Kind, and Loving to all who are
sincerely Pious and Virtuous, without making any difference on the account of
Indifferent things, I mean such things which God has neither commanded nor
forbidden. This is the only way to make your Instructions and Admonitions
successful, when in this manner you go before them your selves, in the way
wherein you desire them to walk.

Children learn more by the Eye than by the Ear, if they see you do contrary to
what you advise them, they will be apt to think you do not believe what you
say; or that you are very cruel and unmerciful toward them, to bind heavy
Burdens upon them, and not to touch them your selves. And if you should
constrain your Children to do what you do not your selves; what would it
signify? It would only make them Hypocrites and Dissemblers, to do that which
they have no Heart unto, and which they are not persuaded to be their Duty.
Such Children, when once the restraint and force which is upon them is removed,
will be sure to give themselves the full swing in all manner of Folly; they
will do those things which they have seen in you, and learned by your Example.

But if you shine before your Children in the constant Practice of true Piety,
walking in the Fear of God, and in Obedience to all his Holy Commandments, your
Example will propagate Religion more effectually than all the Admonitions and
Instructions in the World. And besides, the Influence which your Pious Example
is apt to have on your Childrens lives, this is the way for you to entail a
Blessing on your Posterity. The Just Man, says Solomon, Prove. 20. 7. walks
in his Integrity, his Children are blessed after him. And Psalm. 112. 2. it is
said, His Seed shall be mighty upon Earth, the Generation of the Upright shall
Blessed. And Ex. 20. 6. God has pr^^mised to show Mercy unto Thousands (...)
them that love him, and keep his Co^^mandments.

2dly. 2. They must choose good Company for them.
Choose good Co^^pany for your Children (so far as you have oppo^^tunity and
ability to (...) it,) otherwise, neither your Admo^^tions nor Examples will
signify muc^^ Their ordinary Company, if naught^ will pull down faster than
you are a^^ to build: Corrupt Nature is eas^ drawn away by the Example and
A^^lurements of Sinners; This is like g^^ing down hill, which is easy,
conside^^ing Men's natural bent an^ Inclination Etiam sine Magistro vitia
discuntur. Sen.
: Where^^ Self-denial and mortifyin^ our Lusts and Passions, (...) more
difficult, especially at first, (...) going up hill. When therefore yo^ see
your Children falling into the acquaintance of Vicious and Foolish Persons,
delay not to rescue them from the Snare; to break off their Famili^^rity, that
they be not corrupted there^by, and utterly ruined. We see ho^ careful People
are to keep their Children from those who have the Small Pox, or any other
infectious Distemper; and yet what a strange madness is it for them to trust
them to the Society of those, whose Lives and Manners are full of the deadly
Poison of Sin, which infects and kills the Soul.

As you ought to do all you can, The great Danger that Children are in from
Flatterers.
to preserve your Children from all sorts of vicious Company, so particularly
from Flatterers. Endeavor to save them from this dangerous Snare, than which
there can be nothing of more dreadful Consequence unto them. Such vile and
servile Society will very quickly pull down all that you have built; They will
utterly corrupt your Children, and render their condition desperate. For when
once they are under the power of Flatterers, the Gate is thenceforth shut
against Truth, and against plain and upright dealing; when their delight is
only in those who praise and commend them in all they do or say; when such who
admire them, and who study nothing but to please them in every thing, right or
wrong, are their only Favorites, to be sure they who are their Best and
Wisest, and most Faithful Friends, who tell them the truth, and speak not so
much what may be pleasing as what may be profitable unto them, will not be very
welcome or acceptable to them.

And because such Flatterers are found often amongst Servants, who in hope^ of
serving their covetous or ambitious, or perhaps other base and wicked designs,
do make it their business, by all sorts of vile Compliances, to gain the Favor
and Love of the Children of Richer or more Honorable Persons. Therefore it is
not only the Duty, but the Interest of Parents, to be very careful what
Servants they receive into their Family, or what Persons they admit to stay in
their House, knowing that, according to the Proverb, One Scabbed Sheep will
infect the whole Flock. The Example of the Psalmist ought to be a Rule in this
matter, Psalm. 101. 6, 7. Mine Eyes shall be upon the Faithful of the Land, that
they may dwell with me: He that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me. He
that works Deceit shall not dwell within my House; He that tells Lies shall
not tarry in my sight.

'Twill not be unfit in this place to mention what a Quintilian de causis
corruptae Eloquentiae.
Famous Author reports of the Ancient Romans. 'Twas their custom to make choice
of an Elderly Kinswoman, of whose Probity and Discretion they had good
assurance, to whom they committed the Charge of the Children. Her business was
to keep them from hearing and seeing whatever tended to corrupt their Manners;
to direct them in such little Studies and Exercises, as were proper to their
Years; and to see that their Recreations and Divertisements were harmless and
innocent, and that they were used and managed modestly and inoffensively. This
course Cornelia took, says this Author, with her Sons the Gracchi, Aurelia with
her Son Caesar, and Artia with her Son Augustus. The Fruit and Effect of which
Method was this, The Spirits of the Children being kept pure and sincere,
straight and upright, they were thereby made the more capable to receive Noble
and Excellent Impressions, which way soever they applied their minds, whether
to Military Arts, to the knowledge of the Laws, or the Study of Eloquence. But
now (says he, speaking of the Age in which he lived) Children are entrusted to
the care of a Grecian Girl; and to one or other of the Servants, of most base
and servile Qualities, by whose words and actions they are quite spoiled and
utterly ruined. Neither are there any in the Family who make account what they
say or do before them: And no wonder, says he, for the Parents themselves are
so far from training them up to Modesty and Probity, that they accustom them to
Wantonness and extravagant Liberty, by which means they grow Impudent and
Impetuous, in the pursuit of their wild and foolish Humors and Inclinations.

As this Rule of choosing good company for Children, Advice to Parents who send
their Children abroad to Travel.
is necessary to be followed at all times, so especially when Parents send
their Children into Foreign Countries, when they are fit to Travel; how careful
should they be not to trust them to every body? But to the Conduct of those who
not only may be useful to advance them in the Knowledge of the World, to assist
them in their Journeyings, to take care about their Lodging and Diet, to wait
on them to visit great Men, to see fine Places, curious Fabrics, Famous
Monuments, and Ancient Inscriptions, to learn the Language of the Country, and
the different Modes and Fashions, the Government and Policy, and such like: But
who likewise (through the Blessing of God on their Endeavors,) may preserve
them from the Vices of those Countries where they Travel; from those bad
Customs to which they have a great Inclination: Who may make it their business
to season their Minds with deeper and more lively impressions of Virtue; to
possess them with a mighty regard for such excellent Examples as they have
occasion now and then to see; to Fortify them against the many wicked and
dangerous Opinions and Practices they meet with; to acquaint them chiefly with
the wisest and best Men, by whose Conversation they may be improved in Wisdom
and Virtue; that they may return into their own Country with their Minds
furnished with useful Notions, with solid Principles, and wise Observations;
that they may be able either in a more private way, or in a public capacity,
to do somewhat, not unworthy of those who have had such good occasions for
improving themselves in those things which are excellent.

To serve this design, Parents are to be careful of two things; One is, That
their Children Travel under the Conduct of a Person who is wise and prudent,
and is of a sincere and solid Piety: If he be one that is either Foolish, or
Profane and Atheistical, his Company must needs be very hurtful and dangerous;
It may utterly (...) the young Persons who are entrusted to him, though they have
very good ^^clinations, and have been happy in a Religious Education. We see
that a straight Twig, tied to that which is crooked, and stronger than it self,
grows crooked also.

What an unaccountable thing is it to think, that Men who are careful to have a
skilful Groom to look to their Horses, should be so mad, as to venture their
Children (who are their chiefest Possession, and the principal Objects of their
care and kindness) into the hands of those who have little discretion, and less
Piety?

The Second thing that Parents ought to be careful of, in this matter, is, That
their Children do not Travel till they are come to somewhat of stayedness, and
solidity of Judgment; till their Understanding and Discretion is such, as may
give ground to hope that their Traveling shall do them no hurt, but good. It
is none of the wisest parts in some Parents, to send their Children too soon
into Foreign Countries, before their Judgment is prepared, and made fit to make
useful Reflections and Observations on the World; before their minds are
possessed with solid Principles of Virtue, and with a deep sense of Religion;
so as not to be in great danger from the temptations which they are sure to
meet with in most places: Before they know any thing at home, it is too soon to
send them abroad: Before they know themselves a little, it is not advisable to
send them into the wide World, to know a vast multitude of other things: Hence
it too often comes to pass, that a great many return, after their Travels,
greater Fools than they went; they bring back nothing but a load (...) the
Vices and Vanities of other Countries.

Thirdly, Let not overgreat fondness blind your Eyes, 3. They must, as need
requires, reprove and chasten their Children: and how?
so as not to see the Faults of your Children* nor cause you to stop your Ears
against just complaints It Is true, there are some wicked People who love to sow
Discord* to kindle strife and contention; to divide the nearest Relations: But
all a^^ not so very wicked; you cannot bu^ know some who love you and your
Children sincerely; and when such Persons tell you of their Faults, you ought
to do the part of those who are wise, as well as kind Parents; that i^ you
ought to do all you can to reform their Faults, and make them better and withal
you ought to be heartil^ thankful to those who do not flatter you and your
Children, to the hurt bot^ of you and them.

In order to their Reformation, try first all gentle Methods to make them
better: Endeavor to conquer them with the Weapons of Kindness and Affection;
endeavor by Instructions and Admonitions to make them sensible of their
Faults; Use Promises and Encouragements to allure them to do what they ought;
if these gentler Methods do not succeed, it is fit to use Reproof, to rebuke
them sharply: Reproofs of Instruction, says Solomon, Prove. 6. 23. are the way
of Life. When Threatenings are necessary, make use of them likewise; and if they
do not serve the turn, then try the Rod; Chasten thy Son, says Solomon, Prove.
19. 18. while there is hope, and let not thy Soul spare for his crying. And Chapter
13. 24. he says, He that spares his Rod, hates his Son, but he that loves
him, Chasteneth him betimes. But let this be always the last Remedy, after you
have in vain attempted their Reformation by milder and gentler Methods. And
when you use Severity, do it with due moderation, not exceeding the Quality of
the Fault: Beware of using great Severity, when the Fault is very small and
inconsiderable. Respect must also be had to the Age, Temper, and Disposition of
your Children; if they are very young and tender, your Correction must be the
more gentle and moderate; and if they are of a flexible and Ingenuous Temper,
you must be the more Favorable toward them.

Beware of correcting them when you find your Anger very hot, for then you are
apt to do more hurt than good. Your Passion will hurry you, if you restrain it
not, into somewhat or other very wicked, as well as indiscreet; it will make
you do and say a great many things very unworthy of a Christian. Always
therefore be careful, that your Reason, and not your Passion, direct you in so
important a matter as this is* ^f once you fall into the rough, severe, and
violent Method of dealing with your Children, there are a great many
Disadvantages will attend it.

First, You discourage your Children, you break their Spirits, you make them
unfit for any useful thing; you tempt them to do such things as are hurtful to
themselves, and may prove grievous to you. If Oppression makes a wise Man mad;
it is no wonder if a Child, or young Person, is sadly disordered, and made half
mad by cruel and tyrann^c^l usage: Though it be a Fault in Children to be so; yet
Parents ought to be careful not to provoke them overmuch to wrath, by a severe,
unmerciful carriage toward them. It Is not the less important and true, because
it is a common Observation, to wit, That a tender Sprig which grows crooked,
may be made straight by little and little, if you bend it and handle it gently;
but if you bend it with great Force and Violence, you may quickly break it.
Thus it is with Children generally, who discover very early somewhat of
crookedness in their Nature, which is increased by evil Example; if you use
mild and gentle Methods to reform them, tempered now and then, as need shall
require, with a little severity, there is hopes, that, by degrees, they will be
reformed, and made straight; but if, instead of this moderate course, you use
cruel Methods, and deal rigidly and unmercifully with them, you cannot expect
any other, but that their Spirits should be broken or hardened, and so lose all
sense of Ingenuity.

Secondly, You kindle your own Passions, you disorder your minds, and accustom
your selves to a fiery Temper, you become fierce, barbarous, and savage;
whereby you turn one of your great Temporal Comforts into a grievous Cross, and
heavy Burden.

Thirdly, You hereby likewise teach your Children, through your Example, to be
of a passionate and violent Spirit; and so you do them more hurt, than all your
Corrections and Instructions can do them good: Never think to cure them of
their Faults, by your committing as bad your selves: You must not do evil that
good may come of it: The Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God.

Fourthly, You make your Children care less for your Corrections, than
otherwise they would do: When you are always beating them in your Passion, and
tormenting them, they must needs think, that you do so, not so much for any
Fault they are guilty of, as because you are very passionate, and therefore
must give your Passion a vent one way or other.

If therefore you would chasten your Children to good purpose, do it when your
Spirits are cool, when your Reason is at hand to direct you, and to keep you
within bounds, and not when you have lost your selves, by being under the Power
of a violent Passion.

If you are careful to follow this Christian Method, you may then expect that
God's kind Providence will second you in your Endeavors for reforming your
Children. Either they will grow better; or however, you will find Peace and
Comfort, when in this manner you govern your selves by the Laws of Religion,
and are not led by your unruly Passion.

That Parents may the better perform their Duty in correcting their Children,
Parents ought in correcting their Children, to follow the Example of our
Heavenly Father.
they ought to observe and imitate the Example of our Heavenly Father, who,
though whom he loves, he chasteneth, Heb. 12. 6. yet he does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men. Lam. 3. 33. He does not make use of
the Rod, but when it is necessary, when his Mercy and Kindness do not prevail.
And when he does correct, in the midst of Wrath, he remembers Mercy. When he
visits the Transgressions of his Children, with the Rod, and their Iniquity
with Stripes: Nevertheless, his loving Kindness he does not take utterly from
them, nor suffer his Faithfulness to fail. Ps. 89. 32, 33. He is always ready
to receive his penitent Children, to have Mercy upon them. He does not keep his
Anger for ever. A due Consideration of these things will direct Parents how to
correct their Children both as to Time and Measure.

To what has been said, it will not be unfit to add, Parents must be careful
not to oppose one another, when they c^rrect and reprove their Children.
That, to render Reproof, and Correction the more effectual, it is necessary
that both Parents concur therein; not as if it were proper for them both
together, or one after another, to reprove or chasten their Children, for the
same Fault, for this would be rather very improper for the most part: But when
one of the Parents chides of corrects their Children, the other ought so far to
concur, as to approve what is done, and show their displeasure toward those
Children who have done that which deserves Chastisement. They must not oppose
one another in this matter; when one reproves, the other must not approve and
commend; when one condemns, the other must not justify; when one endeavors to
correct, the other must not hinder it; Otherwise, the Children will be lost;
for it is not likely they will amend their Faults, if they see that either of
their Parents is their Patron, to encourage and defend them, or to excuse and
extenuate what they do amiss. They who are wise Parents, ought to be so far
from doing this, that though one of them should happen to reprove or chasten a
Child when there is no very great necessity for so doing, yet the other Parent,
whether Father or Mother, ought to conceal their present thoughts, and wait a
fit occasion to discourse the matter together, that such unnecessary Reproofs
and Chastisements may be prevented for the future. If Parents do not carefully
observe this Rule, their Children will be sure to take notice of their
Indiscretion, and to make a very bad use of it, so as to despise their reproofs
and chastenings, when they are more just and necessary.

Fourthly, When it pleases God to visit them with sickness, 4. They must
carefully improve the Time of their Childrens Sickness, or of any other
afflictions they meet with, toward the making of them wiser and better.
or any other adversity; be sure to do all that you can, to bear in upon their
minds, a sense of those things you are most desirous to have them touched with,
and which in time of their health they made but very little account of.
Affliction is the time, in which God uses to work upon the hearts of People
most powerfully and effectually; then he awakeneth them, and convinces them of
their sad and dangerous state; he casts them down, that being made sensible of
their sin and danger, he may again raise them up, and speak comfortably to
them. I will allure her, and bring her into the Wilderness, and speak
comfortably to her, Hos. 2. 4. Therefore all they who sincerely desire to
reclaim their Children, or others, from their bad and foolish courses, ought to
take the opportunity of their Sickness, their Pain and Grief, their Losses and
Disappointments, and of any other sorts of Troubles and Afflictions wherein
they are, that then they may suggest to them such counsels and advices as are
proper for their Instruction, their conviction and amendment. At other times,
there are a great many things which are apt to hinder good Counsel from entering
into the mind, or from making any deep impression thereon; Pleasures and
Vanities are apt to choke the good Seed: But when they are afflicted, and
humbled a little by some outward pressure, or bodily distemper; they are
thereby somewhat better disposed to hear Friendly Admonitions and Counsels, and
to think a little more seriously of their ways and doings. It is good for a Man
that he bear the Yoke in his Youth; He sits alone and keeps silence, etc.
Lam. 3. 27, 28.

When it has pleased God to restore your Children to health, or to deliver
them from any other Affliction, fail not to put them in mind of their afflicted
Estate, and of God's goodness toward them when they were in adversity:
Endeavor to make them sensible for what end God has been so kind to them, to
wit, that they may amend their Lives, and bring forth Fruits meet for
Repentance. Strive to keep them mindful of their Purposes and Resolutions, and
press them to the fulfilling of them. Stir them up to be thankful to God for
his Mercy, and to be very watchful, lest Satan prevail over them any more.

Fifthly, Be earnest in your Prayers to God daily for them; 5. They must daily
pray to God for them.
that he would make them what he requires them to be, his dutiful and obedient
Children and Servants; that he would give them his Holy Spirit to sanctify and
cleanse them, to enlighten and direct them, and to assist and strengthen them;
that he would season their Hearts with his Fear and Love; that he would turn
them from Sin and Folly; and incline their Hearts to keep his Precepts always,
even unto the end; that he would hold up their goings in his Paths, that their
footsteps may not slide; that he would be their God and Guide, their Sun and
Shield, and their Portion for ever; that he would give every one of them those
things which be best and most needful for them; that he would Sanctify every
State and Condition of Life, wherein his Providence does place them. If they
are in a healthful and prosperous State, pray to God to make them sensible of,
and thankful for his undeserved goodness, and that he would preserve them from
the snares and dangers to which Prosperity does expose them. You see what was
Job's constant course at the end of his Childrens Feasting. Job. 1. 5. He sent
and Sanctified them, and rose up early in the Morning, and Offered burnt
Offerings according to the number of them all. For he said, it may be my Sons
have sinned, and cursed God in their Hearts, etc. Again, if they are in
Sickness, or any other Adversity; beg of God to Sanctify their Afflictions, to
make them blessed and happy means of their Reformation, or of their Improvement
in true Piety.

When you are about to instruct, to admonish, to reprove, or to correct your
Children, pray to God to direct you by his good Spirit, to do your Duty in an
acceptable manner; and that he would incline and dispose them to their Duty,
and make them Gainers by what you do or say for their good. It Is not always
necessary for you, in every particular Admonition or Reproof, etc. which you
use toward your Children, to make a Solemn Prayer, by retiring into your
Closet; this ought to be done upon extraordinary Occasions; but ordinarily, it
will suffice, if you lift up your Hearts unto God, in a short and fervent
Ejaculation, for his Direction and Blessing in what you are to do or say to
your Children.

You have great encouragement to do this; because you are assured that God
hears Prayer; he has said, Every one that asks, receives. So that either
he will grant your Children what you beg for them, or if they render themselves
unworthy of the Mercy and Kindness of God, by their perverseness and
stubbornness; yet you are sure of one thing, that your Prayers are not lost;
they shall return into your Bosom: God will plentifully reward your Piety, your
Charity, and Zeal, with more Grace here, and Glory hereafter.

Now if it be the Duty of Parents, Against those who curse their Children.
in this manner, to pray for their Children, what shall be said of those, who,
instead of praying for their Children, curse them, and use fearful Imprecations
against them! How dreadful a thing is it for those to whom it belongs to bless
their Children, instead of doing this, to curse them! How unnatural a thing is
it, instead of contributing to their Happiness, to do their utmost to make them
Eternally miserable! It Is true, some Children are very perverse and wicked,
guilty of great stubbornness and disobedience, and of great contempt and
neglect of their Parents: But yet for all this, Parents ought never to give
over praying for them; and if at any time, their Passion and discontent
occasion in their minds any thing that looks like a tendency to evil wishes or
Imprecations against their Children, let them with as great care endeavor to
be delivered therefrom, as they would from Fire, if it broke forth in their
Houses. And indeed, if they who have the worst Children, did but consider what
woeful Effects do often attend such rash curses The Blessing of the Father
Establishes the Houses of Children, but the Curse of the Mother rooteth out
Foundations. Ecelus. 3. 9.
, they would beware of using them, though never so much provoked: It is very
observable, that God often in his wrath and Vengeance hears such
Imprecations, when uttered by Parents See Augustine. de Civ. Dei, l. 22. c. ^8.
and Plato de leg. l. 34. dial. 11.
, whereby he shows his just Displeasure and Indignation both against them and
their Children.

From what has been said, Parents may see what they must do, to render their
Admonitions, and all their other endeavors effectual, for the good of their
Children.

Some Motives to excite Parents to do these things.
Now to stir you up to perform these things; 1. Motive, from the Divine Command.
Consider, first, it is the Will of God that you bring up your Children in his
Fear, and acquaint them with his Holy Laws and Commandments. He who made you,
requires you to do this; he who preserves you and keeps you alive; he who is
your King and Lord, who has a right to your service, to all that you are able
to do; who is your Father in Heaven; who daily takes care of you, and Loads you
with his benefits; who is the God of your Salvation; who has sent his Son into
the World to die for you: It is even he who says, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. And these
words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine Heart. And thou shall
teach them diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou
sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up. And, Ephesians. 6. 4. And ye Fathers, provoke not your
Children to Wrath, but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.
It Is He who Established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel:
Which he Commanded our Fathers, that they should make them known to their
Children: That the Generation to come might know them, even the Children that
should be born: Who should arise and declare them to their Children. That they
might set their hope in God, and not forget the Works of God; but keep his
Commandments: And might not be as their Fathers, a stubborn and Rebellious
Generation, a Generation that set not their heart aright, and whose Spirit was
not steadfast with God. Psalm. 78. 5, 6, 7, 8. If you then be the Subjects, the
Servants, and the Children of the great God; If you love and fear Him, as you
ought to do, you will be sure to make it your Business to train up your
Children in true Virtue and Piety; to make them what God requires them to be,
holy, as he who has called them is holy, in all manner of Conversation; you
will excite them to strive to enter in at the strait gate; To work out their
Salvation with fear and trembling; To remember their Creator in the days of
their youth; T^ seek God while He may be found, and to call upon Him while he
is near; To love the Lord with all their heart, and the^ Neighbors as
themselves; To endeavor to follow the Example of our Blessed Master, to Learn
of him to be meek and lowly, to take up their Cross and to bear it patiently,
to be zealous for the Glory of God, to abound in the work of the Lord, not to
be weary in well-doing, but to grow in Grace and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Is not this a work worthy of all your care and pains, 2. Motive,
from its being a work worthy of the utmost care and pains of Parents.
to save the Souls of those, who are parts of your selves, who derive their
Being from you? You are the Instruments not only of their being, but the means
of conveying unto them natural defilement and corruption: And therefore you
ought with a great deal of Zeal to endeavor to have their pollutions washed
off by true unfeigned Repentance, and a hearty turning from Sin unto God; by
their putting off the works of darkness, and putting on the Armor of Light; by
their putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, and walking as he walked. Are you ready
to do all that you can to make your Children Rich and Wealthy, Great and
Honorable in the World; And yet are you at so little pains to do that for
them* which tends to make them rich in Faith, and Heirs of a Glorious
Inheritance? You endeavor to acquaint them with those who may be useful to
them in their worldly Affairs and Concerns; And why do you not strive to
acquaint them with God, their greatest and best Friend, who is sure to stand by
them, to take them up, and to take care of them, when all forsake them, and
turn their backs upon them? Why do you not with greater earnestness endeavor
to procure unto them his Friendship and Love, who is infinitely Powerful, and
infinitely Good and Kind; and therefore not only can, but will do for them
exceeding abundantly above all that either you or they can think or ask?

Thirdly, 3. Motive, from the Rewards which attend those, who faithfully do
these things.
The doing of this is attended with great Rewards, not only in another World*
but even in this Life. You cannot but find unspeakable Joy and Comfort, when
you behold your Children walking in the Fear of God, going from Strength to
Strength, and from Grace to Grace, that at last they may come and appear before
the Lord in Sion. It will free you from a great many anxious thoughts about
them for the time to come, when you know that they have God for their Friend,
who will be a Guide and Buckler to them: What a great Satisfaction will it
afford you, to think that they, for whom you make so great Provision, and are
at so much pains, are Good and Wise, and in all Probability, will make good use
of what is given them, or designed for them? When you see them humble, of a
mild and gentle Temper, ap^ to bear uneasy things Meekly and Patiently; when
you see them Sober and Temperate, Charitable and Compassionate, Just and
Upright, True and Faithful, Wise and Prudent, Devout and Religious, Zealous for
the Honor of God, and studying daily to grow up in all Virtue and Piety; how
will this fill you with a Pleasure that cannot be expressed? So true is it that
is said by the Wise Man, Prove. 15. and 20. A Wise Son makes a Glad Father. And
Chapter 23. v. 24, 25. The Father of the Righteous shall greatly rejoice, and he
that begets a wise Child shall have Joy of him. Thy Father and thy Mother
shall be glad, and she that bare thee shall rejoice.

They who Plant an Orchard, are mightily pleased to see the young Trees
prosper, grow regularly, and bear a great deal of good Fruit, this makes them
reflect upon all their cost and pains with much satisfaction. How much greater
must their Pleasure be, upon whom God has bestowed Children, when they see
them growing in Grace as they grow in Years? When they behold them straight and
upright in their Lives, pure and undefiled in the way, walking in the Law of
the Lord, having Respect unto all his Commandments, flourishing in the Courts
of the Lord, bringing forth the Fruits of Righteousness and true Holiness.
Doubtless there is no Pleasure in any Earthly thing comparable to this of
Religious Parents, when they are Happy in Pious and Virtuous Children.

And as such Children are a great Comfort, and afford a Mighty Pleasur^ to
their Parents, so they are a great Honor, and a lasting Ornament unto them.
What can be more for the Glory of Parents, than to have their Children adorned
with the Image o^ God, clothed with Virtue and Goodness as with a Garment?
This does reflect somewhat of its Lusture and Beauty upon the Parents
themselves, who have been, under God, the Instruments of making their Children
Lovers and Followers of that which is good. All wise and good People, who
observe the Truth and Faithfulness, the Justice and Uprightness, the Meekness
and Modesty, the Prudence and Discretion, and the other Virtues which appear in
Children, must needs conceive and entertain very respectful thoughts of the
Parents themselves, by whose means the Children have been so Virtuously and
Religiously Formed and Educated.

But besides all that has been said, Good and Virtuous Children afford manifold
Advantages to their Parents. The Psalmist ( Psalm. 128. 3.) compares them to
Olive Plants round about the Table of their Parents; that is, as Olive Plants
are not only for Ornament, but of great use to those who possess them; so good
Children are not only Ornaments to their Parents, but very useful and
profitable to them in many regards; for example, they serve their Parents, they
assist and help them in their Employment, they stand by them in their danger,
and defend them, they provide for them in their want, they pray for them, and
do many Important Offices to them; so that no wonder if the Psalmist says,
Psalm. 127. 5. Happy is the Man that has his Quiver full of them; they shall
not be ashamed, but they shall speak with the Enemies in the Gate. That is, it
makes Parents Courageous, it encourages them to appear in public in their own
just defense, when they have worthy Children to attend them, and to assist them
against those who endeavor to wrong them.

Fourthly, 4. Motive, from the great Benefit which comes both to Church and
State by the good Education of Children.
The benefit of the good Education of Children, is not confined to the Parents
alone, but is extended both to Church and State, Families being the Nurseries
both of one and the other.

1 st. As to the Church, when Children are rightly educated in the Knowledge
and Practice of true Religion, they will then be sure to observe all such
things as tend to Peace, Unity, and Edification; they will readily and gladly
join in Religious Assemblies, and carefully avoid whatever tends to unnecessary
Separation.

Neither will they only join outwardly in Christian Assemblies, but will be
careful likewise to do it sincerely, to Worship God in Spirit and in Truth; and
to hear his Word with great Reverence and Attention, with a great desire to
know the Divine Will, and with a real and hearty design to do it. They will
also observe all other Sacred Institutions, without consulting with Flesh and
Blood. And as they will do those things themselves, so they will do what they
can to engage others to do the like.

And not only will they carry themselves as Christians in public; but
likewise, in their several Relations and Capacities, wherein God has placed
them in the World, they will be careful to adorn their Christian Profession;
they will study to avoid whatever is contrary to true Piety; they will
Zealously endeavor to do all the good they can in the World: For which end,
they will watch the most fit Occasions of doing good to the Souls of those they
are acquainted with, and will be sure to comply with any favorable Opportunity
of serving them, in those things which are for their Everlasting Happiness,
which tend to make them wiser and better.

How great a Blessing would it be to the Church, to have many such Persons of
her Society? And therefore, as the sense of this ought to excite Parents to do
their utmost to Educate their Children in the Fear and Love of God: So it ought
to stir up the Guides of the Church, to employ themselves Vigorously in dealing
with younger Persons, to make them wise and good, in endeavoring all they can
to beget in their minds a true Sense of Religion and Virtue, to possess them
with the Knowledge and Love of God, to fortify them against the many
Temptations to Sin and Folly to which they are exposed: And, in a word, to make
the^ Followers of Christ in true Holines^ in this World, and fit to live an^
Reign with him in Glory in the Wor^ to come.

All who have dealt with Mankind about the concerns of another Life must needs
lament, that very litt^ can be done for reforming Aged People, who are hardened
in Evil Habits and therefore, there is the greater nee^ to deal in good earnest
with young Persons, to prevent their being corrupted, and to lay in them the
Foundation of solid Piety for the time to come.

2 dly. As to the State, it would likewise reap no small Benefit by the right
Education of Children. For (...) As to those who are to Rule a^^ Govern others,
whether in an highe^ or more subordinate Quality, if the^ are happy in a Pious
and Virtuous Education, if their minds are season^ with Religious Principles,
if they a^^ possessed with a great Love to the which is good, and with a great
Abhorrence and Detestation of the which is Evil; if they are trained (...) in
the daily Practice of Modesty an^ Humility, of Meekness and Patience, of Truth
and Faithfulness, of Justice and Uprightness, of Brotherly Kindness and
Charity, and of Temperance and Sobriety, etc. I say, if they who are to rule
others, are Educated in this manner, there is great reason to hope, that they
will prove great Blessings, in those public Capacities, to which it shall
please God to call them. Such Persons are likely to Minister Justice
impartially, to encourage Piety and Virtue wherever they see it, and to curb
and restrain whatever is dishonorable to God, and unsuitable to the Christian
Profession.

Whereas, on the contrary, when they who are to rule others, are bred up in
Idleness and Luxury, are gratified in their Vanity and Folly, are cherished in
their Passions and Extravagancies, are accustomed to no Society but of trifling
or Atheistical Persons, and are not employed in any useful sort of Business. I
say, when they who are to rule others have such woeful Education, what can be
expected from them, but such things only, as are dishonorable to God,
scandalous to Religion, and in many regards prejudicial to Mankind?

2 dly. As for those of lower Quality, when once they are inspired with the
Knowledge of Christian Principles, and when these have taken deep root in them,
and have a due Influence upon them, they will not only teach them, but also
engage them to Honor and Obey their Rulers, and that not only for Fear, but
also for Conscience sake. As Christianity will make them give unto God the
Things that be God's, so it will cause them to give unto Caesar the Things that
be Caesar' s. It will likewise make them true and sincere in all their words,
just and upright in all their deeds, faithful and constant in all their Lawful
Undertakings, and Charitable and Compassionate to every body in distress;
studious of Purity and Chastity, of Temperance and Sobriety, and of Peace and
Concord: It will cause them, as much as is possible, to live Peaceably with all
Men, to seek Peace, and to pursue it, to be Zealous Peacemakers, and to be
ready to overcome* Evil with Good; It will direct them when their Neighbor or
Friend is overtaken with a fault, to restore him with the Spirit of Meekness;
It will make them, not to seek their own things only, but likewise their
Neighbors good as well as their own; It will not only restrain them from what
is manifestly evil, but will also make them careful to avoid every appearance
of it, to shun the very thoughts and desire of Wickedness; It will cause them
to be content with what God bestows upon them, and not to envy others, not to
covet their Goods, nor wrong them by word or deed. And, ^in a word, the lively
Impressions of Religion will make them careful to keep their Consciences Void
of Offense both toward God and toward Men.

Now, if these Rules of our Holy Religion had their due Influence on the minds
of People, what a Blessed and Happy Society would there be in the World! How
easy would every Man be? How well-pleased? How safe and secure from hurt and
danger? How confident in his Friends, Neighbors, and Acquaintance? Knowing,
and being well assured, that they fear and love God, and therefore will do no
wrong.

As the Consideration of these things, ought to make Parents very careful to do
all that ever they can toward the right Education of their Children, so i^
ought mightily to excite all Christian Rulers and Governors, to do their part
in this matter, particularly to take care that there be Schools every where,
and that such Persons be chosen to Educate Children at School, as not only are
skilful to teach them to Read, Write, etc. But who may contribute likewise
toward the seasoning their minds with Religious Principles, who will look upon
it as one great part of their Business to endeavor to possess them with the
Fear and Love of God. How worthy of Christian Magistrates were it also, to take
care that all Schools and Colleges be visited often by fit Persons, that the
Diligent may be encouraged, and that the Remiss and Negligent, or the Vicious
and Profane, may be discouraged by all Just and Lawful means.

These things cannot be looked upon as Foreign to the Magistrates Office, if
it be but duly considered, how much Benefit comes to the State by the good
Education of Children, and how much mischief comes thereto, by the neglect of
their Education. See Plutarch in Lycurgo. Heraclid. de Politiis. Xenophon paed.
Cyr. lib. 1.
Of old the Persians, Lacedaemonians, Cretians, and others, thought it their
Interest to see to the right Education of Children; they did not think it safe,
to leave so great a Trust wholly in the hands of Parents, who through
Partiality, Fondness, or Indiscretion, might utterly spoil them, and thereby do
unspeakable Mischief to the State. And no doubt, till once all Christian Rulers
and Governors, both in Church and State, make it more their business to see to
the right Education of Children, there is no great hopes of ever seeing any
considerable Reformation in the World.

Fifthly, If you neglect to do these things for the Souls of your Children, 5.
Mo^ive, from the s^d Effects which attend the neglect of these Duties.
and leave them to themselves to do as they list, then you may expect that
their Sins and Follies, their Pride and Passion, their Gluttony and
Drunkenness, their Cursing and Swearing, their Lying and Deceiving, their
Malice and Revenge, their Chambering and Wantonness, their Atheism and
Irreligion, will not only prove Tragical to them, but occasion great
uneasiness, Vexation, and Grief of Mind to you. Prove. 10. 1. A foolish Son is a
heaviness to his Mother, and Chap. 17. 21. He that begets a Fool, does it to
his Sorrow, and the Father of a Fool has no Joy.

It Is true, it is not in the Power of Parents to infuse good Qualities into the
minds of their Children; some are so very perverse, that all that can be said
or done by Parents, is altogether slighted, and neglected by them: We know that
Abraham had an Ishmael as well as an Isaac; and Isaac an Esau as well as a
Jacob; and Jacob a Reuben as well as a Joseph. However, such Parents who have
the affliction of sad and wretched Children, have some comfort and satisfaction
in having done their Duty for them, and in endeavoring to approve themselves
unto God, who will accept of their honest and sincere endeavors; and will
crown them with glorious Rewards. But it is otherwise, when Children prove bad
through the too great Indulgence, or the Negligence, and bad Example of
Parents. What a deep wound must it needs give them, when they begin to consider
that they did not their part to make their Children good, and were so far from
it, that they corrupted and ruined them by their bad Example, and over great
kindness and indulgence? Such Parents do often eat the Fruits of their cruel
fondness, and feel the sad Effects of their own bad Example, by means of their
Profane and Graceless Children.

As God does often visit the Iniquity of the Parents upon the Children; so when
Children are suffered to go on in their foolish and wicked courses, through the
indiscreet gentleness and kindness of Parents, who, perhaps, are in other
respects good People; the Lord does sometimes punish such Parents, and bring
Temporal Judgments upon them. Ely was a great instance of this, 1 Samuel 2. and
22. He heard all that his Sons did unto all Israel; which were things of a very
vile Nature, whereby, as it is said Chap. 3. and 13. they made themselves vile,
that is, hateful to God, and base and contemptible to all the People, by their
lewd and abominable Practices. Ely did reprove them, but it was too coldly and
gently. Chap. 2. 23, 24 And he said unto them, Why do you such things, for I
hear of your evil dealings by all this People: Nay, my Sons; for it is no good
Report that I hear; you make the Lord's People to transgress. Besides his
reproof, he ought to have restrained them, Chapter 3. and 13. as being High Priest,
a Judge, and Chief Governor amongst the People: He ought to have put them out
of the Priesthood, as accurssed Persons, and Executed the Laws of God against
them. Which because he did not, therefore God denounced very dreadful Judgments
against him by a Prophet, whom he sent unto him, Chap. 2. 31, 3^, 33, 34, 36.
and Chap. 3. 13, 14. And in Chap. 4. we find his two Sons Hoph^^ and Phineas
were slain in Battle by the Philistines, and the Ark of God was taken; upon the
news whereof, the Old Man fell from off his Seat backwards, and his Neck brake,
and he died.

We see likewise in David, what was the Effect of his too great indulgence to
some of his Children; especially Absalom and Adonijah, who not only wrought
their own destruction, but proved great Crosses to their aged Father.

Here it will not be unfit to relate what St. Augustine tells us of the sad
Effects of leaving a Child to himself, and not endeavoring to Educate him
aright. The Story is this. Augustine. To. 10. Ser. 33. (...) Fratres in Eremo.
There was one Cyril, a Citizen of Hippo, who having one only Son, was so fond
of him, that he avoided doing or saying any thing that tended to make his Son
uneasy: The young Man finding himself at Liberty (through his Father's
Indulgence) to live as* he thought good, gave up himself to all manner of
Folly, particularly to Drunkenness. Notwithstanding this, his Father still
continued to be as fond as ever, and would not do any thing to restrain him
from doing what he had a mind to. The consequence whereof was very dreadful and
terrible; for a little time after, this wretched Son coming home very drunk,
killed his Father, as also his Mother then big with Child; he attempted to have
Ravished his Sisters, of whom two were Mortally Wounded by him.

Such sad Examples as these ought to awaken Parents to do what they can to
Educate their Children in the Fear of God, to train them up in the Study and
Practice of true Piety, and to restrain them by all due means from Sin and
Folly. Which things if they fail to do, they may expect sooner or later, to
reap the Bitter and Cursed Fruits of so sad a Neglect.

Advice to Parents.
PART II.
The Duties of Parents as to their Childrens Bodies.
HAving treated of the Duty of Parents toward their Children, as to their
Souls, the better part; I shall next show what their Duties are, as to the
Bodies of their Children.

First, It belongs to the Mother to give suck to her Children; 1. Duty, it
belongs to the Mother to give suck to her Children.
unless some bodily Imperfection, great Weakness, or Sickness, or her
circumstances in the World, make it impossible, or very dangerous and
inconvenient both for her and the Children, or for either. For this end it is
that God has given Breasts unto Women, and caused the Milk to flow into them,
that there may be nourishment suitable to the tender Infants, in a readiness
for them. Neither can we suppose any other body capable of showing equal Care
and Love to the Children, with that which it is natural for the Mother to
express to the Fruit of her own Womb. Besides this, it cannot well be imagined,
that the Milk of any other Body can be so fit for the Child as its own Mothers,
if she be but in tolerable Health.

We see that Sarah did not think that the greatness of her Quality, or her
great Age, did excuse her from this Natural Obligation, of giving Suck unto her
Child. Genesis 21. 7. And she said, who would have said unto Abraham, that Sarah
should have given Children Suck? For I have born him a Son in my Old Age. Which
words suppose it to be the unquestionable Duty, as well as common Practice of
Mothers, to give Suck to their Children. When God chose a Nurse for Moses, (
Exodus 2. 8.) he led the Handmaid of Pharaoh's Daughter to the Child's Mother.
We find that amongst other Characters of a Woman, that was fit to be taken into
the number of Widows, there was this, If she has brought up Children, (1 Timothy
5. 10.) or, as the words may be Translated, If she has nourished or fed her
Children. It was reckoned as a sign of God's Wrath, Hos. 9. 14. To have dry
Breasts. And therefore, they cannot be accounted Innocent, who, without
apparent Necessity, dry up their Breasts, and so deprive their Children of that
Food and Nourishment which Nature designed for them. The words of the Psalmist
David, Psalm. 22. 9. do not only imply that his Mother gave him Suck, but they
also show, that it was the practice of all Mothers, to do the like to their
Children. Thou did make me hope, says he, when I was upon my Mother's
Breasts. Solomon likewise takes it for granted, that Children of the same Womb,
should Suck of the same Breasts. Cant. 8. 1. O that thou were as my Brother,
that Sucked the Breasts of my Mother. To all which might be added, the words of
the Woman to our Savior, Luke 11. 27. Blessed is the Womb that bare thee, and
the Paps which thou have Sucked. Which words suppose, that she who bare him,
did also give him Suck.

We find that amongst the very Heathens, they were accounted but half Mothers,
who neglected to give Suck to their Children. One of their Ancient Authors
Aulus Gellius. lib. 12. cap. 1. See likewise Plutarch de Educ.
speaking on this Subject, says, How unnatural a thing is this, how imperfect,
and only to be a Mother by halves, having brought forth a Child, presently to
throw it away? having nourished in her Womb somewhat that she could not see,
not now to nourish it with her Milk, when she sees it alive, and calling for
her Assistance?

We see likewise, that Nature has impressed on the most Savage and wild
Creatures, a readiness to draw out their Breasts to their young, Lam. 4. 3.
Even the Sea Monsters draw out the Breast, they give Suck to their young ones.
And shall Women degenerate into such unnatural Barbarity toward their young,
as is not to be met with amongst the most Savage Creatures? Shall they, whose
Love and Tenderness has been so noted and admired, prove unkind and cruel to
the fruit of their own Womb?

2 dly. When Children are fit for stronger Food, 2. Duty, about Childrens Diet.
Parents are not to indulge them too much, in gratifying the curiosity and
daintiness of their Palate, which not only is apt to make them too soft and
tender; but likewise disposes them to Gluttony and Sensuality; to make their
Belly their God. It is fit to accustom them to a plain and simple Diet; which
is generally more wholesome than that sort of Food which is very artificially
prepared.

The State of all Humane Things is very uncertain; they who have at present all
manner of things in greatest plenty and variety, may meet with changes and
vicissitudes: It Is therefore a part of the Wisdom of Parents, to accustom their
Children (so far as their Health and Strength can bear it) to eat any sort of
Food; that so, if God sees fit to change their outward condition and
circumstances, they may be the more fit and able to endure such an alteration.

Thirdly, As to the^ Habit and Apparel: 3. Duty, about Childrens Apparel.
Parents ought to cloath^ them decently, but not gorgeously: Fineries and
Gayeties (...) Apparel are apt to make People* especially younger Persons, vain
(...) conceited, to value themselves upon their gay Clothing. It is fit often
to suggest to them, that their Cloath^ and Apparel are but borrowed Feathers;
and therefore that it is a great Folly to be proud of that which is (...) their
own, but which they owe to the Sheep or Goats, to the Worms (...) Bowels of the
Earth.

It is not fit for Parents to make too great distinction among their Children,
as to their Apparel; because this is apt to cause discontent^ and Jealousies,
Hatred and Envy* Contentions and Quarrellings among^^ them. Joseph's Coat of
many colors which his old Father Jacob gave him caused his Brethren to hate
and en^^ him, and at last to conspire most wickedly against him, Genesis 37. 3, 4,
etc. The same is to be said as to their Diet, and other things, wherein it is
no small part of the Wisdom of Parents, not to show too much fondness to one
above all the rest. This does not hinder, but that Parents may, to very good
purpose, give Rewards to their Children for their Acts of Virtue, for their
ready and cheerful Obedience to their Commands; for their diligence and care in
performing what was appointed them, etc. Whereby they who do such things are
encouraged, and they who do not, but are careless and negligent, are punished,
and spurred up to amend their Faults. But when such marks of Favor are
bestowed, it is fit to let the rest know, that if they do as well, they also
shall have a Reward: By which means they will see that Virtue and Goodness are
the things which their Parents love and esteem most; and for which they are
ready to bestow the marks of their Affection.

The Duty of Parents as to the outward Estate of their Children.
A Third thing that belongs to the care of Parents, is, the outward Estate of
their Children.

First, When they are fit for a Trade, 1. Duty, to choose a fit Trade for them.
they ought to choose an honest Employment for them: To suffer them to live in
Idleness, is to ruin them: If they have not some useful thing or other to take
up their thoughts, they are in great hazard of finding somewhat to do which is
bad, and hurtful both to themselves and others. The Devil is always at hand to
furnish Occasions to idle People, for employing themselves to their own
destruction.

The Athenians (who for a great while were reckoned amongst the wisest People
in the World,) were so sensible of the necessity and importance of Childrens
being bred up to some Lawful Trade and Employment, that by their Laws See Plut.
in Solone.
they obliged them to maintain their Parents, and to supply them in their old
Age, only upon this supposition, that their Parents had been careful to teach
them an honest Trade: Otherwise by their Laws, Children were not bound to
provide for them. Though this is not to be brought into Practice amongst
Christians, it being contrary to Christian Principles, for Children upon any
Pretense whatsoever to neglect their Parents in distress. Yet this Example
shows, how great a Crime it was reckoned amongst the wiser Heathens, for
Parents not to breed up their Children to some honest Employment.

As to the particular kind of Employment, wherein Children are to spend their
days, it is to be left to the discretion and prudence of Parents: They are so
to instruct and dispose the minds of their Children, that they may be ready to
be determined to any Trade or manner of Life that is honest, which their Parents
think best and meetest for them to follow: But yet a great regard is to be had
to the particular Genius and Inclination of Children, which ordinarily
disposes them more for one sort of Employment than another: It will make them
more diligent in learning their Trade, when they have a delight in it:
Otherwise, if they are put forth to a Trade against their minds, they are more
likely to neglect it, or to break off from it. Seldom do such Persons attain
unto great Perfection in their Employment, who follow it against the Grain.

As for those whose great and plentiful Estate in the World does raise them
above the necessity of putting forth their Children to a Trade, ^dvice to those
who have great Estates and Riches, to bestow on their Children.
they ought notwithstanding to be careful to bring them up, not in Idleness and
Vanity, but in such Studies and Exercises, as are most proper for them, and
which tend to make them serviceable in their Generation 'Twas excellently said
by Agefilans King of ^acedemon, We must teach Children what they should do when
they are Men.
.

When God created Adam after his own Image, and placed him in the Garden of
Eden, which, no doubt, was the most Honorable State that ever Man was in upon
Earth, yet he did not suffer him to live in Idleness, He appointed him an
Employment, to wit, to dress and keep the Garden.

The greater that Men's Possessions are, they ought to be so much the more
concerned in the right Education of their Children, that so they may be made
the more fit to Inherit their Wealth and Riches. How much reason had the
Philosopher Crates to say, Plutarch. de Educat.
that if he might, he would go up unto the highest place of the City, and there
bespeak the Citizens in this manner. O Men! what mean ye to be (...) so much
pains, and so incessantly to busy your thoughts, how to heap up Wealth and
Riches; and yet to take so little care of your Children, to whom you are to
leave all these things! Upon which, Plutarch has this wise Reflection: That
such Parents are very like those Foolish People, who have a great deal of care
of their Shoe, but none at all of their Foot.

Great and Rich Men, therefore, ought to be very careful that their Children be
well Educated; that they be instructed in useful Arts and Sciences, which may
not only afford Pleasure and Delight unto their minds, but may be of use and
advantage to them in their Conversation in the World. Above all, they ought to
endeavor, that their Childrens minds be possessed with a lively sense of
Religion, with sincere Love to God, with a fervent Zeal for his Glory, with a
great delight in all those things which are truly Noble and Worthy, which tend
to the Honor of God, and the Benefit of Mankind, and with an utter abhorrence
and detestation of all wicked Practices, of Profane and Atheistical Company,
and of every appearance of Evil; they ought to train them up in useful and
pious Actions and Designs, which may be of Advantage to Church or State, that
so they may prove a Blessing to the World, and Pillars of that Society to which
they belong.

Great care ought to be taken, to make them understand the Vanity of Riches and
Honor, the great uncertainty and mutability of the things of this World, and
the many Tentations and Vexations which attend a plentiful Estate and great
Fortune.

Endeavor to make them sensible, that no Earthly Enjoyments are capable to
satisfy their desires; that, as the wise Man says, Eccles. 5. 10. He that
loves Silver, shall not be satisfied with Silver; nor he that loves
Abundance, with Increase: And that they are so far from satisfying the mind,
that they distract it, and oftentimes fill it with greater uneasiness; that
they occasion Cares, and Fears, and Temptations and Sorrows.

Show them likewise, that these outward and perishing things add nothing of
real worth unto them, that a Hundred or a Thousand a Year cannot make them one
whit either wiser or better; that their Estates cannot keep off Sickness or
Pain, nor sad and sudden Accidents; and that they cannot defend them so much as
one moment, from the approaches of the King of Terrors.

Show them, what was the Psalmist's Opinion of outward Greatness, himself being
one of the greatest Men of his time, and therefore able to judge o^ the matter:
Surely, says he, Psalm. 62 9. Men of high degree are a Lie; to be laid in the
Balance, they are altogether lighter than Vanity. Great Me^ are a Lie; that
is, they are not either what their own Vanity would make them, or what Foolish
People imagine them to be, to wit, another sort of Beings than other Men. Thi^
is but a Lie, for they are the same thing with the poorest Beggar, they are of
the same Mould, they have the same Passions, they are subject to the same
distempers, they are liable to the same accidents and mischances, they are
exposed to most part of the same Temptations, and to a great many more, which
made Agur in his Prayer* Prove. 30. 8, 9. to say, Give me (...) Riches, lest I
be full, and deny thee, (...) say, who is the Lord.

Show them likewise, For what (...) it is that God bestows Riches a^^ Honor
upon them, that it is not (...) gratify their Lusts and Passions, to Indulge
themselves in Vanity and Folly, an^ to have wherewith to give themselves the
full swing in whatever is suitable to their corrupt Inclinations; that it is
not (...) take to themselves a Liberty to wo^ wickedness, to trample upon
whatever is Sacred, to countenance and patronize those who are profane Mockers
of Religion, who scof^ at the most Sacred things thereof. Show them that it is
for better purposes, that the great Lord of the World bestows Riches, Power,
and Honor on the Sons of Men, even that they may employ themselves, and all
they have, for his Honor and Glory. Show them, that to whom much is given, of
them much shall be required; That God does expect greater Service from those,
upon whom he bestows greater Encouragements: And therefore, that they ought to
employ themselves as much as they can, in doing his Will, and Glorifying his
Holy Name; that they ought to encourage Religion, to countenance those who are
Pious and Devout, to set a Mark of Respect upon those who fear and love God,
and to testify their dislike of those who are Profane and Irreligious, to
endeavor to curb and restrain them, so far as they are able; and that they
ought to make it appear, that there is no way for any body to recommend
themselves so effectually to their ^^vour and Esteem, as by their behaving
themselves as the Followers of Jesus Christ ought to do.

Show them also, how much Persons of meaner Quality are influenced and led by
the Example of those who are Great and Noble, whose Actions are generally of
greater force than Laws are with them Antigonus used this as an Argument to
induce Zeno the Philosopher to come to him. You may, said he, be well assured,
that, by teaching and instructing me, you will at the same time instruct all
the Macedonians: For he who contributes toward the making the King of Macedon
a Virtuous Person does in great measu^^ disp se all his Subjects for Virtuous
Impressions: For such as Rulers and Princes be, such likewise ordinarily are
they who depend upon the^^ Diog. Laert. in Zenone.
: That therefore, they ought to shine before them in all the Actions of true
Piety and Virtue, that others, by seeing their good works, may be excited to
imitate them, and so to Glorify their Father that is in Heaven.

Lastly, Show them, that if they are Wicked and Profane, and so by their bad
Example defile and corrupt others, then God will require at their Hands the
Blood of those many Souls, who perish by following their Footsteps, and
walking after them in their Ungodly ways.

In this manner, they who are Rich, Great, and Honorable, who have no need to
choose a Trade for their Children, ought nevertheless to teach them, (and that
so much the more carefully) such things as may make them truly wise and good.

As for those who intend to set apart one or more of their Children for the
Holy Ministry, Advice to those, who intend to set apart one or more of their
Children for the Holy Ministry.
they ought, 1 st. to be careful to serve God with the best they have. For
Cursed be the Deceiver, which has in his Flock a Male, and Voweth and
Sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing. Mal. 1. 14. They ought to Consecrate
to this Sacred Office those of their Children who are most worthy in all
respects, who have not only good parts, but who have also good Inclinations,
and are apt to receive Religious Impressions. It Is an argument they very little
understand the greatness and difficulty of the Pastoral Office, and have very
little Sense of Religion, who think that God may be put off with any thing, and
that the Refuse of the Flock is sufficient to be an Offering to him. How great
Ingratitude is there in this? Have not Parents received from God freely and
undeservedly, all the good things they enjoy, and particularly their Children?
When therefore they design to bestow one or other of them for his more
immediate Service, they ought to give him the best, and not such a one as is
unfit to be employed in any other ordinary business, which requires a Person of
tolerable Sense and Discretion.

2dly. They ought to have a single Eye to the Glory of God, and not to govern
themselves by Worldly and Carnal respects and considerations. They must not
look upon the Ministry, as if it were only a Trade to get Wealth and Riches, or
as a way to come to Honor, and to obtain Preferment in the World. They ought
to look upon this Holy Office with another Eye, to wit, as it is appointed of
God for Divine and Spiritual ends, to guide and direct Men in the way to
Happiness, to show them what they must do to obtain Everlasting Happiness, and
to avoid Hell and Destruction, to teach them how to fight the good fight of
Faith, how to resist the Devil, how to overcome the World, and how to be
preserved from their deceitful and desperately wicked Hearts. They ought to
consider, that Christ's Ministers are appointed to be Shepherds and Watchmen,
to feed and to watch over the Flock, which he has purchased with his Blood; to
acquaint People with their danger; to call upon them early and late; to be upon
their Guard, to quit themselves like Men, to be strong in the Lord and in the
power of his Might. They must consider that it belongs to the Ministers of the
Gospel to deal impartially with all sorts of People, and not to suffer Sin upon
them, but to reprove them plainly, to exhort them seriously to repent and
amend; and to direct them what they are to do for the time to come, lest they
fall again into the same evil Practices and Customs.

When therefore Parents design a Child for the Holy Ministry, they should at
the same time consider, that he is to spend himself in the work of the Gospel,
that is, he must Study, and Pray, and Watch, and Preach, and Visit, and
Converse, and do* all other things which are needful to save Souls; he must be
instant in season and out of season; he must often and seriously consider what
is farther to be done to convert Sinners, to instruct the Ignorant, to comfort
the Afflicted, to relieve the Poor, to excite the Remiss and Negligent, to
encourage the Diligent, to strengthen the Weak, to confirm the Strong, to
direct the Zealous, to reclaim the Erroneous, to convince Gainsayers, to put to
silence the Ignorance of Foolish Men: And besides all this, he must be ready
and willing to Sacrifice his life in the Service of his Great Master, if he be
called thereto; he must count nothing too dear, that he may finish his Course
with Joy, and approve himself to the great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls. Thus
Parents, when they design any of their Children for the Holy Ministry, ought to
consider that they are to be employed in the greatest, the most painful, and
most dangerous work in the World, and therefore,

3 dly. They ought to do all that in them lies, to fit and prepare such
Children, that they may undertake this Sacred Employment as they ought to do.
More than ordinary care is to be taken that their minds be furnished with good
Impressions, that they be inspired with a great Love to God, and with a mighty
Zeal for his Honor and Glory. They must be daily trained up in the Practice of
Humility, of Meekness, of Patience, of Temperance, of Charity, and of all other
Virtues and Graces; they must be kept from seeing and hearing bad things, so
far as may be; their minds must be strongly fortified against Temptations: and
all that is possible must be done, to keep them from the danger that comes from
evil Company, and corrupt Example. They must be entrusted to the good Conduct
of Excellent and Worthy Persons, by whose means they may be formed to as high a
sense of true Piety as may be, that so, when they come abroad into the World,
their light may shine before others.

If Parents, who dedicate their Children to the Holy Ministry, would, in this
manner, endeavor to act the part of Men who have a lively sense of God upon
their Souls, who are possessed with a mighty Zeal for his Glory, and are
earnestly desirous to promote the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, we might hope to see
very speedily the Blessed Effects of their Pious Endeavors, Religion would
flourish more than it does at this day, and Impiety and Irreligion would not so
much Triumph as, alas! they do.

Secondly, When they are fit for Marriage, 2. Duty, about disposing of them in
Marriage.
Parents are so to dispose of them, as that in all likelihood they may be happy
in such a state of Life: Callias the Athenian, was highly commended by the
Greeks, because he gave his Daughters leave to choose what Husbands themselves
liked best. Herodot. in Erato.
They are not to constrain then to marry against their Will; for such Marriages
are seldom Happy; they end too often in somewhat or other very Tragical and
Calamitous, to one or the other Party, if not to both.

Great care is to be taken, that there be not too great inequality of outward
state and condition; for that occasions often neglect and contempt of the
Person that is Inferior to the other in some External Advantages: Nor yet too
great Inequality of Years; for that does likewise, sooner or later, cause an
Abatement and Decay, and sometimes an utter Extinction of that Respect and Love
which is necessary to make those who are Married Happy.

Parents are not, in disposing of their Children in Marriage, to govern
themselves wholly by their respect to Riches and Honor; but are to have a
regard to Virtue and Goodness, so far, as to prefer one who is Discreet and
Wise, of a Virtuous and good Disposition, to another that is foolish, or
indiscreet, and Profane and Atheistical, though attended with greater degrees of
Wealth and Earthly Honor. Plut. in Themistocle.
It Is reported of Themistocles, a Famous Athenian Captain, that when several
young Men came i^ Suit of his Daughter, he preferred one who was a Wise and
Virtuous Person, to another that was very Rich. When some People wondered at
this choice, he told them, he had rather have a Man without Money, than Money
without a Man.

What a great reproach is it to our Religion, to think that so many Parents, in
disposing of their Children, only consider how much Wealth they may have, and
what Friends and Alliances they may make, by marrying into such a Family? or
what Profits and Preferments may be expected thereby? As for any other thing,
they do not much trouble their heads about it: They know no other Happiness but
in the things of this life, and therefore they seek nothing else for their
Children, but to make them Great and Wealthy; The sad Effects of marrying very
lewd and profligate Persons.
by which means it often comes to pass that they bring their Children into a
most miserable and unhappy state of life, in which they must pine away their
days in Sorrow and Grief, in the company of Foolish and Wicked Wretches, who
are often in a fury and rage, who spend their time in Gaming and Drinking, in
Cursing and Swearing, in Quarrelling and Fighting, in Whoring and Ranting and
such like woeful doings; which cannot but prove to those, who have any the least
degree of real goodness, so very uneasy and afflictive, that Wealth and Riches
can make no amends for them. Such unfortunate Persons cannot but often envy*
the happiness of those who are in a very poor and low Estate and Condition, but
yet live in Peace and Quietness, in Love and Concord, and in the fear of Cod;
and so enjoy real satisfaction and contentment, and have a great deal of
Comfort to sweeten their outward Wants and Necessities. For as the Wise Man
says, Prove. 15. 16, 17. Better is little with the fear of the Lord; than great
Treasure, and Trouble therewith. Better is a Dinner of Herbs where Love is,
than a stalled Ox, and Hatred therewith.

But besides all this, it too often falls out, that they who are given in
Marriage to Vicious and Profligate Persons, are, sooner or later, involved in
those Judgments, which are caused by the Sins and Follies of the Persons to
whom they are matched. It Is true, such Persons have a great deal to support
their Spirits, if they have not been Partakers with them in their works of
Darkness: In this case, there is no doubt but their Merciful and Gracious God
will order what they suffer for their good. But, alas! it too often comes to
pass, that they who are unequally yoked, either with Persons of a false
Religion, or of a Wicked Life, do by degrees degenerate from their strict and
Virtuous Education: Though formerly they seemed to have a right sense of
Religion, and a great Inclination to the best things, yet sooner or later, by
the Example and Persuasions of their Irreligious and Atheistical Relatives,
they lose all sense of God, and give up themselves to all manner of Wickedness.
It Is said of Jehoram, who was Educated under a Religious Father, Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 21. 6. That he walked in the way of the Kings of Israel, like as did the
House of Ahab, for he had the Daughter of Ahab to Wife, etc. Where it is very
observable, that this unequal Marriage of Jehoram, is noted as the cause of his
great Wickedness. And from the following Verses it appears, how many heavy
Judgments fell upon him for his Impiety.

To what has been said may be added, that the hurt and inconvenience attending
such Marriages, does not only affect the Married Persons themselves, but
likewise extends to their Offspring and Posterity, who are in great danger of
being corrupted, as to their Religion and Manners, by the Influence and Example
of their Parents. It Is observed as one principal cause of the Wickedness of
Rehoboam, (1 Kings 14. 21.) That his Mother was an Ammonitess; which is
repeated, v. 31. to show us that it is a matter which deserves to be taken
notice of. To the same purpose it is said of Ahaziah King of Judah, (2 King. 8.
27.) That he walked in the way of the House of Ahab, and did Evil in the sight
of the Lord, as did the House of Ahab; for he was the Son in Law of the House
of Ahab.

Thirdly, Parents are to provide for them, 3. Duty, about providing somewhat
that may be the foundation of their comfortable subsistence in the World.
if they can, somewhat that may be a Foundation for their Comfortable
Subsistence in the World; which by the Blessing of God on their Callings, may
be improved toward their living decently and honestly. For this end, they
ought to keep within Compass, and to avoid all vain and unnecessary expenses.
Parents ought to lay up for the Children, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12. 14. And
2 Timothy 5. 8. He that provideth not for his own, is worse than an Infidel.

Parents are not to propose to themselves, the rendering their Children very
Great and Rich: But as they themselves having Food and Raiment, are to be
therewith content; so, if they can get Necessaries for their Children, they
ought to rest satisfied, and be thankful. Our Life (that is, the happiness of
our Life) does not consist in the abundance of the things we possess, Luke 12.
15.

Though you are to provide for your Children, yet you are not, out of too great
thoughtfulness about the time to come, to restrain your selves from doing all
necessary Offices of Charity to the Poor, who do now stand in need of your
help: Never neglect a present Duty for fear of an uncertain inconvenience: You
are forbid to take thought for the Morrow, Mat. 6. 34. But you are required to
do good to all Men, while you have opportunity, Gal. 6. 10. To cast your Bread
upon the Waters: to give a Portion to seven, as also unto eight, because you
know not what evil there may be in the Earth, Eccles. 11. 1, 2. This is the way
to lay up Treasures for your Children; to entail upon them great Blessings; to
make God their Guardian; to leave them to his Merciful and kind Providence, and
to his Almighty Protection. Psalm. 37. 25, 26. I have been young, and now am
old; yet have I not seen the Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging Bread. He
is ever Merciful and lends, and his Seed is Blessed. So that by your Bounty
and Charity, you bring your Wares to a good Market, you put forth your Money
into God's hands, who will not fail to repay it with Usury. For as the Wise Man
says, He that has Pity upon the Poor, lends unto the Lord, and that which
he has given will he pay him again. Prove. 19. 17. The Liberal Soul shall be
made fat, and he that waters, shall be watered also himself, Prove. 11. 25. He
that gives to the Poor shall not lack, Prove. 28. 27. And Deuteronomy. 15. 10. it is
written, Thou shall surely give him, (to wit, thy poor Brother) and thy heart
shall not be grieved, when th^^ give unto him; because that for this thing,
the Lord thy God shall bless thee* in all thy Works, and in all that th^^
put thine hands unto. And in the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 6. v. 10. it
is said, God is not unrighteous to forget your Work, and Labor of Love, which
you have showed toward his Name, in that you have ministered to the Saints, and
do minister. From all which it appears, that Charity and Liberality are the
best Husbandry.

As you are to beware, lest your care for your Children, make you neglect
necessary Duties of Charity; so you are to take heed, lest you use any unlawful
Method to get Wealth to bestow upon them: This is not a way to make them Rich;
for such Riches seldom prosper: There is a Curse which attends all unlawful
Gain, and like a Canker eats it out, and consumes it. All Ages and Places
afford Examples, which confirm this Observation. Wealth gotten by Vanity, says
Solomon, shall be diminished, Prove. 13. 11. And again, Prove. 10. 3. He says,
Treasures of Wickedness profit nothing. And Jer. 17. 11. it is said, As the
Partridge sits on Eggs, and hatcheth them not, so be that gets Riches and
not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall
be a Fool. A small Estate got honestly, is a hundredfold better than a vast and
plentiful Estate purchased by unrighteous Methods. A little, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 37. 16. that a Righteous Man has, is better than the Riches of
many Wicked. And, Better, says Solomon, Prove. 16. 8. is a little with
Righteousness, than great Revenues without Right.

As it is the Duty of Parents by all Honest and Lawful ways, to provide
somewhat for their Children, and to preserve it for them; so they ought in due
time to bestow upon them more or less of what they have acquired and purchased,
and not wholly to delay the doing of this until their own Decease. They ought,
so far as they can, to afford their Children whatever their present Necessities
or their Lawful Occasions do require: And the more Virtuous and Industrious
they see their Children, they ought to give them so much the more liberally,
that they may have not only what is absolutely necessary for them, but
likewise, what they may improve for the bettering their Estate in the World;
that they may live decently, and may also have somewhat wherewith to help and
relieve others. How great a Reproach is it to some Persons, who have a great
deal of wealth, out of a woeful covetous Temper to suffer their Children to go
in Rags, and to depend upon the Charity or good Nature of others, for a piece
of Bread! Such Parents must needs be very unnatural, whose Bowels are not
stirred with Compassion toward their Children, when they see them in distress
and want; and who do not all they can for their necessary Supply and Assistance.

But, Great Prudence and Caution ought to be used in bestowing their Worldly
Goods on their Children.
tho Parents ought to give their Children cheerfully and seasonably more or
less of their Worldly Goods, yet they must have a care, lest out of an
indiscreet fondness, they give them more than their own circumstances will
permit. How many sad Examples are there of Children, who have either wholly
neglected their Parents, or who have not cared for them as they ought to have
done, so soon as they were put into the Possession of their Estate and Fortune?
Whereas formerly, they seemed to carry themselves with all possible Duty and
Affection, no sooner did their Parents bestow all they had (or at least, the
greatest part) upon them, but they begun to grow Insolent toward them, and
went on to so great a height of undutifulness, that their poor Parents were
forced to leave them, and thenceforth to live in a very melancholy and
mournful condition. It Is therefore the Wisdom of Parents, so to give their
Children, as still to reserve to themselves what is needful for their own
support: They ought rather to keep their Children in a dependence upon them,
than that they should depend upon their Children. To this purpose is the Advice
of the Son of Syrach, Ecclesiasticus 33. 18, 19, etc. Hear me, O ye great Men
of the People, and hearken with your Ears, ye Rulers of the Congregation. Give
not thy Son and Wife, thy Brother and Friend, power over thee while thou
live, and give not thy Goods to another, lest it repent thee, and thou
entreat for the same again. As long as thou live and have Breath in thee,
give not thy self over to any. For better it is that thy Children should seek
to thee, than that thou should stand to their Courtesy. In all thy works
keep to thy self the Preeminence, leave not a stain in thine Honor. At the
time when thou shall end thy days and finish thy Life, distribute thy
Inheritance.

4 thly. 4. Duty to have their Will and Testament in Readiness.
It Is the Duty of Parents to have their Will and Testament in readiness. They
ought, while they are in Health, to determine the several Proportions of their
Worldly Goods, which they intend to bestow on their Children, and not to leave
the doing of this till the very immediate approach of Death. A wise Man ought
so to dispose of his affairs in time, that when he comes to die, he may have as
little work to do as is possible.

It Is very unfit, on many accounts, The great Inconvenience of delay in this
matter.
to leave the ordering of those things which relate to a Man's Estate unto the
last hour. For, 1. No Man knows if he shall have a leisurely Passage out of the
World, so as to have time to settle his affairs; a thousand Accidents may
prevent this; of which see [ Discourse about the right way of Improving our
Time, Motive 2 d.]

2 dly. Though you should have time on your Deathbed, for ordering your Temporal
Affairs, yet what signifies Time (considered abstractly and separately) if you
are not fit to use it? For ought you know, your Sickness then may so affect
your Head, that you shall not be able to act any longer as rational Creatures,
but must be governed and taken care of by others, as if you were Children upon
the Breasts, or perhaps as Persons in a much more sad and lamentable condition.
Now therefore, it is fit for all who are wise, to provide against such
Casualties, and not to delay so important and necessary a work to an uncertain
Moment.

3 dly. Supposing you have a leisurely passage out of this Life, together with
the use of your Reason all the while, yet consider, that you are likely to have
enough to do in your last hours, though the ordering of your Temporal concerns do
not then lie upon your Hands. Your Spiritual Enemies will, very probably, at
that time, muster up all their Forces, and use their utmost Effort, either to
conquer you, or to frighten and disturb you: You will then find that all your
Preparation is little enough, that you may finish your course with Joy: The
sight of Death will make you see a great many things, far otherwise than you
saw them in time of Health: The things of this Life will then appear very
little and inconsiderable, and Eternity will appear as a vast and boundless
Ocean: Your good actions will appear but very few and imperfect, and your Sins
and Follies very many and great. Thus it is generally with the best and most
Holy Persons; and therefore, it is your wisest and safest course, to dispatch,
not only as much of your great Business as you can before the approach of
Death, but likewise to dispose of your Worldly Concerns in such a manner, that
they may not prove a hindrance and a burden to you at that time, when you are
to have a sharp Conflict with the King of Terrors.

But besides all these Considerations, which ought to excite you to put your
House in order, in time of your Health; consider farther, that by so doing, you
will prevent a great deal of Trouble and Confusion, and of Strife and Division,
which oft-times happen amongst Children, when their several Portions are not
assigned them by the Will of their Parents. How sad is it to reflect upon so
many Instances of this kind, as have happened in our days! It cannot but be
looked upon as a great Reproach to our Holy Religion, to see Brethren, and
other near Relations, contending, and going to Law with one another, and
thereby laying the Foundation of lasting Variance and Discord, of Bitterness
and Wrath, of Anger and Clamor, of Malice and Envy, etc. which too often are
concluded, with the Desolation and Destruction of one or other of the
contending Parties, if not of the whole Family.

How needful therefore is it for Parents to make their Will in good time? when
they are in Health, when their Understanding is good, when their Memory is
perfect, when they are able to think of Business, and to judge calmly and
discreetly of what they do; when they can call to mind what they owe, and what
is owing to them.

And because of the great Falsehood and Wickedness of the World, by which it
often happens that the true sense of Men's words are perverted, it is likewise
very fit that Parents, in setting their House in Order, have the advice of
those who are Skilful, Upright, and Faithful Persons, by whose Assistance their
Will may be framed in such Terms and Expressions, as may (so far as is
possible) prevent the Cavils of Crafty and Ungodly Men.

As Parents ought to use a great deal of Caution and Circumspection in all
things relating to their last Will, Great care to be taken in the choice of
Guardians for Children.
so particularly in the choice of Guardians for their Children, who, after
their own Decease, may act the part of Parents toward them, and may promote
their Happiness and Welfare, both in Temporal and Spiritual things. If you know
amongst your near Relations those who are Wise and Prudent, True and Upright
Persons, who fear and love God, and of whose sincere kindness you have had long
experience, it is very reasonable to prefer them before Strangers. 'Twas an
Athenian Law, that they should not be chose^ Guardians, who have a right to the
Childrens Estate, after their Decease. Diog. Laert. in Solo^e.
But if you have found others more sincere and upright, more prudent and
discreet, more kind and loving, more constant in their Friendship, and more
faithful to your true Interest, than your nearer Relations have been, you ought
rather to entrust your Children to their care, than to those, who, though your
Kinsmen, have given you no great ground to expect much kindness and
faithfulness at their hands toward your Children. If they have not been very
faithful to you, it is but madness to expect that they should prove more
Faithful to them. Though they may grow better, yet no wise Man ought to trust so
great and dear a concern to such an uncertainty.

Thus I have showed you what are the principal Duties you owe to the Souls and
Bodies of your Children, and what you are to do for them as to their outward
Estate.

The above mentioned particulars earnestly recommended to Parents.
FRom what has been said you may see, what a weighty and difficult Charge you
have; the sense whereof should excite you to beg of God earnestly every day,
that he would direct and assist you, to perform the Duties that belong to
Christian Parents.

That you may the better act your part; it is fit for you, when you call your
selves to an account about your Lives and Conversations, to make enquiry
particularly how you perform the Duties of Parents toward your Children, as to
their Souls, their Bodies, and Outward Concerns: And if, upon serious enquiry,
you find that you sincerely endeavor to do whatever you know your selves to be
bound to do for them; then bless and praise God, who gives you both to will and
to do according to his good Pleasure: Beg his pardon for those Imperfections
and Defects that attend all Humane Actions, Resolve to go on, and not to grow
weary in your Duty toward them; that so they may be as happy in all respects,
as is possible for you, by the help of God, to make them.

But if upon inquiry, you find that you have been very negligent in your duty
toward your Children; that you have done very little good for their Souls, and
not what you should, and might have done for their Bodies and outward Estate;
and that perhaps you have done them a great deal of hurt by your Evil Counsel,
and Profane and Wretched Example; that you have led them on in the Broad Way,
which leads to the Chambers of Death, that you have robbed God, who bestowed
them on you, of their Service and Obedience; and have made them the Servants of
Sin; that you have contributed to the making them Heirs of Wrath, and Children
of Disobedience, who were made by their Baptism, Children of God, and
Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven; that you have done what tended to destroy
eternally those Souls and Bodies, which God entrusted with you, that you might
take care of them, and do what you could to make them happy. If, I say, upon
enquiry into your hearts and lives, you find your selves guilty of those
things, how great reason have you to be in bitterness and grief of Heart, to
weep and lament, to abhor your selves in Dust and Ashes, to confess and
acknowledge your Sins with great Humility and Contrition, to implore the Divine
Mercy and Forgiveness with all earnestness, for the sake of his dear Son; to
resolve and purpose sincerely to amend your ways and doings; to beg Grace from
God, that he would assist you, that he would compass you about with his
Salvation, and never leave you nor forsake you; that he would give you his Holy
Spirit to sanctify you, to wash and cleanse you, to lead and guide you, to
support and strengthen you, to revive and quicken you, to carry you from
strength to strength, and from Grace to Grace, till you come and appear before
him in Sion.

Consider the particular things wherein you have hurt the Souls of your
Children, and failed in your Duty to them, as to their Bodies and Outward
Concerns: And the more you find you have done amiss, resolve so much the more
to be zealous to do them good; to double your diligence in promoting the
welfare and happiness both of their Souls and Bodies. Tell them so far as is
meet, what you now see and feel; let them know that you have been out of the
way, that you have misled them, and brought both your selves and them in danger
of being undone, and ruined Eternally: Tell them what you resolve to do, and
what you and they ought to do, and must do, or else that you will certainly
perish. Delay not to do this one moment: fly like a Bird out of the Snare of
the Fowler. Your Souls lie at the stake, and therefore do what Men use to do to
save their Lives; Skin for Skin, and all that a Man has, will be give for his
Life. Men are ready to part with any thing to save their Lives; They Will part
with House and Lands, with Silver and Gold, with their whole Estate and
Substance, to save their Bodies alive, which must die at last, and, for ought
they know, may die within a very few days or hours. How much more ought you,
that you may save your own Souls, and the Souls of your Children, to part with
your ^ile and unruly Lusts and Passions, your vain foolish Habits and Customs,
which are your reproach and dishonor, which are the worst things in the World,
which can do you no good, if you hold them still, but will certainly do you a
great deal of mischief? They will prove the cause of your destruction; they
will deprive you of all that is good and excellent; they will cut you off from
the favor of God, the Love of Christ, and the fellowship of the Blessed
Spirit; they will likewise deprive you of the Assistance and Ministry of the
Holy Angels, and the Comfortable Society of the Saints departed; they will
exclude you for ever from the Kingdom of Heaven, the Crown of Righteousness,
the Peace, the Joy, the Love, and Glory of the future State: All this your sins
will deprive you of; and instead thereof, they will expose you to the Wrath of
God, to the devouring fire, to Everlasting Burnings, to blackness of darkness,
to weeping and gnashing of Teeth, to the wretched and cursed Company of Devils
and damned Souls, to the Worm which never dies, which will gnaw you, and
torment you for ever: And will you choose all this rather than part with your
Lusts, that you may be for ever happy, and have fullness of Joy and Pleasures
for evermore? Will you be so mad, as to prefer Hell and Death, everlasting
Misery and Woe, to Heaven and Everlasting Life, to Blessedness and Glory? And
will you still continue to be so cruel to your poor Children, as to draw them
along with you to the bottomless Pit? Now is the time for you to become either
happy or miserable; if you repent and amend, and act the part of Wise and
Religious Parents, you may be happy; for God will have Mercy upon you. Isa. 55.
7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous Man his Thoughts: And
let him return unto the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon him, and to our God,
for he will abundantly pardon. Follow therefore the Example of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 119. 59, 60. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
Testimonies, I made haste and delayed not to keep thy Commandments. Resolve
without delay to forsake your wicked Customs and Practices: Begin in earnest to
work out your own Salvation: and do all that lies in your power to make your
Children wise and good.

But if, instead of this, you continue in your sin and folly, setting at naught
God's Counsels, and despising his Reproofs, putting the Evil day far from you,
promising your selves peace and safety, though you walk after your own Hearts
Lusts; making a mock at Sin, and laughing at all that is sacred and serious;
and by your wicked Example destroying the Souls and Bodies of your poor
Children; then assure your selves God will not be mocked; he will at last whet
his Sword and bend his Bow, and make ready his Arrows against his Adversaries;
he will render to you according to your Works; he will in no wise clear the
Guilty. Consider the terrible threatening which is mentioned, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20.
against the Man, who, when he hears the words of the Curse, does bless
himself in his Heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst: [ The Lord will not
spar^ him, but the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that
Man; and all the Curses that are written in this Book shall lie upon him, and
the Lord shall blot out his Name from under Heaven.]

Concerning the Duty of Parents when God removes their Children by death.
THe Death of Children as well as Aged Persons, falls out so very often, that
it cannot but be seasonable to a great many Parents to suggest to them some
plain and easy Considerations, which they may sometimes reflect upon, and
imprint on their minds, that so they may not be surprised with the death of
their Children, nor swallowed up of excessive and immoderate grief.

Parents ought to consider, 1. They ought to consider that it is the Lord who
does it.
when their Children dye, first, that it is the Lord who does it: He who is
Lord of Life, who gave Life to themselves and to their Children, is also Lord
of death, and removes out of the World whom, and when, he sees fit, He is the
great Potter; and Man is the Clay, which he has formed and fashioned into a
curious and beautiful shape; and animated with an immortal Soul: When he sees
fit to break this brittle Vessel in pieces, and to separate the Soul from it,
who can stay his Hand? Or who dare say unto him, what do thou? May not he do
with his own, what he thinks good? Or must he give an account of his Actions,
unto the work of his own Hands? He is infinitely great and powerful; and
therefore will do according to his own good pleasure: He is infinitely wise,
and knows what is best and fittest to be done: He is infinitely good and kind,
and therefore will order all things for good: And he is infinitely just and
righteous, and therefore can do no wrong. It Is fit therefore that Parents, when
God removes their Children from them by Death, submit cheerfully to the will of
him, who is infinitely powerful, wise, good, and just; and that they adore him,
and say with Ely, 1 Samuel 3. 18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him
good. And with the Royal Psalmist, Ps. 39. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my
Mouth; because thou did it.

Secondly, they should consider that their Children were born Mortal, 2. They
ought to consider that their Children were born mortal.
frail by Nature, subject to a necessity of dying, by their very composition
and frame; and also by the Decree of Heaven, Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed for
all Men once to dye. And therefore when God sees fit to remove them by Death,
to make the House of Clay fall down about their Ears, Parents ought not to be
surprised. This is nothing but what falls out daily: Some are going out of the
World, and some are coming into it: Some are a great while upon the Stage, and
some but a very short while; some no sooner enter upon it, but presently they
are gone, and are seen no more; some take a few turns, and then they are
withdrawn; some tarry longer, and Act a great part on the Stage, for a
considerable time, and give hopes of yet greater Actions and Performances; but
on a sudden they are gone likewise, as a shadow; and all their own designs and
projects, and the hopes and expectations of others fall to the ground. All this
happens every day in the Course of things here in the World; and therefore
Parents have no reason to think it strange when they see their Children dye.
The thing that has been, it is that which shall be; and that which is done, is
that which shall be done; and there is no new thing under the Sun, Eccles. 1. 9.

And as it is with Men, so it is with all things else, which live upon the
Earth, or grow out of it: Some live longer and some a shorter while than others
of the same kind: Some prosper and thrive, and others decay and perish. Some
things grow up in the Morning, and are withered e're Night: Some things grow
apace till they are very near the time of ripeness and perfection; and then
somewhat happens, which prevents the perfect growth, and makes the goodly
appearance come to nothing: Now, what are Men? Moses in his Prayer ( Ps. 90. 5,
6.) tells us, In the Morning they are like grass, which grows up; In the
Morning it flourishes and grows up: In the Evening it is cut down and
withers. And to the same purpose the Psalmist David speaks, Psalm. 103. 15,
16. As for Man his days are as grass, as a flower of the field, so he
flourishes, for the Wind passes over it, and it is gone, and the place
thereof shall know it no more. Likewise Esa. 40. 6, 7. it is thus written, The
Voice said Cry. And he said, What shall I Cry? All flesh is grass, and all the
goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field. The grass withers, the
flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord blows upon it: Surely the
People is grass. By all which it appears what Man is by Nature, to wit, a very
weak and vanishing thing, soon nipt and brought to nothing; like the tender
Grass, and the Flower of the Field, which is more exposed to the Winds and
other inconveniences, than the Flowers of the Garden, which the Gardener
preserves and secures.

The Consideration of these things, will tend mightily to quiet the minds of
those who calmly and wisely reflect upon them, when God removes their Children,
or other Relations from them by Death. Their case is not singular, it is that
which is common and usual amongst Men; it is according to the course of Nature
for a mortal thing to die. Plutarch reports of Anaxagoras, an Ancient
Philosopher, That when he was Discoursing to his Hearers concerning the Causes
of Natural Things, One brought him the news of his Sons Death; upon which,
after a little pause, he said to those who were present, I knew I begat a Son
that was Mortal. The Consideration of this did quiet the Thoughts of this
Heathen.

But what if the manner of the death of your Children be somewhat
extraordinary, by some sudden and unusual Accident, or by some strange and odd
Distemper; are you on this account to allow your selves in the excesses of
Sorrow and Mourning? No, in no ways: You are not therefore to be transported
into immoderate grief and mourning. Shall you be vexed and disquieted, because
a Worm did eat up your pleasant Fruit, or because the stormy Wind did blow away
your lovely Flowers? Are you therefore to be enraged and mad with anger against
the Worms, or against the Winds? What would it mend the matter, if you should
give way to your passion and anger never so much in such a case? This would
only multiply your losses, by making you lose not only your Fruit and your
Flowers, but your selves too: Which they all do, who lose their Patience, in
which it is that we possess our Souls.

When therefore your Children are removed from you by Death, in some unusual
and extraordinary manner, you ought to look beyond Diseases, or Accidents, unto
the Lord of Life and Death; who by his Providence orders not only their
death, but the manner of it. If the Sparrows fall not to the Ground, that is,
die not, without your Father: You may be sure your Children do not die by
chance, or without the particular disposal of their heavenly Father. As to the
particular grounds and reasons, for which God does after such a manner see fit
to put an end to your Childrens days, you are not to be too curious and
inquisitive. The Counsels of God are a great deep: His ways are in the deep
waters; and none by searching can find him out unto perfection, Job 11. 7. Upon
such occasions all ought to remember the words of our Lord, when they told him
of the Galileans, whose Blood Pilate has mingled with their Sacrifices, Luke
13. 2, 3, 4, 5. Suppose ye that these Galileans were Sinners above all the
Galileans, because they suffered such things? I tell you, Nay: But except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Or those eighteen upon whom the Tower of
Si^oe fell, and slew them, think ye that they were sinners above all Men that
dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you, Nay: But except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish.

We see what was Aarons Carriage, when God removed his two Sons Nadab and Abihu
by a very extraordinary stroke. Levit. 10. 2. There went Fire from the Lord and
devoured them, etc. And v. 3. it is said, That Aaron (...) his peace. He did not
murmur against the Justice of God, or complain as if he had been too severe.
No, he was silent; He submitted to the Will (...) God, and considered that the
Honor of God ought to be dearer to him tha^ the Lives of his two Sons.

In like manner we see how Job carried himself, when God removed (...) seven
Sons and three Daughters, all at one blow, in an extraordinary manner, Job 1.
18, 19. Thy Sons and thy Da^ghters were eating and drinking Wine (...) their
eldest Brothers House; And (...) there came a great Wind from the Wilderness,
and smote the four Corners (...) the House, and it fell upon the young Men, and
they are dead. This was sad news to the good old Man, who had ^^rd so much ill
news before. But yet for all this, you see how patiently ^e hare his
Affliction. He fell down upon the Ground and Worshipped, and said, Naked came I
out of my Mothers Womb, and naked shall I return thither: The Lord gave, and
the Lord has taken (...), blessed be the Name of the Lord, Job. 1. 20, 21.
This good Man was so far from Cursing God, which Satan said ^e would do, that
he humbly adored and worshipped him. He was so far from Blasphemeing God, and
from entertaining any dishonorable Thoughts of him, as if he had done any
thing which he ought not to have done, that, (...) the contrary, he approved of
all, he acquiesced in the Divine pleasure; he considered, that all that he once
enjoyed, was a free and undeserved gift from God, which he so gave, as still to
reserve to himself the Supreme Power of disposing of it, as he should think
good; and therefore, when all was taken away from him, he blessed the Name of
the Lord; he did not quarrel with the Divine Providence, but was heartily
thankful, not only for the former Mercies, but also for the present Correction
and Chastisement which he knew to proceed from Infinite Wisdom, Goodness, and
Justice.

To the abovementioned instances from Scripture, might be added several
Examples of the patience and composedness of Spirit, which some Heathens
discovered, when their Children were suddenly snatched away by a violent and
untimely Death. I shall only mention two, related by Plutarch.

The 1 st is, of Dio of Syracuse, who, as he was busy in consulting with his
Friends about matters of importance, heard a great noise and tumult in the
House, which occasioned his enquiring what the matter was; and being told that
his Son was dead by a fall from the Roof of the House, he received this sad
news without discovering any perturbation of Mind; and having given Orders that
the dead Body should be delivered into the hands of the Women, that they might
take care of it, and that it should be buried in the accustomed manner; He went
on in his Design, to consult with his Friends about the business that was
before him.

The other instance, is, of Xenophon, who, when he was employed in offering
Sacrifice, received the news of his Son's being killed in Battle; at the
hearing of which he pulled off the Garland from his Head, wherewith it was then
covered, and having asked the manner of his Son's Death, and being told that he
died fighting valiantly for his Country, he quickly brought his Mind, which was
a little disturbed, into subjection to his Reason, and again putting on the
Garland, he went on with his Sacrifice, and told those who brought him the news
of his Son's Death, I never prayed the Gods to make my Son Immortal, or very
long lived (it being very uncertain if that be expedient) but to make him an
Honest Man, and a Lover of his Country: And now, said he, I have my desire.

Thirdly, Consider from whence, 3. They should consider from whence, and
whither they are gone.
and whither they are gone. They were here in a life of Vexation and Trouble;
subject to innumerable Vanities, Temptations, Snares, and Dangers: They were
compassed about with great and terrible Enemies, the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh: They were subject to daily necessities and wants. I^ they had lived
never so long, they would only have seen the same things in a continual
succession and revolution: As for Example, heat and cold, fair weather and
foul, might and day, Summer and Winter, health and sickness, plenty and
poverty, peace and war, prosperity and adversity, succeeding one to another:
All things going round. But now they are delivered from all these; they are at
rest, they are subject to no more necessities and wants; oppressed with no more
troubles and vexations; exposed to no more enemies, temptations, or dangers;
but exalted to a state of perfect Peace, Joy, Love, and Glory. They are as well
and better than you can desire: You are not able to comprehend the Happiness
that they are admitted to. Will you then be in continual sorrow and grief for
your Children, when they are exalted to a state of Rest and Glory; when they
are where you would rejoice to be; when their Gracious Father has freed them
from the vain company of the World, and Translated them into the blessed
Society of Angels, and of the Spirits of Just Men made perfect; when he has
put an end to their Toil and Labor, to their Fighting and Wrestling against
their Enemies, and bestowed on them a Crown of Glory, and an Everlasting
Inheritance; when he has broken their Bonds asunder, wherein they were held
and kept in Captivity and Slavery, and has put them into a state of perfect
and glorious Freedom? The consideration of these things should mitigate and
assuage your Sorrow and Grief, and fill you with unspeakable Comfort and
Gladness.

But some are apt to say, I should rejoice, if I thought that my Children, who
are dead, were in Heaven: But this I do not know. As to this, you are not to
trouble your thoughts about it; for God does not see fit to acquaint you with
such things. Secret things belong to God; and things revealed to us and to our
Children, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. If your Children, while they were alive, minded good
things; and if you did your part to instruct them, and to make them what God
requires them to be, you are not to be any further solicitous about their
Everlasting state: You are to hope that they are very happy, and you are to
comfort your selves with these thoughts.

Others are apt to say, I am afraid that my Children are not in a happy state;
they did very bad things, and used bad Company; and therefore I have cause to
fear, and to be troubled about them, now that they are dead. As to such
Parents, who have had wretched Children, they ought not to suffer their minds
to be disordered, and oppressed with Grief and Sorrow, because their Children,
who died, were wicked. If they did their Duty to make them better; if they
advised and admonished them; if they reproved them, and, as was fitting,
chastened them; if they desired others to deal with them, to see what they
could do toward the reclaiming of them; if they prayed to God for them, and
gave them a good Example: They are not any further to be troubled and
disquieted concerning them, when God takes them into his own hand; He is wise
and good, holy and just, he does all things well, for excellent and glorious
ends; and therefore Parents ought to leave them to his Disposal, who is the
Supreme Governor of the World, and Judge of the whole Earth. Whatever he does,
whether in Mercy or Justice, is always best. The Inhabitants of the other
World, who are translated into a state of Heavenly Glory, are not under the
power of such passions and partialities, as govern us here below. The glorified
Parents of damned Children, are not under any uneasiness on that or any other
account: The Will of God and his Glory is their all; they know that whatever he
does is most perfectly just and good, and for his Honor; and therefore all
things afford them great Pleasure and Delight, true and lasting Joy and
Satisfaction of mind. There Is nothing able to interrupt the happiness and joy
of those in Glory: They are perfectly and eternally delivered from all sort of
evils, both of sin and punishment: They are placed above the reach of whatever
may render them in the least uneasy.

But there is a third sort; of those who are troubled, not only because their
Children were bad and profane, but because they were so through their example
or neglect. As for such, I have already in general showed them what they ought
to do. I shall only add; That since they have been so faulty and defective in
their Duty toward their Deceased Children, they ought to be the more careful
of those who are yet alive, and to do all that is possible to make them what
God requires them to be. As to those who have no more Children left them, it
would be very fit for them to take into their care one or more Children, upon
whom they may bestow all that pains and care which they should have bestowed in
the right Education of their own; and endeavor, by God's help, to make them
truly Pious and Religious, and Patterns of all sorts of Virtue to others. This
is an Office which will be very acceptable to God, and one of the best
demonstrations which Parents can make of the sincerity of their Repentance, for
their not having done their Duty to their own Children.

Fourthly, Consider, that there will be a Resurrection of all those that are
dead. 4. They should consider that there will be a Resurrection.
The mighty Power of God, which made all things out of nothing, will also
gather together the scattered dust of those who are deceased, and will reform
and rebuild, as it were, their bodies which are fallen down, and consumed. He
will raise them up again in a more excellent, perfect, and glorious manner.
Then shall you meet with your Children and Friends who died in the Lord, and
behold them after another manner* than you saw them here in this World. Instead
of weak and diseased bodies, you shall see them strong, vigorous, and lively
bodies: Instead of frail and dying bodies, you shall see immortal and
incorruptible bodies: Instead of filthy and vile bodies, you shall see pure and
glorious bodies: And you shall see them so as to be with them for ever, so as
never any more to be separated from them by death, or any other thing; for you
and they shall die no more: 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44. So also is the resurrection
of the dead. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown
in dishonor, it is raised in glory. It is sown in weakness, it is raised in
power. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body: And, verse. 53.
This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality.

How gladly would poor People part with their dearest Children, if they could
be assured of seeing them again in an honorable state and condition, exalted
to great Dignity and Honor? And will not you, who have the hopes of a glorious
Resurrection, be comforted in the absence of your Children? When their merciful
God and Father takes them away from you unto himself; not to do them hurt, but
good; to make them happy and blessed with himself for ever; to bestow upon them
what Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor which has entered into the Heart of
Man to conceive? Consider the words of the Apostle to the Thessalonians, 1
Epist. 4. 13, 14. But I would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren, concerning
them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope:
For if we believe that Jesus dyed and rose again, even so them, which sleep in
Jesus, will God bring with him.

Fifthly, Your giving way to excessive Grief and Mourning, 5. They should
consider that their giving way to excessive Grief and Mourning, can do no good,
but will certainly do a great deal of hurt.
can do you no good, but will certainly do you a great deal of hurt and
mischief in many respects. It cannot bring back your Children that are dead.
Though you should break your Hearts into a thousand pieces, by your weeping and
mourning, and waste and consume your years in constant heaviness and sorrow;
though you should never henceforth allow your selves one moment of relaxation of
mind; after all, you must go to them, they shall not return to you. Now what a
folly is it for Men to consume, to disquiet, and to torment themselves, where
it is to no purpose at all to do so?

And not only do you thereby no good at all to your selves, but you do your
selves a great deal of mischief and prejudice. You provoke God to anger against
you, to bring upon you yet heavier and more grievous punishments, and to
deprive you of other Mercies and Comforts, which you still enjoy.

You do thereby no small hurt to your Bodies; you bring upon your selves very
dangerous distempers, which will make you unfit for the actions of Life, and
the Duties of your Calling. You likewise do unspeakable mischief to your Souls;
you deprive your selves of that vigor and cheerfulness of Spirit, that is
needful to make you fit to serve God acceptably. You thereby weaken your
Memory, and darken and disorder your Reason and Understanding, and so expose
your selves to all the sad consequences of a disordered and distracted Mind.

Your Example does also a great deal of hurt to others: Your impatience and
immoderate sorrow and mourning teaches others to do so upon the like occasion.
Hereby you bring no small reproach upon our holy Religion, as if it were not
sufficient to support and fortify us against our crosses and afflictions, and
to comfort us amidst the uneasy things which God sees fit to exercise us with
in this World.

What an excellent Example is David unto you in this matter? When God struck
his Child, so that it was very sick, he fasted and prayed; but when the Child
died, he arose from the earth, and washed and anointed himself, and changed his
apparel, and come unto the House of the Lord, and worshipped: Then he came to
his own House; and when he required, they (...) Bread before him, and he did
eat. Then said his Servants unto him, What thing is this that thou have done?
Thou did fast and weep for the Child, while it was alive; but when the Child
was dead, thou did rise and eat Bread. And he said, While the Child was yet
alive, I fasted and wept; for I said, Who can tell, whether God will be
gracious unto me, that the Child may live? But now he is dead, Wherefore should
I fast? Can I bring him again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to
me, 2 Samuel 12. 15, 16, etc. Thus ought all Parents to do, who fear God. When
the Lord lays his hand upon your Children, you ought to pray to God for them,
and to use all lawful means for their recovery: But when he ^ees fit to take
them away by death, you ought patiently to submit to his Will; This is your
wisest course; It is the way to make your selves happy, and to enjoy comfort
and satisfaction of mind under your crosses. This is the likeliest and readiest
way to obtain new Mercies and Favors from the Lord, instead of those you are
deprived of: Thus you see the Lord dealt with Job: Jam. 5. 11. Ye have heard of
the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord: That the Lord is very
pitiful, and of tender mercy. And, Job 42. 12, 13. The Lord blessed the latter
end of Job, more than his beginning. And, verse. 16, 17. After this lived Job an
hundred and forty years, and saw his Sons, and his Sons Sons, even four
Generations. So Job dyed, being old and full of days.

But if God see it more fit to withhold from you the blessings of the Womb, and
to bestow no more Children upon you; he can and will make up this want, with
much greater and better Blessings. What you want in Temporals, you shall have
in Spirituals. As Elkanah said to Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 8. He will be better to you
than ten Sons. He will give you a Name better than of Sons and Daughters, even
an everlasting Name, that shall not be cut off. Isa. 56. 5.

The Duty of Parents On their Deathbed.
The shortness and great uncertainty of your Time, The Duty of Parents on their
Deathbed.
ought to make you very careful, while you are in Health, to improve, as well
as you can, the present opportunities of doing good to your Children, both as
to their Spiritual and Temporal concerns. There can be no greater Folly, than
to delay the doing whatever is needful for your Childrens real Happiness and
welfare, merely out of a vain Expectation of having time enough to do every
thing of this kind, when you lie upon your Deathbed. It Is strange, that Men
who daily see the Casualties which others do meet with, and who have power to
consider the great Dangers their own Lives have been exposed to, should
notwithstanding flatter themselves with such Thoughts, and be so far bewitched
thereby, as to neglect any Duty of Importance and Necessity, which now they
have sufficient opportunity to do. And therefore, while you are in Health, fail
not to do all the good you can to your Children both for their Souls and
Bodies, and for their outward Estate.

But, if it shall please God to afford you time and leisure, upon your
Deathbed, to do any thing for their Benefit, neglect not at such a time to do
whatever your Weakness and Sickness will permit. Particularly,

1 st, 1. Duty, to give their Children good Advice.
Give them your best Advice: Direct them according to their Capacities:
Consider what their faults and defects most commonly have been, and suggest to
them such things as God shall bring into your mind, to make them sensible of
their faults, and to rescue them from their evil Habits. Consider what those
things are, whereby they are most likely to be endangered, and strive to
fortify their Minds with such wholesome Precepts and Maxims, as may tend to
preserve them for the time to come. Consider what good thing does appear in any
of them, and endeavor to stablish their Minds in Virtue and Goodness, in the
Fear and Love of God. Amongst other things, it is (...) to recommend to them
Unity and Concord, that they Love one another heartily, and be ready to assist
and serve one another to the utmost of their power, that they be friendly
Monitors to One another, and take it kindly and thankfully when they are so
deal with. Then likewise you may advise them, to endeavor, as much as is
possible, to live peaceably with all Men; to be careful, not to wrong any body
by Word or Deed, but on the contrary to seek the welfare of others, to strive
to do all the good they can in the World, and to make it as their necessary
Food to glorify God. David's Example is worthy of the imitation of all
Religious Parents at such a time, of whom it is said, 1 King. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. He
charged Solomon his Son, saying, I go the way of all the Earth: Be thou strong
therefore and show thy self a Man. And keep the Charge of the Lord thy God, to
walk in his ways, to keep his Statutes and his Commandments, and his Judgments,
and his Testimonies, as it is written in the Law of Moses, that thou may
prosper in all that thou do, and whithersoever thou turnest thy self: That
the Lord may confirm his Word, which he spoke concerning me, etc.

2 dly. Pray to God to bless them, 2. Duty, to pray to God for them.
to sanctify them, and to preserve them; that he would never leave them nor
forsake them, that he would be their God and Guide, and their Portion for ever,
that he would possess them with his fear, and keep them in his love, and
preserve them from sin, and from all their Spiritual Enemies, and that he would
order all things for their good. The fervent Prayer of a Righteous Man avails
much at all times, but never more than when he is stepping into Eternity, and
going to his Heavenly Father. Parents therefore, at this time, ought to be
Importunate with God, especially for Spiritual Blessings to their Children,
that he would grant them his Grace, to walk in his ways, and to keep his
Commandments, and that his kind Providence may be their Inheritance.

3 dly. It will be very fit at such a time, 3. Duty, to commend them to some
Faithful Friends.
to commend them to some of your Friends, whom you have found true and
faithful, sincere and upright, and kind and loving to you and yours. This is
especially needful to be done for those Children, who are less able to look to
themselves. 'Twill be of unspeakable Advantage to them, in many respects, to be
directed and assisted by those who are their true Friends, who by their counsel
and advice, and by doing other good Offices for them, will be as Eyes, and
Hands, and Feet unto them, and will prove a defense unto them against a great
deal of danger and mischief, till such time as they are capable to mind their
own Business, and are fixed and settled in the World.

HAving discoursed of the Duties of Natural Parents, 'twill not be amiss to say
somewhat concerning the Duty of those who are in the place of Parents, such as
Step-Fathers and Step-Mothers (or Fathers and Mothers in Law) and Guardians.
And first,

Concerning the Duties of Step-Fathers and Step-Mothers.
The first and chief thing which belongs to the care of Step-Parents,
Concerning the Duties of Step-Fathers and Step-Mothers, or Fathers and Mothers
in Law:
is, to do all that they can for the benefit of their Childrens Souls. They
ought to endeavor to season their tender minds with the Fear and Love of God,
to reform what is amiss in their temper and humor by all kind and prudent
Methods, to teach them to worship God, to Remember their Creator in the days of
their Youth: They ought to see that they be taught to read; that they spend the
Lord's Day well, and that they frequent the place of Public Worship: They
ought to make them understand what was promised in their Name at their Baptism,
and to encourage them to renew their Baptismal Covenant, if they have an
opportunity: They ought to advise them to come to the Lord's Table so soon as
they are fit for it, and then, as also at other times, to examine themselves,
and to call themselves to a strict and serious account, They ought to observe
what remarkable Mercies and Providence they meet with, and to acquaint them
therewith so soon as they are capable to reflect on such things: They ought
likewise, to talk to them often of the various Providence which either they
have met with themselves, or which they have observed in the World, that
thereby the Childrens minds may be affected with a due sense of the Power, the
Greatness, the Wisdom, the Mercy, and the Justice of God.

To render all which endeavors effectual, they must be Examples of Piety to
them: They must see what Company they use, and do what they can to keep them
out of ill Company, and to acquaint them with those who have a sense of good
things: They must reprove them when it is needful, but with great mildness and
discretion: And as for correcting and chastening of them, they ought to leave
that part to the Natural Parent, if alive; but if the Natural Parent be dead,
then they may correct them when it is necessary, according to their Age: But in
this great caution ought to be used, they must do it with the greatest
gentleness and tenderness that is possible, not only out of Conscience, but
Prudence, to prevent all occasion, which a great many are apt to take, to
reflect upon them, and to censure them severely and unjustly, when they do any
thing that looks like unkindness or sharpness to their Step-Children. It Is
therefore very advisable, when Correction is necessary, to acquaint some of
the Childrens Relations (if they be not at too great a distance) with their
fault, and so to correct them by their advice, and, if possible, in their
presence, that they may be, as it were, Witnesses of their doing nothing but
what is absolutely fit and needful to be done for the advantage of the Children.

Step-Parents ought also to take the opportunity of their Childrens sickness,
or of any other Adversity they meet with, to set home upon their minds such
Admonitions and Counsels as they were not so apt to mind when they were in
health. And to all their other Endeavors, they ought to join their daily
prayers to God for them, that he would bless them, and make them his faithful
and obedient Children and Servants.

As Step-Parents ought principally to take care of the Souls of their
Step-Children, so they must not neglect their Bodies. Their Duty as to this,
is, in a word, to take care that they have necessary and convenient Food and
Raiment.

As to the outward Estate of Step-Children, though Parents are not obliged to
give them any great Portion of their Worldly Goods, especially if they have, or
are like to have Children of their own, to give such things to; yet they ought
to be careful, that the Portions, which of right belong to their Step-Children,
be preserved and improved for their use and advantage, according to the Will of
the Deceased Parent.

When they are fit for a Trade or any honest way of getting their Livelihood,
they ought to assist them all they can, that they may be placed forth as
happily and comfortably as may be. In like manner when they are fit for
Marriage, they ought to express a great deal of readiness and cheerfulness to
serve them to the utmost of their Power; they ought to assist them with their
best advice and hearty Counsel in a matter of so great Importance. And, in a
word, they ought not to be wanting to them in any thing that may be useful and
beneficial to them, either as to their Souls, or Bodies, or as to their outward
Concerns.

Some Motives to stir up Step-Parents to do these things.
It cannot but excite Step-Parents, Some Motives to stir them up to do their
Duty.
to perform the abovementioned Duties for the Benefit of their Children, both
in their Spiritual and Temporal concerns, if they seriously consider, 1 st, The
Nature of their Marriage Relation, whereby they become one Flesh with those to
whom they are married. When God made the Woman, and brought her to the Man,
Genesis 2. 24. he said, Therefore shall a Man leave his Father and Mother, and
cleave unto his Wife, and they shall be one Flesh. Now, by Virtue of this near
Relation and close Union, they ought to have a tender regard for the Interests
and Concerns of one another; and the dearer any thing is to the one, the
greater affection ought the other to have toward it. As therefore it is past
all doubt, that Children are the dearest and most valued and beloved Earthly
thing that Natural Parents have, upon this account, it is very reasonable, that
Step-Parents should express a great Regard and Affection for them.

2. This is the way to preserve and to increase that mutual Love, which ought
to be 'twixt Man and Wife. If a Step-Parent is kind and loving to the Children,
and careful to promote their Happiness and Welfare, it cannot but have an
Influence on the Natural Parent, so as to produce an Increase of Love and
Respect, which will render the lives of the married Persons very easy and
comfortable. Whereas, on the other hand, if Step-Parents are rough, unkind, and
unnatural to their Step-Children, it must needs cause a great deal of mischief;
it will certainly cool, if not quite alienate the affection of the Natural
Parent, and when once this happens, there is thenceforth nothing but strife and
contention, jealousies and suspicions, which are ordinarily attended with very
sad and dreadful effects, to the utter Ruin of one or the other Party, if not of
both.

3. This is the way to make the Children very respectful and kind, and very
dutiful and obedient to them, when they use them kindly, are careful to seek
their happiness and welfare, and carry themselves toward them in all respects,
as they ought to do. Whereas, on the contrary, by being unkind to them, and
unconcerned for their happiness and welfare, they provoke them to hate them,
and to prove Disrespectful and Disobedient to them.

4. This is the way to gain a great deal of Love and Respect from all those who
are Related to the Deceased Parents, who cannot choose but resent it very
kindly, when they see the Children of their Friends well used, and taken care
of both as to their Souls and Bodies: This will make them ready upon all
occasions to serve them, and to do them the best Offices which are in their
power: Whereas, on the other hand, if they see the poor Children of their
Deceased Friends neglected and contemned, wronged and abused by unkind
Step-Parents, they must needs take it in very ill part, and resent it heavily;
yea, and all other Persons, who see or hear of such unkindness, severity, and
injustice, toward poor Children, cannot choose but think very ill of those, who
discover themselves to be altogether void, not only of Religion, but of
Humanity also.

From what has been said, it appears how very just and reasonable it is, for
Step-Parents to be heartily concerned both for the Spiritual and Temporal
welfare and happiness of their Children. And therefore, how much are they to be
Condemned, who make no Conscience at all of doing any thing for the benefit of
either their Souls or Bodies? As to their Souls, some Step-Parents are so far
from endeavoring to season them with good Impressions, and to fortify them
against Tentations, that they themselves are their greatest Tentation, and do
them the greatest hurt and prejudice. As to their Bodies, they grudge them
necessary Food and Raiment, and seldom let them have any thing with good will.
And as to their Outward Estate, they are so far from improving for their
Advantage, the Portion of Worldly Goods that belongs to them, that, on the
contrary, they use their utmost Policy to rob them, and to disinherit them,
that they may build their own Childrens Fortune upon the others Ruin; for which
end, they make it their business to alienate the Affection of their Natural
Parent; they invent a great many wicked and malicious Stories, which, with
great boldness and impudence, they fasten upon them; and they never give over
working and undermining, till they have brought about their cruel and cursed
Devices. But surely he that sits in Heaven, and beholds all their contrivances,
even he who is the God of Recompenses, will in due time bring to Light their
hidden Works of Darkness, and will vindicate the cause of those poor Children,
and render to their cruel Persecutors according to their Works; he will fooner
or later cause them to feel the heavy Load of his Just and Terrible Indignation.

The Duties of Guardians.
GUardians are either chosen by Parents before their Death, The Duties of
Guardians.
or by Children themselves after their Parents Decease, or by the Magistrate.
Which way soever they are chosen, their Duty is, to do what they can for the
benefit and advantage of their Pupils, both in Spiritual and Temporal Things.

As to their Souls, they must take care of their good Education, according to
their Age and Capacity. If they are not as yet taught to read, they ought to
make choice of a skilful and prudent Schoolmaster or Tutor for them, of whose
fitness for such a Charge they are well assured. But they must not so entrust
them to the Care of such Persons, as never to mind them more themselves: They
ought to enquire after them now and then, and either by themselves or others
more fit for it, make trial of their proficiency, that so they may be able to
judge and resolve what is further to be done for them.

As for the way of training them up in true Piety, the Directions given to
Parents are to be observed and practiced.

As to their Bodies, the former Directions likewise to Parents, concerning
Childrens Diet and Apparel, ought to be followed.

As to their outward Estate, when they are fit for a Trade, or some sort of
business, they ought to take care to settle them in good Company, so far as is
possible, and in such a way of living as is most agreeable to their Genius and
Inclination, and which their Friends and Relations reckon most suitable and
convenient for them. It will afford great peace and satisfaction to Guardians,
whatever be the Event, if in this matter they have a due regard to Childrens
own Inclination, and to the Opinion of their Friends and Relations.

As to their Marriage, when it is time to dispose of them that way, they onght
to do nothing by force and violence: They must not constrain them to Marry,
unless they have a mind themselves: And though they are not bound absolutely to
approve of those whom their Pupils fancy, without any regard to their fitness,
yet they are obliged by the Law of Justice and Equity, not to impose upon them
such Matches as they cannot like.

As to their Patrimony and Inheritance, they ought to improve it, as much as
may be, for the Childrens good, and to employ it wholly for their use, except
so far as the Law does allow them their necessary Charges, in which they ought
to govern themselves, by that Golden-Rule, Mat. 7. 12. All things whatsoever ye
would that Men should do to you, do ye even so to them.

Some Motives to excite Guardians to do these Things.
The first thing, Some Motives to excite Guardians to do their Duty.
which should stir up Guardians to perform their Duty toward their Pupils, is,
A Sense of Justice. When they are chosen for this End, if they have no mind to
undertake such a Charge, or if they cannot attend it, they ought to declare so
much, and peremptorily to refuse it, that so care may be taken to get some
other Body who will undertake it. But when once they have undertaken it, they
ought to make Conscience of it, and to do all that is in their power for the
Childrens welfare and happiness in every thing. It Is both their Duty and
Interest to fulfill their Engagement, and to act that part which they have
undertaken; which if they perform wisely and faithfully, then they may expect
the Praise, Love, and Esteem, of not only the Children themselves, and of their
Relations, but likewise of all good and worthy Persons, who see or hear of
their Fidelity and Carefulness for the benefit of their Pupils.

If Care is not taken in this manner, to fulfill what is undertaken to be done,
and if there is no respect had to Covenants, Trusts and Engagements, then the
very Foundation of the Happiness of Society is subverted. If there is no regard
to Truth and Justice, what a miserable thing must it be to live in Society? To
be united by any civil ^yes to those, whose Promises and Engagements are worse
than none at all?

2. Does not A Sense of Honor oblige Guardians to be careful of their Pupils,
and true and faithful to them? 'Twas the Opinion of their kindness and
faithfulness, and of their fitness and worthiness for such a Charge, which made
them be chosen before others. And therefore, if they have any thing in them of
true worth, if they have any sense of Honor, they must needs strive to answer
the Expectation of those who have testified so great a value and esteem for
them.

3 dly, Does not Charity oblige Guardians to do these things? Orphans have
always been reckoned amongst the greatest Objects of Charity, especially when
they are very Young, and are not able, either in respect of Body or Mind, to do
any thing for themselves. So great is God's Compassion and Tenderness toward
such Children, that he has been Graciously pleased to declare himself to be,
The Father of the Fatherless. It Is therefore the Duty of All, who are Followers
of God as dear Children, especially of those who are chosen to perform so
Charitable an Office as this, I say it is their Duty, to omit nothing that is
needful to be done, for the benefit of Fatherless Children, both in their
Spiritual and Temporal concerns.

We see a very worthy President and Example in Mordecai, Esth. 2. Esther's
Father and Mother being dead, Mordecai took her, and she was to him as his own
Daughter. How careful was he both of her Soul and Body? How well did he
instruct her? As may be easily gathered from her Wise and Pious Carriage and
Behavior. And when she was taken from him, we find he was still mindful of
her, for, v. 11. it is said, Mordecai walked every day before the Court of the
Women's House, to know how Esther did, and what should become of her. We find
him likewise, from time to time, giving her his best Advice, how to carry her
self, and how to glorify God, in that Honorable State, to which it had
pleased him to raise her. How worthy is such an excellent Pattern as this, of
the imitation of all those who are called to be the Guardians, the Guides, and
Defenders of Fatherless Children? And for their encouragement, let them
consider how richly God did reward the Charity and Piety of Mordecai, not only
in raising him up to great Honor by Esthers means, but also by making her the
Instrument of preserving his Life, and the Lives of all the Jews, who were in
the Provinces belonging to Ahasuerus.

From what has been said, it appears how great Reason there is, for Guardians
to be true and faithful to the Interests of their Pupils, and to do all that
ever they can for their Spiritual and Temporal Advantage.

Now, if it be their Duty to do so, what shall be said of those, who are not
only careless of seeking their good, but do likewise, too successfully, seek
their hurt and ruin? As to their Souls, they corrupt and poison them by their
wicked Example, and by Atheistical Principles which they instill into them;
they breed them up in all manner of Licentiousness. As to their Bodies, they
either too far gratify their vanity and folly; or they are too niggardly
toward them, in withholding from them not only Conveniences but Necessaries.
As to their outward Estate, they either suffer them* to live idly; or they put
them forth to some Trade or other, very unfit and unsuitable to them. And when
they are fit for Marriage, they force them to Marry as they think good,
according as they see it will best serve their own private and worldly, base,
and vile Interests, without ever regarding the Happiness of their Pupils. As
for their Patrimony and Inheritance, they are so far from improving it, that
they impair it woefully, and sometimes quite consume and waste it; they study a
great many Arts and Wiles to ruin the poor Children, whom they have got into
their merciless hands; Instead of proving their Guardians, they prove their
Robbers; instead of being as Parents to them, they prove betrayers of them, and
their most Dangerous and Cruel Enemies. But shall they escape who do such
things? No: They shall not. He who is the helper of the Fatherless, will plead
their Cause, and will avenge them of those Treacherous and Perfidious Persons:
For, He beholds mischief to requite it, Ps. 10. 14.

I shall conclude this Advice with what is written, Ex. 22. 22. etc. Ye shall
not afflict any fatherless Child. If thou afflict them in any wise, and they
cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry. And my wrath shall wax hot,
and I will kill you with the Sword: And your Wives shall be Widows, and your
Children Fatherless. And, Prove. 23. 10, 11. Enter not into the fields of the
Fatherless; for their Redeemer is mighty; He shall plead their Cause with thee.

PRAYERS FOR FAMILIES.
A Morning Prayer for Parents, or Masters of Families, with their Family.
O Most Gracious and Merciful Lord God, Prayers for the Morning and Evening, to
be used in Families.
who affords us, thy unworthy Servants, the Honor and Liberty of drawing near
unto thee, Assist us by thy good Spirit to Worship thee with sincere Devotion,
to lift up Holy Hands without wrath and doubting.

We acknowledge, O Lord, we deserve not to appear in thy sight, for we are not
only Vile and Sinful by Nature, being the corrupt Posterity of Sinful Parents;
but likewise we are Guilty of a great many actual Transgressions, in our
Thoughts, Words, and Deeds, whereby we have provoked thee to Wrath against us.
We have not only sinned through Ignorance, but have sinned also against
Knowledge; we have acted contrary to that light, which thou have made to shine
upon us. We have been very Inconstant in good Purposes and Resolutions: We have
often confessed our Sins, and yet soon after returned to them.

O Lord have Mercy upon us, and forgive us all our Sins, for Jesus Christ's
sake. Thou who know the Deceitfulness and desperate Wickedness of our
Hearts, make us what thou requirest us to be; put thy Spirit within us, and
cause us to walk in thy Statutes, and to keep thy Judgments, and do them. Give
us unfeigned Repentance for all our past Offenses: Work in us strong
Resolutions to observe thy Laws for the time to come: Make us Watchful and
Circumspect in all our Words and Actions; Lord watch thou over us for good, and
never leave us nor forsake us. Make us sensible of thy Power and Faithfulness,
that we may put our Trust and Confidence in thee: Acquaint us more and more
with our own Hearts and Lives, that the sense of our Weakness and Folly, of our
manifold and great Sins, may make us very humble, and careful to avoid those
Temptations which do so often and easily prevail over us. Fortify us with
great Measures of Meekness and Patience, That we may bear and endure all those
uneasy things, which thou see fit to exercise us with: Possess us with a
lively sense of thy wise and just Providence, that in all things which befall
us, we may say, Good is the Word of the Lord. Save us from the Immoderate Love
of all Earthly things, from all vain Hopes and groundless Fears. Make us
content and thankful in every condition of Life; Faithful and Just in all our
Dealings; careful to do to others what we would have them do to us: And as much
as in us lies, to live peaceably with all Men. Set a Watch before our Lips,
that we offend not with our Tongues; save us from Lying and Slandering, from
Foolish Talking and Sinful Jesting, and from all manner of Corrupt
Communication: And grant that our words, being seasoned with Salt, may Minister
Grace to the Hearers. Keep us mindful of thy all-seeing Eye, that we may be in
thy Fear all the day long, that whether we eat or drink, or whatever else we
do, we may do all to thy Glory.

Lord be Merciful to the many Nations which sit in Darkness, send the Light of
the Gospel unto them. Grant that all they upon whom this Glorious Light does
shine, may walk as Children of the Light and of the Day, that they may put off
the Works of Darkness, and put on the Armor of Light.

Bless all Rulers and Governors, make them wise and good, just and merciful:
Let it be their chiefest care to encourage Piety, and to restrain whatever is
dishonorable to thee, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords.

Have mercy on these sinful Lands: Bless and preserve our King and Queen, and
all the Royal Family. Direct our Judges and Magistrates: Sanctify and assist
all thy Ministers. Be gracious to all our Friends every where; and forgive
those who wrong us by word or deed.

Let thy Blessing be on this Family. Bless our Children; make them thy
Children; put thy Fear within them; Grant that as they grow in Years they may
grow in Grace; shed abroad thy Love in their Hearts, that they may never depart
from thee; save them from every evil thing. Be favorable, O Lord, to all
others, for whom we are bound to pray on any account whatsoever; Bless them and
us in our Souls and Bodies, and in all our Affairs and Concerns.

We give thee our Hearty Thanks for preserving us, and watching over us and our
Habitation the last night, for affording us quiet Repose, and for raising us up
in Health and Safety this Morning: Be with us this Day: Assist and direct us in
all our ways: Give thy Angels charge concerning us.

Lord make us ready to leave this vain World. Let the sense of our Frailty stir
us up to redeem our time, and to give all diligence to make our Calling and
Election sure. Grant that this day we may do somewhat worthy of Christians, for
thy Glory, the Advantage of others, and our own Everlasting Happiness and
Comfort. Let it be our constant Study and Endeavor to follow the Example of
our Blessed Savior, who went about doing good: In whose most Blessed Name and
Words we conclude our Prayers. Our Father, etc.

An Evening Prayer for Parents, or Masters of Families, with their Family.
O Lord our God, what shall we render unto thee for the many and great Favors,
which thou have been pleased, from Time to Time, to bestow upon us. We bless
thee for giving us a Being; for making us reasonable Creatures, capable to know
and love thee, and to live for ever with thee; for preserving us in the World;
and for affording us all things needful for our Support and Comfort. But above
all we bless thee, for thy Love in Christ Jesus, whom thou have sent into the
World to visit us, to make his abode among us, to dye for us, That he might
wash us from our Sins in his Blood. Lord what is Man that thou art mindful of
him, or the Son of Man that thou do, in this gracious manner, visit him!

Though thou have bestowed innumerable Mercies upon us, and have visited us with
this great Salvation, yet we have been very unthankful and undutiful to thee:
We have abused thy Goodness, and turned thy Grace into wantonness: We have set
at naught thy Counsels and, despised thy Reproofs; we have trampled under foot
the Blood of our Savior; we have quenched the motions of thy good Spirit; we
have refused to obey thy Commands, and to follow thy kind and gracious
Invitations; we have not regarded thy Promises, nor been afraid of thy
Threatenings; we have been too often led by the sinful Examples and Manners of
the World; we have, in many Things, gratified our Lusts and Rassions, We have
drawn near to thee with our Mouth, and Honored thee with our Lips, when our
Hearts have been far from thee; we have promised our selves Peace and Safety,
in the broad way that leads to Destruction. O Lord, We have destroyed our
selves; but in thee is our Help; Our only Hopes are in thy infinite Mercy, who
have hitherto spared us, notwithstanding our manifold and crying Provocations.

Most Gracious God, have Mercy upon us: For Jesus Christ's sake pardon us all
our sinful Thoughts, Words, and Deeds* Renew and Sanctify us by thy Holy
Spirit, that henceforth we may live thy faithful Servants, and may be always
ready to do, or to endure whatever is thy Holy Will and Pleasure. Thou know
our Weakness and Inconstancy; let thy Grace continually prevent and follow us,
that we may abhor that which is Evil, and cleave to that which is Good: Make us
Faithful unto Death, that at last we may obtain the Crown of Life.

Lord be Gracious to all Mankind; pity those who are in a State of Ignorance
and Barbarity, and send the glad tidings of Salvation to them. Grant that they
who have this Blessed Light of the Gospel, may walk honestly as in the Day,
that others seeing their good Works may glorify thee our Heavenly Father. Lord
cleanse thy Church from the many and great Sins which abound in her: Let every
one that names the Name of Christ depart from Iniquity.

Have Mercy on these Sinful Lands: Give Repentance to all sorts of Persons
amongst us, that all of us may search and try our ways, and turn again to thee.
Lord turn us that we may be turned; and draw us, that we may run after thee,
and follow thee fully. Be Gracious to our King and Queen; direct and prosper
them in all their good Designs; make them the happy Instruments of promoting
Religion amongst us. Bless the rest of the Royal Family. Guide ou^ Judges and
Magistrates; Grant that they may Execute Justice without Respect of Persons.
Sanctify and assist all thy Ministers; make them Diligent and Faithful; grant
that their Endeavors for the good of Souls, may be attended with great
Success. Raise up many Faithful Pastors to feed thy Flock with Wisdom and
Understanding.

Show thy Pity upon all who are any ways afflicted or distressed in Mind, Body,
or Estate; Sanctify their Afflictions unto them, give them Patience under
them, and a Happy Issue out of them.

Let thy Blessing be upon this Family; let no harm come near our Dwelling this
Night, or at any time. Lord bless our Children, take them into thy Gracious
Protection; give them a Heart to Fear and Love thee; cause them to Remember
thee their Creator in the days of their Youth; possess them with a deep sense
of thy Infinite Power, Wisdom, Faithfulness, and Love; that they may walk
before thee in Holiness and Righteousness all their Days: Be thou their God and
Guide, and Portion for ever. Bless all others, for whom we are obliged to pray
to thee; bless them and us in our Souls and Bodies, and in all our Interests
and Concerns.

Blessed be thy Name for bringing us safely through the past Day, for
preserving us from a great many Dangers, and for bestowing upon us innumerable
Mercies: Preserve in us an Affectionate and Grateful Remembrance of all thy
undeserved kindness to us. Lord watch over us this Night; refresh us with
comfortable Rest and Sleep; defend us from all the Powers of Darkness; save us
from all vain and sinful thoughts, from all sad accidents, and from every evil
thing. When thou see fit to remove us out of this vain World, translate us
into that Blessed and Happy State, which thou have prepared for thy Ransomed
Ones. And if thou art pleased to prolong our time, grant that we may spend it
to good purpose, in such Designs, Words, and Actions, as may tend to thy Honor
and Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. In whose Blessed Name and Words, we
continue to pray as he has taught us, saying, Our Father, etc.

A short Prayer for the Morning or Evening, when through Extraordinary
Occasions there is not time for the other.
O Lord our God, look down with an Eye of Pity upon us thy unworthy Servants
this Or Evening.
Morning. Pardon us the many Sins whereof we are Guilty before thee, in our
Thoughts, Words, and Deeds. Have Mercy upon us, and be reconciled to us,
through Jesus Christ thy dear Son. Sanctify and assist us by thy Holy Spirit,
that for the time to come we may do thy Will, and seek thy Glory.

We bless thy Name for all thy Mercies, especially for thy wonderful Love in
Christ Jesus, whom thou have sent into the World to die for us, to purchase for
us an Everlasting Kingdom. Give us Grace firmly to believe in him, heartily to
love him, and constantly to obey him. Grant that it may be our sincere
Endeavor to follow his Blessed Example, in all Lowliness and Self-denial, in
Meekness and Patience, in Charity and Compassion, in Sincerity and Vprightness,
in Temperance and Soberness, in Thankfulness and Contentedness, in Purity and
Holiness, in Watchfulness and Circumspectness, and in fervent and prudent Zeal
for thy Honor and Glory.

O Lord, we bless thee, for bringing us safely through the last Night Or, the
past day.
; Watch over us this Day O^*, this night.
; Keep us mindful of thy All-seeing Eye, that we may avoid every thing that is
displeasing to thee.

Be Gracious to all Mankind: Have Mercy on these Lands: Bless and Guide our
Rulers, and all thy Ministers. Be near to all who are in trouble, and Sanctify
their Afflictions to them. Be with our Friends and Relations every where: Bless
them and us with all things needful for our Souls and Bodies. Make us sensible
of our Frailty and Mortality; give us Grace so to number our Days, that we may
apply our Hearts to Wisdom. When this vain and short Life is at an end, make us
Partakers of Everlasting Life and Happiness, through Jesus Christ our Lord, who
has taught us when we pray to say, Our Father, etc.

SOME FORMS OF PRAYER WHICH Parents may teach their Children according to their
Age.
A Morning Prayer to be taught Children, when they begin to speak.
O Lord, I praise thee for all thy Mercies, and for thy Care of me this Night.
Watch over me this Day. Forgive me all my sins, and make me thy Child for Jesus
Christ's sake.

This Prayer may be used likewise at Night, only changing that Petition [watch
over me this Day] into [watch over me this Night.]

When Children come to be four or five years old, the following Prayer may be
used.

O Lord my God, what shall I render unto thee for all thy Mercies! I bless thee
for giving me Life, and all things needful to keep me alive. But above all, I
bless thee for sending Christ to dye for me, that he might wash me with his
Blood, and make me fit for the Kingdom of Heaven. For his sake have mercy upon
me, and forgive me all my sinful thoughts, words, and deeds. Give me Grace to
serve thee as I ought to do; that I may not do, nor say a naughty thing, lest
thou be angry with me, and cast me into Hell fire.

Lord bless and preserve my Father and Mother If there be Brothers and Sisters
let them pray for them likewise.
and all my Friends and Relations.

I praise thee, O God, for preserving me this Night, watch over me this day;
save me from every evil thing. Good Lord hear me, and grant me whatever thou
know to be best for me, for Jesus Christ's sake, in whose holy Name and
Words, I pray, Our Father, etc.

This Prayer may be likewise used at Night, by changing only two words, and
saying, instead of [preserving me this night] [preserving me this day;] and
instead of [watch over me this day] [watch over me this night.]

A Morning Prayer for Children, when they come to twelve or fourteen years of
Age; sooner or later, according to the ripeness of their understanding.
LORD teach and assist me by thy Holy Spirit, to worship thee as I ought to do;
Lift up my heart unto thee.

What shall I render unto thee, O most Gracious God, and most Merciful Father,
for all thy Mercies to me, and to all the World? I bless thee for making me a
reasonable Creature, and for affording me all things which be needful to
support my Life; I bless thee for my health, liberty, and safety; for my Food
and Raiment; for the use of my Reason and Understanding, and of my Senses; for
thy corrections and deliverances; and for all the advantages I have had by good
Examples, and good Instructions: But chiefly, I praise and bless thee for the
redemption of Mankind by the Lord Jesus Christ: That I was born within thy
Church, where I was early given to thee in Baptism; that I have had the benefit
of Christian Education; that thou have afforded me the means of Grace, and
called me to the hope of Glory.

But notwithstanding thy goodness and love, I have gone astray from thee; I
have not cared so much as I ought to have done, to know thee, and to do thy
Will, but have done my own will in many things, and followed my own foolish and
sinful inclinations: I have broken many of thy most Holy and Just Laws, in
Thought, Word, and Deed Here they may make a particular Confession of their
Sins.
, whereby I have deserved thy Wrath and Curse.

Father of Mercies have mercy upon me, and forgive me all my sins for Jesus
Christ his sake, who dyed for sinners. Give me a true and hearty Repentance for
all mine iniquities; that I may not wilfully break thy Laws any more. Make me
always mindful of my Baptismal Covenant, to forsake the Devil and all his
Works, to believe in God, and to serve him. Lord never leave me, nor forsake
me. Hold up my goings in thy Paths, that my footsteps may not slide. Grant that
hencesorth I may love thee with all my heart, and may be afraid to sin against
thee: Work in me a true Faith, and a lively hope; make me humble, meek, and
patient, sober and temperate in all things, Charitable and Compassionate
toward all that are in distress, true and faithful in my words, and sincere
and upright in my Actions, well content and thankful in every condition of
Life, and zealous for thy Glory. Grant that I may daily grow in Grace and
Spiritual Knowledge. Create in me a clean Heart, and renew a right Spirit
within me, and cause me to walk in thy ways.

O Lord send thy Gospel through the World: Pour out plentifully the Blessings
of thy holy Spirit on all thy People: Bless and preserve our King and Queen.
Guide our Judges and Magistrates: Sanctify and assist the Ministers of the
Gospel. Be with all my Friends and Relations; particularly bless and preserve
my Father and Mother: Reward them for their care and kindness toward me: Make
me a loving and dutiful Child unto them. If there be any Brothers or Sisters,
he may pray for them, and for Grandfather and Grandmother, if they be alive.
Comfort all that are in trouble, and sanctify their afflictions to them.

I thank thee, O Lord, for thy care of me this Night. Watch over me this Day.
Bless and direct me in all I do or say. Keep me mindful that I am always in thy
sight, that I may be in thy fear all the day long. Cause me to remember that I
mus^ shortly dye and come to judgment; th^^ I may not mispend my precious time,
but employ it in a constant ^^d cheerful Obedience to thy Holy and Righteous
Laws; that when this vain and short life is at an end, I may be made partaker
of everlasting Li^^, through Jesus Christ our Lord; in wh^^ Holy Name and Words
I pray, Our Father, etc.

This Prayer may serve likewise at Night, until you come to the last part,
which begins with these words, [I thank thee, O Lord, for thy care of me this
Night, etc.] instead thereof, you may say as follows,

[I thank thee, O Lord, for thy care of me this Day; watch over me this Night,
and grant me quiet Repose; save me from every Evil thing, for the sake of thy
dear Son Jesus Christ, in whose Holy Name and Words, I conclude my Imperfect
Prayers, saying, Our Father, etc.]

A Grace before Meat.
WE Bless thee, O Lord, for making this Provision for us, who are less than the
least of thy Mercies. Grant that by a moderate use of these thy good Creatures,
we may be made more fit for thy Service, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

After Meat.
BLessed be thy Name, most Gracious God, for all thy Mercies freely bestowed
upon us; and for refreshing our Bodies at this time with thy good Creatures.
Cause us to hunger and thirst after Righteousness: Feed our Souls with the
Bread of Life: Let it be our Meat and Drink to do thy Will. Provide for all in
want, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

