A serious Call to Obstinate Sinners, Or, A sounding Trumpet to the
UNCONVERTED. Laying forth the danger of living in Sin, and delay of REPENTANCE.
Which may be a Warning-blow for Wicked Men to forsake sin, and to turn to God
unfeignedly.

I have no pleasure, says God, in the Death of the wicked, but that the wicked
might turn from his evil ways and live,

Ezekiel. 11.33. Except you be converted, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven,

Matt. 18.20. In the ways of Righteousness the Saints find Treasure, so shall
the Sinner by returning unto God,

Jer. 24.7. By William Knowls.

London, Printed by H. B. for W. Thackeray at the Angel in Duck-Lane. 1684.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
I Entreat thee from the Lord, that thou would read this small Book, and
treasure it up in the Closet of thy heart, to seal your Salvation to the day of
redemption. Be thou never such a si^ now turn unto the Lord by Repentance,
and the may find mercy: now obey his call while his mercy is open, and run
the race that is set before you, and throw by sin as a monstrous enemy, and
cast the Devil behind thee, and the profits and pleasures of the World tread
under your feet; set Christ and his Glory before thine eyes, and remember Death
and Judgment; have a strong Faith wrought in Christ Jesus, in which way you will
find treasures exceedingly, and so shall the wicked b^ turning to the Lord, for
there is great joy in heaven at a sinners returning, more than at ninety nine
righteous persons, that need not repentance. O you wicked sinners, I beseech
you make timely preparation for your sins. O consider your own good and be
wise; my prayers are ever for you, and my daily study is to find out medicines
to cure you, and among you I throw the Seed of the Word. I travel in pain to
the hazard of my life, and all to save your Souls from Hell, and that iniquity
might not be your ruin. So hoping in the Lord for some of your conversions. ^
rest your friend, in the Lord Jesus.

W.K.B. in P.

A serious Call to Obstinate Sinners.
Turn you, turn you from your evil ways; for why will you dye, O house of
Israel?

Ezekiel. 33.11.
CHristian Friends, and beloved, whom the Lord would ever cover with the shadow
of his wings, and embrace in his Arms, but you will not: you love Death better
than Life, because your deeds are evil. But hearken to the call of God; and to
the Doctrine of Christ our Lord; you which are unconverted, draw nigh, now
while I sound the Trumpet in Sion, and sound you an Alarm in your Holy
Mountains. O you sinners, you inhabitants of the Earth, tremble at this sudden
call from God for the day of the Lord is at hand, Joel 2,1. And a most swift
and sudden destruction attends the wicked; for God will most certainly shower
down his wrath and vengeance upon all such as forget God, and will not be
brought to the knowledge of his truth: nay, you will not discern the mystery of
Christ's Body, which was crucified on the Cross, and whose most dear and pre^s
blood was spilt for redemption of Sinners. O bewail your ignorance, and beseech
the Lord to give you the knowledge of his truth and instruct you sinners not to
make any longer a ^est at his words and threatenings, and (...) not you can be
sa^ when you will; ^ he not so deceived nor v^ed by the Prince of darkness. O
it (...) the Devils pro^se to deceive the very (...) God chosen ones, O you are
called (...) ^pecial grace of God to inherit a Kingdom; now therefore obey this
special Call; To day (...) you wi^ hear his Voice, hardon not your ^earts,
tomorrow is another day, and who knows what ^ day brings forth; continue no
longer in filthiness, for the day of slaughter is nigh, and a just reward is
prepared for the wicked. O we an^ sinners, who ^ hearts are double-minded, and
whose will works deceit. How many ca^s have you had? How many c^ecks of
Conscience? how many godly Sermons? Precepts upon Precepts, Line upon Line, one
Grace upon the nee^ of another, and yet remains all this while as wicked as you
did; what shall be used mo^e for your remedy; does not your Ministers baptize
you into Christ, and unto Christ, and to make you a member of that mystical
body: and for all this you remain unsanctified; they administer the outward
Ordinance of the Supper of Christ, to make you mindful of his death and
passion. to bind you to his will, and to knit your hearts to his spiritual
Ordinance, yet all this avails not, let the Ministers of God say what they
will, ye you do not regard them, you are now grown so wise you need no
teaching, you make light of Christ and Salvation: the swearers, and drunkards,
and (...), and fornicato^s, and deceitful men do (...) they shall be saved as
well as others, when there is no (...) hope; but Death and D^mnation is
reserved or the wicked: He that lives and dies in sin, is a Hell-hound, and a
son of perdition. It Is the turning from the state of the ^h^ wicked to the waves
of God that shall guide (...) to the glory of the Father of lights, with who
(...) is no (...), nor shadow of tur^os: (...) man throw off the world, ^ the
pleasures and de^ght (...) it, with the deceivable Lusts of the (...) and
^o^ness be in your life: (...) present cond^ be unrebuke (...) God and man, you
cannot serve God and the (...) yea you must lose all for the fa^ of Christ, and
count the world but d^ss in compar^io^ to the w^ of Christ: this all Sinners
would do it thee did but know the Oracle of God, and the mystery of his (...)
word, and the reward they shall g^ in by Kingdom of Heaven, you would not
under^ue the worth of Christ, you would not make light of (...) O I beseech you
to make a speed turn to (...) Lord; seek, ^e^k for the Fountain that every
(...), and va^ your Souls in t^ precious (...) of Christ, his only body feed o^
and his (...) drink of fre^y; in not one (...) fall to the Ground, it is
altogether excellent precious, it cannot be got for Gold of Ophir, a^ Diamond
can purchase it, no Pearl can equa^ it; Christ cannot be bought for Gold nor
S^ver, and the worth of Christ is beyond Rubies* lo, this is the Fountain, and
therefore pray Cleanse me, O Lord, and I shall be cleansed it is he, and he
only, that is the door, and the way, and opens for hungry and thirsty souls;
wh^ never tasted the sweetness of Christ's body (...) Blood, but only the
outward Ordinance, which gives not life: it is the spiritual feeding, and
spiritual washing that makes the corrupted Souls of men perfect. Oh let these
things prick your hearts, and cry, What shall we do to be saved, (says St.
Peter) and be baptized every one of you for remission of Sins? No Repentance,
no Salvation; therefore you sinners be reconciled to God, and obey his Gospel,
and speedily turn from the vain glory of the World, unto the righteousness of
God; and see here is happiness in the state of the Righteous. What hinders you,
that you will not be reconciled to God? does the world hinder you, and the
profits and pleasures of it? what are you seeking, that you seek not God and
his Kingdom? what seek you, preferment, honor, and riches, or glory in the
world, which things does darken your minds and understandings, and draws our
hearts more and more from God, should not the Lord in mercy forbear the
iniquity of the world; and wait upon the sinner for Repentance but in wrath and
vengeance pour upon this Nation such severe Judgments, the sins of this Nation
cries for, there would be nothing but utter destruction; therefore, O Nations,
gather your selves together before the decrees comes forth, before the fierce
anger of the Lord comes upon you; Seek the Lord while he may be found, and
while pardon and remission of sins may be had, for if once the door of mercy is
shut against you, you are utterly lost, you are past Remedy, if you overslip
the day of Grace, you may then, when it is too late, call and cry, but God will
not hearken, but will laugh at your calamity; you may seek him early, but God
will not answer; and if you seek the Lord with Tears, you cannot find him.
Prove. 1.28. Why will not God be found? says God, They hate knowledge and refuse
instruction, and do not walk in the fear of God, Prove. 2.4. O you must incline
your ears to wisdom, and give up thy heart to understanding, you must seek the
Lord as for fine silver, and search to find him as for precious treasure: then
shall thou know the fear of God, and obtain the excellent knowledge of Christ:
you must seek diligently with a pure heart; yea, you must hunger and thirst
after righteousness, if you mean to be filled in the end* you shall reap if you
faint not. (...) but how backward is the people of the world t^ hearken, and
how loath are they to spend ha^ an hours time from their worldly employments to
hear the salvation of Sion; how slow in hearing, how dull in understanding are
the wise me^ of this world, the natural man perceives no^ the things of the
Spirit, neither does he know them, they seem foolishness to him, because they
are spiritually discerned; Let the Ministers of Christ call and cry, and tell
you, you are out of the way, and persuade you to turn, or else you will travel
into utter destruction, and tell you that you are at the brink of Death, you
will not believe, but make light of it, until your Soul drops into Hell. I
beseech you therefore in time to avoid the path of death; let not the ease,
pleasure, and delights of it entice you any longer to walk in the danger of it;
set but the dreadful character before your eyes, and consider that the end of
your way is death; the Devil to deceive you, tells the worldlings that the way
to Heaven, and the walking in this path of the righteous is full of misery and
sorrow all your Life long, and hard to be endured; and so by these evils he
deceives the hearts of men; but do but understand what comfort the Saints
enjoy, and have more peace of conscience in a life of misery than the wicked
has in the greatest Felicity in the World; for there attends on earthly
^easuces everlasting sorrow, on honor abasement, on wealth and riches
attends poverty, in all things else that attends the wicked; for ^light is
altogether vanity and vexation of spirit. Solomon had the enjoyments of all
earthly pleasures that could be thought on, yet all pro^ed but vanity; then why
should we seek after that profits not; let us seek Heaven, and the
Righteousness of it, and all other things shall be added thereto. Fight the
good ^ight of Faith, and so lay hold on Eternal life. God is the only refuge of
the Righteous, and the greatest reward. The Righteous listens to tne call of
God; The sheep hears the voice of the Shepherd, they follow him, for they know
his voice, John 10.3. You worldlings, it is a sign you are none of the Sheep,
when you will not hearken to the voice of the Shepherd, when he calls you by
the mouth of his Ministers. How many hundred calls have you had from God, and
you return no answers from the appearance of your conversations; whose motives
are evil and actions unjust. Does not all the Sermons you hear every Sabbath
little prevail with you, and do they not all call upon you to turn; and do not
men labor to write hundreds of Books, suitable to convince the sins of the
wicked, and calls out for you to turn; and yet it appears you live in a life
most desperate, by your loose living, and ^less giving ear to the word of God,
and yo^ making light of Christ and Salvation with you readiness to hear and see
pastime and gameing or else some idle lusts or desires, which corru^ the
spiritual minds of men, and increases vi^ when the Apostle says, Lay aside
vain babl^ and use no foolish jesting, which are things o^ comely; but rather
be giving of thanks, wh^ becomes the Saints of God. Are not the with ready to
deride them that tells them of the things, as if it were not true Doctrine; O ^
alas, I could wish they would understand ^ word of the Lord, and give better
heed to ^ blessed word; draw nigh you sinners, to the present call from God, it
may be the last (...) you may have, it may be the last hour of your lives, make
a speedy turn therefore to the Lord for though you were sheep that were gone
astray, but now are turned to your shepherd and Bishop of your Souls, 1 Peter
1.25 Think it no lost labor to turn from the World unto God; for he will
receive you, if you quickly turn; yea, he will cloth you with royal robes of
Righteousness; he will seat you in the Glorious Throne of Heaven; you shall have
bread of Life to feed on, and the precious blood of Christ to drink on; if you
will but turn, you shall never hunger; and if you will believe on Christ, you
shall never thirst; nor you shall need no Candle, either light of the Sun, for
the Lord God, and ^e Lamb will be your light; yea, his Glory all light you, his
power defend you, and his ^vourable Arms embrace you; but if you will all
remain obstinate, and not turn, he will ^ing Judgment upon the wicked, as will
he (...) swift witness against South-sayers, drunkards ^dulterers,
false-swearers, and he that keeps ^ck the hireing from his wages, and vexes
the ^dow and fatherless, and oppresses the stranger, and fears not the Lord of
Hosts: O but in ^ime return unto me, and I will return unto you, says the
Lord. Mal. 3.7 For at that time a sinner returns from his sins from the bottom
of his Heart he shall have mercy, Ezekiel. 18.22. Not at what time soever, but at
that time when the door of mercy is not shut against Sinners, for if once the
Master is risen, and has shut the door, there is no entering; it is in vain to
knock or call, for if you will go on in sin, and never come to be acquainted
with God, in the time of youth, health, or prosperity, which is the onlie^t
time that God regards, and let your ^amps of Oil burn out, and suffer it to
be spent upon delight and pleasure, in the time of youth, health, and
prosperity; it will ^e dark finding of Christ, when the inward light is
darkened, and the Oil of the spirit quite wasted. God will not be found in
adversity, by those that seeks him not in prosperity; nor in sickness (...)
will not hear him, who denies his helps in (...) health. For the spirit of God
and Christ is li^ to a skilful Physician that knows your woun^ too deep, and
your disease most desperate, an^ that you are past recovery, or very dangerous*
for strong Physic is not fit for a weak soul; for the spirit of God is
powerful in its working (...) that creature whom he is pleased to appl^ it
(...) to; and therefore I beseech you to seek the Lord. Are you not yet stirred
up to the amendment of life, and cannot you spare a little time from your
worldly affairs to hear the Trumpet sounded in Sion, and calling to Repentance;
and to know the excellent joy of the righteous, and the damnable torments of
sinners; for says Job: The wicked is re^erved for the day of d^struction, They
shall be brought forth to the day of wrath; though here you have Pleasure,
Honor or Riches, yet for you is reserved Eternal Destruction, and though the
righteous are destitute of all Comfort, and suffer hunger and cold, or
adversity, yet they have prepared for them a Crown of Righteousness, which
shall be given them by the Righteous Judge at the last day, when the hearts of
all men shall be laid open, and their works good and bad shall be tried. O how
the wicked flourish in the world, and are pampered up with pleasure and
delight, like Dives in the Gospel, Luke 16.16. In what ^leasure did he live,
yet how was his heart hard^ed against distressed Lazarus: But Lazarus ^yeth and
is carried to Heaven by Angels; and ^he rich man dyed, and was carried by
Devils to (...) punished in the fiery flames of Hell Who can (...) this small
evidence lay open in full the mise^y of one, and the felicity of the other. Now
^ould the worldly man choose to be Lazarus, so he might enjoy with him the
felicity that he enjoyed. It cannot be laid open what joy the Lord has
prepared for them that love him. ^ow has the people of God suffered for the
sake of Christ, as for example: Moses chose rather affliction with the people
of God, than to be in favor with Kings, or to be seated in the Royal Court of
Pharaoh, Exodus 2.15. And Joseph fled from the hand of his Mistress, and threw
himself into Prison, rather than to commit Adultery with his Mistress, Genesis
39.20. And so all along has the people of God counted a miserable Life better
than a merry Life, for they are even enamoured with the worth of the felicity
in Heaven, for it far exceeds the misery on Earth. Jo^ counted his misery
nothing, nor the loss of all his earthly gains, the killing of his sons, and
the discomfort of his Wife, yet this could not make him forsake his God; and
the Apostle Paul counts the misery of this life but light in comparison to the
worth which should be revealed hereafter Sure such men as have undergone such
ha^ conflicts of misery for the sake of Christ will b^ swift Witness against
this Rebellious a^ untoward Generation; and thus all along h^ the people of God
undergone extreme mis^ in the World to this very day, while the wic^ rests
secure in ease, pomp and pleasure; free the highest to the lowest, they all
walk in (...) paths of vanity, and will be by no means call^ from this wretched
state of life; they think v^rily that God will carry them to Heaven in the^
pleasure; but I pray God he throws not suc^ misunderstanding wretches to
hellish flames i^ his displeasure, for he is a consuming fire, which will
devour the wicked, and reserve the infernal pit to burn both body and soul for
ever. (...) my Friends, that those things might convinc^ you; they are in your
ears but as warning-pieces to rattle you, which if you are not persuaded by,
will surely bring Gods Judgments on you, and will prove a severe
murthering-piece to your poor souls. Why do you think the Apostles and Prophets
before us has suffered such great conflicts of misery, and counted the
greatest joy but light in comparison to the World hereafter, because they are
fully persuaded, that the p^easure and enjoyment of Heaven, greatly exceeds the
miserable sorrows on Earth; for as the joy (...) one is finite, the felicity
and happiness of ^e other infinite, past all men's imagination; ^s no lost
labor to follow Christ, who suffer^ his own body to be pierced and ^is blood
to be ^lt for the Redemption of sinners; will he that (...) a Sinner, for whom
Christ dyed, think it hard (...) forsake the pleasures of this Life, the
desires (...) the flesh, and the vain delights and glory of the World. O esteem
this nothing to the worth I ^w set before you, and lay open the pierced ^des of
Christ, whose blood runs freely to sin^ers, and to the broken hearts that mourn
in Si^; consider I say how your sanctifier was pier^ed, who was buffeted, and
shamefully reproached, and barbarously Crucified, lay three days in the jaws of
Death, from whence he went to Glory, where he daily makes our peace to God the
Father, so that we will give Glory to his blessed Name; turn therefore out of
this cursed fate of life, work wickedness no more, but speak every one truth to
his neighbor, for he who makes a Lie, and works deceit, is abomination
before the Lord, and shall surely be destroyed. The Soul that sins ( says
God in Ezekiel. 18.20.) shall surely dye. The death of the soul is everlasting:
but God is not willing to leave your souls in Hell; as in the 21. verse, If the
wicked will but turn, and do that which is right before God, he shall not dye,
he shall surely live, nor his former sins once mentioned in his righteousnes^*
What a blessed expression is here, what a gen^ral act of oblivion is here, that
the Penite^ may have mercy. O you sinners of the wor^ if you would but Arm your
selves with faith, a^ come holdl^ to the Throne of Grace; and pl^ with the
Lord, thou house of Israel, so iniqu^ shall not be your ruin; yea, cast off
the wor^ of darkness, and put on the Armor of lig^ and create in your selves a
new heart, and (...) new spirit; For why will you dye, O house (...) Israel?
Romans 13 12. Ezekiel 18.31. Ca^ therefor one another to turn: for says St.
Paul, Romans 3.12. You are all gone out of the way, and altogether
unprofitable, whose Throat is an open Sepulcher, who uses their tongues to
deceit, and your mou^hs full of cursing and bitterness, with feet swift to shed
blood.

Destruction and calamities are in your ways, who ^ws not the way of peace, nor
no fear of God before your eyes. O cleanse your minds within (...), and make
preparation to entertain the Lord ^f life. What Royal entertainment is made for
^orporal Princes; you will make every Room clean (...) his Royal entertainment;
but how much ^reater is the King of Kings, who would feign (...) you make
preparation to entertain him, and cleanse and purify your hearts and minds,
for ^cept you be cleansed, you cannot receive the Holy Ghost? and Christ must
live in you, except you be Reprobates; but he lives with none that acts
wickedness; Be you therefore holy (...) Christ our Lord is holy, 1 Pet. 1.15.
And (...) no more to the state of the wicked, as a Dog returns to his Vomit; or
like a Hog to the wallowing in the mire, for your conversation is an
unexpressible joy to the Host of Heaven; for there is more joy in one sinners
returning, than ninety nine just persons that need no repentance, Luke 15.7.

O but mark the Sentence to those that return not, ^aith the Lord, Luke 13.27.
Depart ye cursed; you love the world, and the pleasures of it, more than God
and his Kingdom; but the World passes away, and that therein is, 1 John 2.17.
Choose rather misery with the righteous, than joy with the wicked, and pleasures
of sin for a moment. Heb. 11.2^ The rebuke of Christ is greater Riches tha^
Treasures of the World: Weep therefore (...) worldlings, and howl for your life
of pleasure, in wantonness have nourished your hearts to day of slaughter, Genesis
5.5. For behold the is coming, you shall burn as the stubble, and proud, and
all that does wickedly shall be (...) up, Mal. 4,1. For at the last day the
(...) will be revealed, whom the Lord will (...) with the brightness of his
coming, and all the deceiveableness of the wicked shall perish, beca^ they will
not receive the ove of the truth, (...) they might be saved, 1 Thessalonians. 1.8. O
what a dre^ful thing it is to refuse salvation where it (...) be had! how worse
than mad are the bewit^ men of the World, who might have Life Liberty, if they
would receive it, but (...) will not! they choose death rather than (...)
because their deeds are evil; I have spread (...) my hands all the day long to
a Rebellion people, says the Lord, which walks not in the ways that are good,
but in their own imagination, a people that provokes me to anger exceedingly
who blaspheme me to my face, (...) with fury and wrath will I recompense the
i^niquity into their bosoms. O that these Judgments might but waken you out of
sin and security, and open your eyes to behold the danger (...) walk in, whom
the God of this world blinds (...) you cannot discern the light of the Gospel
(...) shine upon you, 2 Cor. 4,4. From whence ^i^es contention, but through
your pleasures at fight in your members, you crave, yet not (...); ye ask by
Prayer, and receive not, be^se you ask amiss, that you might lay the same (...)
on your pleasures: O the amity of the world (...) enmity with God: Whosoever
therefore is a ^end to the World, is an enemy to God: let ^ur laughter be
turned into mourning, and your (...) into heaviness, and cast down your selves
to (...) Lord, and he will lift you up, James 4.6. By (...) time are some of
you resolved to turn, and (...) up your selves to know God, for except you
^ent, God will presently strike, he has where Sword, he has bent his Bow, and
is ready to shoot, he has prepared deadly weapons, (...) has ordained Arrows
to persente you, Psalm. 7,12. O make a speedy turn, and be reconciled to God,
and let this day be thy day of conversion: let this sound of Salvation enter
into the Closer of thine heart, and throw by all busy affairs, to hear of
Salvation in Sion, and the sinners Repentance: let go the world and the
pleasures and profits of it, and take hold of Christ, and let nothing hinder
you from hearing this blessed Call of the Lord. O that you would but give me a
serious hearing, and it cannot choose but work in your hearts for I come not to
dra^ you from obedience to God and his worship, (...) run not into so many
opinions, for fear G^ should cut you off like Lukewarm creature which if he
should, he would even spue you o^ of his mouth: pray ^ay and night I beseech
(...) that you may attain assurance of your salvation Gods promises are to the
penitent in heart, a humble and a broken heart God will not despise so you will
but come to amendment of Life stir therefore, and abide not a moment in the
state of the wicked, for the wicked are curse with curses, and the Plagues of
Hell attending them: Tell them, says God, three or four times of their sins,
but if they refuse your Admonition present them, and there shall be to them no
covering for sin, but a fearful looking for Judgment, and in their earthly
felicity these curses attend the Swearers, the Liars, the drunkards, the
murderers, the stealers, adulterers, inchanters, southsayers, and all other
wicked people, you shall be cursed, says God, Deuteronomy. 28.16. At some and abroad,
in your wealths and possessions, and all that thou set thy hand unto will
perish; the Lord will smite you with the pestilence, and desperate diseases,
and your very Carcass shall be meat for Fowls; you shall be struck with
blindness that you shall grope at noon day, as in the darksome night, and thou
(...) not prosper in that thou take in hand, (...) Calf shall be slain, thy
Goods shall be ^sed, and thy Children shall be given to other Nation, and the
Land wherein thou ^est, shall be plagued wonderfully, even with ^t Plagues, and
the Land shall burn with ^rimstone, like Sodom; then shall all Nations (...).
Why has God poured his wrath and ^rce indignation on this Land? who shall
an^er; Because they forsake the Law of the ^d, and walk in the indignation of
their ^n hearts, therefore will the Lord root out (...) wicked out of the Land
in his heavy displeasure. O how the wicked live to the ^orld, and not to God,
how they worship themselves, but not the Lord! O how full ^ mirth and pleasures
is their hearts, as if ^ey were purposely made for the World, their hands and
eyes they lift up, but not their hearts to the Lord; You confess me says God)
with your mouths, but your ^earts are far from me. O but in time lay ^part all
filthiness, and put far from you all maliciousness, and be doers of the word,
and not hearers only, lest you enter into Condemnation, James 1.22. Walk worthy
of God, that the knowledge of Christ may be increased in you, Col. 1.10. How
would this Nation be blessed, if the wicked would repent, as did Niniveh, who
lay in the dust, be wailing their tra^gressions: and they would be greatly
blessed home and abroad, whose wealth will multiply, (...) whose enemies would
fly like dust before the The Heavens shall give Rain in Season and the increase
shall multiply upon the earth, Deuteronomy. 28. God will exceedingly bless you, if you
will glorify his name in your Lives and Godly Conversations. O but alas you
are such, who profess you know God, but in works you deny him, an^ are
abominable and disobedient, and unto ever good work are Reprobates, Tit. 1.16.
For wh^ is reserved eternal destruction with Devils, h^ the Righteous shall
have all Tears wiped aw^ from their eyes, and called by the Lamb to sing Come
ye blessed inherit a Kingdom; to the wicked says God, Go you cursed inherit
destruction

And now I am coming to the end of my work my heart trembles to think how I
shall leav^ you; lest the devil, and the delights of the world, should deceive
you, for he continually watches to make you his Bond-slave, and to keep you in
Hell to all Eternity. O friends, let timely repentance prevent this eminent
danger: And let Christ dwell in your hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 2.17. O as I could
desire that same of you. Are you resolved to turn? O that I could but win one
Soul to Heaven this day: and I wish that he that hears me not preach this
Doctrine in my assembly, may he ready to cover after my Books ^t in Print; do
but read; or hear them read, you cannot choose but profit by them: let not that
which is good seem too dear for you* I have taken (...) pains to pen it in the
usual Volume, that all ^ight come to the price of it; but the worth that (...)
revealed, it cannot be bought for Gold nor Silver, for the price of Christ is
above Rubies.

And now I have done my work; what will be^me of it I cannot tell; I have
thrown out the ^e^ at Gods command but I cannot give thee increase. If you will
obey the call of God, you ^y have mercy, but I cannot entertain it for ^it; I
cannot show you Heaven or Hell by Eye^ght, but I herve showed you the joy and
sorrow ^t both; and I beseech the Lord to work in you what has been said, Heb.
13.20. And make you perfect in all works, working in you that which is pleasing
in his sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord; Amen.

FINIS.

