Proposals of a New Model for Rebuilding the City of LONDON, with Houses,
Streets and Wharfs, to be forthwith set out by His Majesty's and the City
Surveyors: With the Advantages that will accrue by the Building the same
accordingly, Viz.
I. The Owners satisfied for their Ground, the Builder for Building, and the
Poor Inhabitants their Losses by the Fire. II. The City built stately with
large Streets, the Houses not in Danger of Fire, and the Ground all put to the
best Profit. III. The People will walk easy and dry, the Houses-of-Office and
Streets kept sweet and clean; and Goods delivered much cheaper. IV. Convenient
Houses, Shops, Warehouses and Wharfs not dear. V. Advanced to His Majesty by
Fines 372670 l. VI. A Revenue for ever settled upon the Crown of per Ann.
223517 l. 10 s.
I. ONE Row of Buildings fronting toward the River of Thames from the Temple
to the Tower-Deck, to be built uniform with Stone or Brick; the Front,
Backside, and Partition-walls, at least one Brick and a half thick, from the
Bottom to the Top; the Cellars arched with Brick, or Stone, ten Foot high, and
fifteen Foot wide, with two Vaults before each Door in the Street, of the same
Bigness, and shall stand at least eighty Foot from the High Water Mark, and
shall be all thirty Foot in the Front, and twenty-five Foot deep, and four
Stories high, besides the Cellars and Roofs: The two first Stories ten Foot
high each, and the two uppermost Stories eight Foot high each; and there shall
be no Garden, Yard, or Backside, belonging to them; but shall have Houses built
after the same Manner close to the Backside of them, fronting toward the
North, with a Shore between every two Houses to the Thames; over which shall be
to each House (both on the Foreside and Backside) an House-of-Office, and a
Piazza of ten Foot wide, paved with free Stone for People to walk dry and easy
upon, with the Houses continued over it. The Signs and Sign-Posts to be of Iron
or Copper; and an open Newell of six Foot wide and twenty Foot long between
every four Houses, to give Light to their several Stair-Cases, in which their
Houses-of-Office shall be.

II. Two Streets of sixty Foot wide each: One from St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet to Tower Hill; and the other from Holborn-Bridge and Goldsmiths
Rents to Newgate; and then to Leaden-hall-street, with a Common-Sewer in the
Middle of each, of six Foot high and four Foot wide, with Houses and Piazzas on
both Sides built as before.

III. Twenty-two Streets of thirty Foot wide each, and each a Common-Sewer; ten
whereof shall go in Length from the Temple to Tower Hill, ten more whereof from
Fetter-lane or Goldsmiths Rents, to the Old-Bailey; and then toward Tower Hill
and Crutched-Friars; and the other two from Shoe-lane toward Bishopsgate
street; between every of which shall be built Houses after the same Manner,
with Piazzas on both Sides of five Foot wide, paved and built over as before.

IV. Six cross Streets of sixty Foot wide each, with each a Common-Sewer as
before, viz. One from Goldsmiths Rents by the Temple to the Thames; one from
Smithfield-down the Old Bailey to the Thames; one from Aldersgate to St. Paul's
Church, and then to Paul's Wharf; one from Cripplegate to Queenhith; one from
Moorgate to Dowgate-stairs; and one from Bishopsgate-street to London Bridge,
together with the Houses on both Sides of the Cut, to have Piazzas of ten Foot
wide built over as before.

V. Six other cross Streets of thirty Foot wide each, with each a Common-Sewer
as before: One leading from Shoe-lane to the Thames; one from Holborn-Conduit
to the Thames; one from Christ-Church by the West End of St. Paul's Church to
the Thames; one from the Middle of the Wall between Aldersgate and Cripplegate
to the Thames; one from the Middle of the Wall between Cripplegate and Moorgate
to the Thames; and one from the Postern-Gate in Moorfields to the Thames, with
Piazzas on both Sides of them, of five Foot wide, paved and built over as
before.

VI. A Cut of thirty Foot wide for the Thames to run in, and Barges to swim in
at High Water, leading from Billings-Gate up St. Mary-Hill to Fenchurch-street,
and so winding through Grace Church Street to Broad-street, and then down
Lothbury to Holborn-Bridge, and from Hockley in the Hole by Clerkenwell to
Bridewell-Dock, with Wharfs on both Sides of eighty Foot wide, (which Cut will
cost nothing digging, because that which comes out of it will be useful in the
Buildings). The Stone of all the Churches burnt, and the Bricks and Rubbish
lying upon the Ground (except St. Paul's, St. Bride's, St. Sepulchre's,
Christ-Church and Bow) to be pulled down, and taken toward making good the
Walls of the said Cut.

VII. The Owners of all the Ground to have their Proportions respectively set
out as near the Place where it was, as may be, and to be enjoined to let the
same to build at the Rate of 3 s. per Foot per Ann. for every Foot in the
Front, (which shall be twenty-five Foot deep) for ever.

VIII. The Builders to have eight per Cent. for ever, for all the Moneys they
shall lay out in Building, secured by a Rentcharge upon the House or Houses
they shall build.

IX. Each House in the Streets of sixty Foot wide, and by the Thames, to be
let for 70 l. Fine, and 70 l. per Ann. for twenty-one Years, (which will cost
but 250 l. a-piece building; and each in the Streets of thirty Foot wide, for
50 l. Fine, and 50 l. per Ann. for the like Time (which will cost but 200 l.
a-piece building) and not for more or less: Out of which the Ground-Rent shall
be first paid, which will be 4 l 10 s. for every House; next the Builder his 8
per Cent. which will be for some Houses 10 l. each, and for others 16 l. each;
and the Remainder which will be 45 l. 10 s. for some, and 29 l. 10 s. for
others, with all the Fines, shall be paid to the King, his Heirs, and
Successors, toward the Maintenance of his Forces by Sea and Land; out of which
shall be first paid, and satisfied, to every Person that has lost by the Fire,
such a Proportion as the Parliament shall think fit.

There will be in the Great Streets, and by the Thames, 891 Houses; In the
Lesser 6206, and 800 Wharfs, which will amount to per Ann. 223517 l. 10 s.
Besides the Ground-Rent and Builder s. And the Fines for the Houses and Wharfs
will amount to 372670 l.
20 Sept. 1666. VAL. KNIGHT.


