A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF The Right Honorable THE Lady GUILFORD,
Nov. 18. 1699.

By John Knight, D. D. Rector of Broughton, in Oxfordshire.

LONDON, Printed for George Thorp, Bookseller in Banbury, 1700.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord GUILFORD.
My Lord,
THE following Discourse is herewith humbly offered to your Lordship, in
Obedience to Your Commands. And though I cannot doubt of its Acceptance there,
where I have received so many Pledges of Respect; yet had I been left free,
this should have been the last Thing I would have chosen, by which to express
my Thankfulness, and my Duty.

The sad Solemnity being performed late in the Evening, I was obliged to drop
several Paragraphs, that I had prepared to speak, which are here supplied in
their proper Place.

As for the Defects which still remain, I can only ask Your Pardon, SIR, but
cannot remedy 'em.

I had neither Skill nor Colors, to draw so bright and Heavenly a Life; the
Piety and Devotion She daily practiced, gave Her such Perfections as were
easily Admired, but scarce possible to be described.

And now, my Lord, if instead of votive Tables to adorn Her Shrine, Your
Lordship shall preserve Her Memory, by imitating Her Example, You also shall be
kept by the Power of God, through Faith, unto Salvation; which is the Prayer of,

Right Honorable, Your Lordship's, in the Humblest and most Dutiful
Observance, John Knight.

NUMB. XXIII. Latter part of the 10th Verse. Let me dye the Death of the
Righteous, and let my last end be like his.
WHICH Words are the Sober and Pious Wish of a very impious, and otherwise very
profane Man; who, though out of a greedy Appetite after Gain, had sold himself to
work a most desperate piece of Wickedness, even to compass an Enchantment
against Jacob, and thereby ruin Israel, God's only Heritage, by Magic and
Sorcery; yet the Spirit of God so effectually overruled the Rage of the
Prophet, and the Malice of his Familiar, that he could not curse nor defy, but
altogether blessed them.

The King of Moab, whose Drudgery Balaam was to do, built his Altars to Baal,
the reigning Idol of that Age and Nation; at his Oracles the Prophet was to
consult, and from them receive his Commission, to go and curse Israel. And
after he had thus affronted God by sacrificing to the Devil, he was, one would
think, hopefully disposed, both to curse and to bewitch his People.

But observe the turn God gave to his wicked Enterprise, which will afford us
equal matter of Comfort and Amazement; the Devil had the Sacrifice, but God
gave the Answer, and the Oracle stood dumb, whilst the Angel of the Lord
pronounced the devoted People Blessed.

Wherefore surely there can be no mischievous Divination against Jacob, when
Jacob's God resolves to bless the Augury, and make the Magician his own
Prophet. And what could Balak or Satan do to vex Israel, when their God
proclaimed Peace to them, from the very Altars of Baal; turning the Magic
Circle into Holy Ground, and forcing that Tongue, of which the Devil had
possession, to declare his Goodness and Loving Kindness to his People? For
after many fruitless, though very desperate Attempts to curse that People, Balaam
perceived the Blessing was fatal, and the Decree of it irreversible, v. 20.
insomuch that he saw cause to wish himself embarked in their Bottom, that their
final Lot might be his own; Let me dye the Death of the Righteous, etc.

From which Words, and the Occasion of them, were it suitable to that Occasion
on which we are now assembled, I could advance, and prosecute several very
grave, and important Observations; As,

1. Obs. That to be established in the Divine Favor, as the Lord's Peculiar,
is certainly the safest, and most honorable Condition of Being, even in this
Life. For in this instance, under our present Consideration, you see neither
Men nor Devils can annoy those whom God undertakes to vindicate and uphold.

It Is all impotent Malice that sets upon any Opposition to them. However they
are threatened, or how desperately soever they are exposed, how bold soever
their Enemies may be; though they show it first in defying God, which bespeaks
the utmost, even an hellish Rage; yet so obstinate is the Defense, and so
secure the Shelter which God's People have under his Protection, that the very
Messengers of Satan, employed to buffet them, shall find their Powers
controlled, their Artillery turned upon themselves, and the Holy Spirit will
cast out Satan; the mad Diviner shall revolt, and become the Lord's Prophet, to
pronounce that People blessed, whom he took Fees to curse.

2. Obs. The prevailing Force and Evidence of Divine Truths, which profane or
Atheistical Wits, either question or deny: Those Articles, upon the belief of
which God has established his own Worship, and thence challenges our Reverence
and Adoration, however they are exploded by the Lusts of Infidels, the Wit of
Atheists, or the Malice of Devils, will one time or other be effectually pressed
home, to the Conviction of those that scoff at them.

For see here, how unlikely a Man was Balaam to say any thing in Honor of the
true God, or to assert the peculiar Prerogative of his Providence in the
Government of the World; who was himself fallen into the grossest Idolatry,
giving Divine Honors to the Devil, and in his Name, and by his Power
attempting to bring the utmost Reproach upon the Name, and upon the Church of
God. And yet you see the profane Wretch could not peaceably dye in his
Impiety; though it is to be feared he did dye in it; but renouncing his Magic, he
betakes himself to his Prayers, and despising his own Idol; when he consulted
his own Happiness on that Occasion, he gave Glory to God, though he had so lately
sold, and devoted himself to celebrate and establish the Worship of a damned
Idol.

3. Obs. The commanding Influence, and awful Majesty there is in a virtuous and
holy Life. Its avowed Enemies, in their sober moods, and if ever they reflect,
do constantly commend its side. The King of Moab's Treasury, with all the
Riches in it, Balaam thought too mean to purchase the Reputation, or the
Happiness that attends a Righteous and a good Man; nor now especially, when he
took the prospect of Death and Judgment, could it calm the Tempest of his
amazed Conscience.

To die the death of Kings, or Statesmen, was too stupid a wish even for such a
Man as Balaam. And this, without that other Cognizance and Qualification, which
Piety and Holiness, and Devotion to the true God gives a Man, is to dye
wretched and contemptible, full of Horrors or void of sense: That is, a man
must at the Apprehensions of his last End, look either like a Beast or a Devil,
though he were a great Prince, and had acquired the Reputation of being never so
wise or powerful, rich or learned.

4. Obs. From this early Instance of Heathenish Idolatry and Profaneness, we
may observe, and bewail the desperate Degeneracy of the Age we live in; in that
the very same Abomination should be set up and practiced so commonly as they
say it is among the inferior sort of People, especially in such a Church, and
such a Nation as this! That after Men have given up their Names to Christ, been
initiated his Disciples by a solemn instituted Rite of his most Holy Religion;
after they have made an open Renunciation of God's Enemies, and their own, and
devoted themselves the entire Servants of God and Christ, and engaged
themselves in a Covenant to live and dye so; a Covenant that establishes their
Title to such blessed Privileges, as the very Angels admire, and which were
purchased for us at no less a Price than the Life of God! In a word, that after
all the clear and gracious Declarations of God's Mind and Will in this
Particular, so many poor Souls, whom Christ died to save, should revolt from
the Captain of their Salvation, refuse their own Mercies, and undo themselves
for ever, by running greedily after the Error of this very Balaam, for Reward,
as St. Jude expresses it; this, I say, to any serious Man, must occasion but a
Melancholic Entertainment. The People I mean, are those poor deluded Wretches,
who fly to Wizards and Diviners, such as they call Cunning Men, for the redress
of any providential Evil or Disaster, under which they suffer.

Now foreseeing that People of this Size would throng in, to make up the
biggest part of this great Assembly, I was loath, upon so proper an Argument as
I have in hand, and on so grave an Occasion as this, to slip the Advantage of
dropping so serious and seasonable an Admonition.

These poor Creatures it seems, in any manner of Distress, very ordinarily,
with Saul apply themselves to Witches and Enchantments for Relief. And can
there be a sadder Story told than this, that professed Christians should be given
up to such a reprobate Sense, as to take the Devil for Familiar, and by the
most damnable Apostasy, pay their Devotion there, where they have been taught
to expect their everlasting Torments!

For to apply our selves to the use of such means as Charms and Enchantments,
upon any occasion whatsoever, is an Atheistical Disclaimer of our Dependence
upon God's Providence, and the most provoking Affront that can be offered to
his Person.

Will it be said, (as I have heard it said in their Excuse,) that they use
these means with an harmless intent, yea with a religious Trust in God, that he
will bless them, to their Relief?

But this is worse than to lie for God; this is to pretend to own him, in an
Instance wherein they do in Fact renounce him. This may be called the Religion
of Atheism, for it is affronting God with Solemnity, and denying him with
Devotion. Besides it is so ridiculous a Conceit, that the erecting an odd
Figure, and a parcel of senseless Giberish, should raise a sinking Pulse,
repair the Decays of Nature, or bring back lost Goods, except it be by the
Power of the Devil; That God has in Mercy left us, in this Balaam's Story, a
demonstrative Argument, not only of the impious Profaneness of it, but of its
stupid Folly, by opening the Mouth of a contemptible Ass, to rebuke the Madness
of the great Magician.

And now let us behold him, as he stands thus suitably corrected, and we shall
see this very Man in a much better mood; and yielding himself up to be acted by
a more powerful and purer Spirit, he becomes a Preacher of that very Faith,
which he had so lately persecuted, even a Preacher of Righteousness and the
Resurrection. I dare not be positive, that Balaam, though so eminent a Prophet,
had an express Revelation made to him of this Doctrine; for it is probable, if
not certain, that many of the Prophets were made use of to predict such future
Events, as they themselves did not perfectly and clearly apprehend. Though, if it
be as just an Observation as it seems to be a judicious one, which Monsieur
Alix has made (in his Reflections on the four last Books of Moses, Cap. XI.) on
Balaam's Prophecy, viz. That in it he makes a very distinct mention of the
future Calling of the Gentiles to the Faith, Numb. 24.17. (Now I say, if so) it
may be as easy to allow him to have a Foresight and Belief of the
Resurrection; this being the great Article of that Faith to which the Gentiles
were called by the Servants of the Messiah, in their Preaching of the Gospel.
But let that be as it will, it is certain Balaam had the knowledge and belief of
a state of Immortality, and of future Rewards and Punishments; and so much has
been generally acknowledged by the Learned Fathers and Doctors of the Christian
Church, to be his Intention and meaning in these Words of my Text; it being the
Foresight of this, that urged him to such a (...), in crying out, Let me dye,
etc. But farther, this is certain, if we may believe Diogenes Laertius, (Lib.
1. de Vit. Philos.) there were several of the Eastern Magi, among whom Balaam
is generally reckoned one, that taught this express Doctrine, that Men after
Death should return back to Life, and be Immortal; and this he publishes to the
World, upon the Authority of Theopompus, who was one of them, and who says in
the Eighth of his Philippics, this Doctrine is juxta Magorum Sententiam; the
same is supported by the Authorities of Rhodius and Eudemus. But though these
Testimonies were rejected, yet in the subsequent Context, this Prophet, is by
almost all that believe the Divine Revelations, understood to prophecy very
clearly of Christ, and the Kingdom of the Messiah. He says of Christ that he
shall have the Dominion, Chap. 24. v. 19. But we know that his Resurrection was
the first glorious Manifestation of his Royal Power, in his Conquest over Death
and Hell. And in this state why might not Balaam behold him, especially after
he knew the Knowledge of the most High, and had seen the Vision of the
Almighty, upon which he declared, I shall see him, but not now, v. 17. But to
dispute for the Prophet's meaning no longer, be it what it will, sure I am,
that the last end of the Righteous cannot be by us understood, to mean any
thing short of the Resurrection: For the Death of the righteous and the wicked,
by the best Judgment we can make, is often so little preferrable one to the
other, that there can be no sense in our wishing rather for that than this,
unless upon the steady Conviction and Belief of their rising again to an
Immortal Life.

And now I am come to treat of the Text, as in a true, so in a sense very
suitable to the sad Occasion, on which we are now met.

For what so proper to allay our Sorrows for the Death of our Friends, or to
prompt us to all serious Preparations to follow them, as to be told, at their
Interment, that the Body we commit to the Dust shall again be quickened, though
it perish there; and though sown in Dishonor, yet not without hopes it shall be
raised in Glory. Wherefore in pursuit of the utmost intention of the Words, the
Altior Sensus, and Mysticus, as Grotius speaks, I shall hold my self
accountable for this twofold Undertaking.

I. I shall show the Doctrine of the Resurrection has not been only anciently
and generally believed, but the Reason of it, which makes it necessary; and
therefore not without absurdity to be denied.

II. The Article being proved, I shall show for what singular Reasons the last
end of the Righteous is incomparably most desirable; so that it will be our
Wisdom not only to wish it may be our own, but also seriously to endeavor it.

I. As for the Doctrine of the Resurrection, we may the less wonder it has been
so generally received, it being an Article of so vast moment to be believed,
that Theophylact fears not to call it, (...), the Capital Article of our Faith.
And a greater than he says, If it be not true, our Faith, i. e. our Religion,
is good for nothing; it is a Scheme of Vanity, 1 Cor. 15. Nay St. Paul esteemed
it so considerable, that, as if the whole of our Religion was contained in it,
he calls it ( v. 1. of that Chap.) the Gospel. Yea, we will absolve the whole
Rabble of Deists, Atheists, Skeptics, and Apostates, from all their Blasphemy
and Scurrility, and say with them, our Religion is an Imposture, and its holy
Author a Cheat, if with any tolerable Sense, or show of Reason, the Truth of it
can be questioned.

Wherefore, to be as clear and quick as may be, in the dispatch of this Head, I
will

1. Evince the Truth of our Savior's Resurrection. And,

2. Then show the necessary Connection there is betwixt his and ours, i. e.
Because he is risen, we shall also infallibly be raised from the dead.

1. My business is to prove that Christ is risen. And if there had not been one
Witness of it in the World, the Prophecies that foretold it would have been
infinite Satisfaction to every Man, that had but Balaam's modesty to believe,
that God is not a Man that he should lie, v. 19.

The Spirit of Prophecy is that undeniable Testimony to Jesus and his
Resurrection, that to all Men that can believe the Truth or the Power of God,
it is and has been always esteemed beyond any sort of Proof or Evidence
whatsoever.

So strong an Argument of the Event are all the Predictions of the Holy Ghost,
that things are therefore said in Scripture to be done, because they are
foretold. Were there then any Prophecies to this purpose, which Holy Men of old
spoke, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost? This is so certain, that our
Savior ventured the whole Credit of the Fact, rather upon this, than upon any
other Testimonies; insomuch that he told the Jews, if they did not believe
Moses's Writings, neither would they believe, though one rose from the dead. And
this method of Proof he took to persuade his own Disciples: Though these Men had
seen him often, and had converst with him, though they had eat and drank, walked
and discourst with him, and were hereby in no manner of doubt concerning the
Truth of his being risen, (except Thomas, for whose satisfaction he exposed his
Wounds to be searched and handled by him) yet notwithstanding all this, he urges
what had been prophesied of his Resurrection, to give them the greatest
Assurance of it, and confirms their Faith by a surer Evidence, for then opened
he their Understandings, that they might understand the Scriptures, saying,
thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the
Dead. Luke 24.45, 46.

The same Argument St. Peter, though he was himself an Eyewitness, urged as
the chiefest Evidence of the reality of the Miracle, and as the chiefest
support of their Faith in it, 2 Pet. 1.17, and seq. They were these Predictions
that made him as well the Expectation as the Desire of all Ages.

Yea, it was after all so plainly foretold by our Savior himself, and the
Impression of his Prediction wrought with such Force upon the Minds of his
Enemies, that his very Murderers did expect it; it being from hence they were
prompted to guard his Tomb; which by the unsearchable Wisdom of God was the
occasion to these Wretches, of such further Evidence, that they were at Charges
to stifle what they therefore wanted the Impudence to deny: For next to the
Angels, the Guards that were hired to keep him Prisoner in the Grave, were some
of the first Evangelists to publish the Truth of his Resurrection, Mat. 28.11.
So that upon their Report, the Chief Priests and Elders were confirmed in their
Belief on it.

And how impossible must it have been for those Infidels to hold out in the
real Disbelief of it, when they had observed the ancient Prophecies were
verified in him, with respect to some of the minutest Circumstances and
Transactions of his Life; yea when they had seen several Persons, whom they had
known truly dead, were restored to Life by him; and one particularly, Lazarus
by Name, not only dead but rotten.

Now was it likely, or could they imagine, that he that had given such Evidence
of his Almighty Power, and so openly displayed his Conquests over the Grave,
was liable himself to be held Captive by the Enemy he had vanquished?

Upon the whole then, if Christ, as you have heard, laid the greatest weight
upon, and chiefly appealed unto the ancient Prophecies that foretold his
Resurrection, our modern Atheists and Infidels have nothing to do, but to
examine whether there are any Prophecies extant of such a Date. And if they find
any such, they must in spite of their Teeth confess, that the Accomplishment
of them is an immovable Testimony to the Foreknowledge and Wisdom, to the
infinite Power and Truth of God.

Again, that what was thus prophesied of Christ, and particularly of his
Resurrection, has accordingly been fulfilled. This God himself has born such
undeniable Witness unto, both with Signs and Wonders, and diverse Miracles, and
gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own Will, as the Apostle speaks, Heb.
2.4. that the Infidel has not the least color of Pretense to dispute its
Evidence. Insomuch that his Wit and Malice is quite exhausted upon the
Argument. And except we will admit of Scoffs for Objections, and Grimaces for
Confutations, the poor Atheist and his Cause are ruined; for whatever Reasons
he brings to weaken or subvert the Credit of this Doctrine, or of them that
have testified to the Truth of it, will equally affect his own Credit, though
what he affirms be really never so true, and though it were infinitely his
Interest that it obtained Belief.

Wherefore all that I shall here further add upon this Argument is, That upon
the Credit of those Prophecies that foretold the Resurrection, and those
Eyewitnesses that saw Christ risen, it was generally believed by almost all
Nations, and all sorts of men; by the Patriarchs and Magi, by Jews and
Gentiles, by Philosophers of all Sects, yea by Judas that betrayed him, by the
Judges that condemned him, and by the Executioner that dispatched him; for when
he, the Centurion, i. e. the Heathen Officer who had the care of his Execution,
saw what was done, he feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God.
Matt. 27.54. For he that was seen and felt to exercise such a power, that put
the Earth into Convulsions whilst he was dying upon the Cross, left no room in
any Infidel to doubt after that, but he could also rend the Prison of the
Grave, as he did by a second Earthquake at his powerful Resurrection.

Thus did he, that suffered for our Sins, to show the efficacy of that
Atonement, rise again for the Justification both of it and us; which makes our
assurance of our Resurrection equal to that of his; and that if we believe he
is risen, with the same certainty are we to believe that we shall: For if there
be no Resurrection of the Dead, then neither is Christ risen, as St. Paul
argues 1 Cor. 15. Which brings me to my second Particular to be proved, viz.
The necessary Connection between his and ours.

Christ is the head of that Body, of which we are said to be members, and by
his Resurrection he has begotten us to a lively hope of our own; for if the
Spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the Dead, dwell in you; he that raised
up Christ from the Dead, shall also quicken your mortal Bodies, by his Spirit
that dwells in you. Romans 8.11. So that if Death had no more power over him,
who took upon him to expiate for our Sins, which brought the punishment of
Death upon us, (for Death was the consequent of our sinning, not the fate of
our Nature) it must needs follow, that it can have no more power over us;
otherwise our Punishment would remain after our Guilt is taken off, which
cannot be said, without robbing God of the Attribute of his Justice, as well as
Christ of the Merits of his Cross. Wherefore as by the first Adam came Death,
by the second came also the Resurrection of the Dead.

In short, as I have above proved, that the most undoubted Argument of Christ's
Resurrection, were the Prophecies that foretold it; so have we the like
assurance from the Declarations of God's Will concerning ours too: And if there
be no doubt of God's Power, but that he is able, there can be none of his
purpose in this matter, since he has assured us, that he will; and therefore we
have now nothing to do, but to believe it necessary. Wherefore marvel not at
this, for the hour comes, in which all that are in the Grave shall hear his
voice, and come forth; they that have done good unto the Resurrection of Life,
and they that have done evil unto the Resurrection of Damnation. John 5.28, 29.
We may have leave, and it is indeed our duty, to admire and adore the grace and
efficacy of such an Operation, but it is unpardonable to wonder so, as to
suspect the certainty. We may devoutly admire, that Bodies so frail as ours
should become subjects of Immortality: And to hear how the Almighty Potter
designs to form such lumps of Clay into everlasting Vessels of honor, is, one
would think, enough to persuade us in the mean time, to reverence our Bodies
more, than to defile them by sensuality, to oppress them by Intemperance, and
ruin them for a Lust. Once more, It justly may and ought to raise our wonder
and devotion both, to be told, That it is by his Power and Goodness we shall be
rescued from the Grave, who was himself by our inhumane Malice sent thither. Is
he to come and fetch us from the Grave, who comes with Garments dyed in his own
Blood, and so brings with him the Remembrances of our Cruelty? It is so; and
therefore, as I said, though we are forbid to marvel so as to distrust the
faithfulness of his Promise, or the omnipotence of his Power, yet not to be
affected with all astonishment and devotion at the consideration of it, might
be esteemed another Miracle.

And thus have I endeavored, with competent satisfaction I hope, the discharge
of my first task, viz. the proof of this great Article of our Faith; though
considering there are still some Atheistical Gainsayers, that except against
the Article and the Proof of it, I must be obliged to pay some deference to
them, especially since they distinguish themselves by their Numbers, and by
their Wit, by their polite Manners, and politer Learning: Nay they say these
Heathens boast the Reverse of Tertullian's Apology for the Christians, and tell
us, that they fill our Courts, our Camps, and our chiefest Cities; But what
occasion soever there is for so impudent a Vapor, let those that are most
concerned in the reproach on it look to it; mean while I return to what these
Gentlemen except against.

And, 1. They tell us, that this Doctrine was never generally received, but men
of the acutest wit and deepest judgment always opposed it, and even as early as
it was publicly attempted to be imposed upon their credulity. Among the
Greeks, the Epicureans and Stoics derided it, and among the Jews the Saducees
obstinately denied it, as appears 1 Cor. 15. and Acts 17.18.

Ans. True this is, and let our Infidels make the most on it: And after all it
will appear, that they were but some among the Corinthians, i. e. some odd
inconsiderable Folk; a despicable Sect among the Jews, but of late date, and
short continuance, whom the Learned Historian, of their own Age and Nation,
describes as very contemptible for their Numbers and their Manners. So also in
the other Instance, they were not all the Schools of Athens, but certain of the
Epicureans and Stoics; as if not all these neither. But whoever reads Epicurus
their Master's Epistle to Herodotus, [apud Diog. Laert.] will not wonder his
Scholars and Successors should affirm any thing absurdly, or deny what may be
evidently proved true; since he there asserts the Infinity of Bodies, and calls
it Dotage to assert the Soul incorporeal; which Pythagoras, a greater than he,
and his Predecessor in the same School, very rationally affirmed. So that these
Exceptions rather confirm the Doctrine, than make any valuable Objection
against it.

And indeed of extraordinary use they proved in his Almighty Hand, who can
bring Light out of Darkness; for it was through the senseless Incredulity and
Pertness of these few Men, that the Arguments were multiplied in defense of the
Doctrine, 'till it became established so, as to be impossible to shake it.

For though the Corinthians Infidelity was occasioned by a foolish Enquiry into
the manner how the dead were raised? And with what Body do they come? Yet the
acute Argument the Apostle brought to satisfy those Fools, and to solve the
mysterious Phenomenon so far, as to take off all pretense of Absurdity, in
affirming it of the same Body, is infinitely more rational than their strongest
Exceptions. For he illustrates it by Grain, which he says is not quickened
except it dye; and by dying it is quickened, even the very same Grain. For it is
generally now acknowledged, that the Seeds of Plants do contain every
individual part of the entire Bodies, in parvo, which spring from them, and
that the Generation of more Seed, is nothing else but the Nutrition or
Augmentation of the parts of the very same Seed.

And for this reason, the Apostle speaking of Seed-corn, uses such Words as are
proper to our Bodies, that they dye, and are quickened; and of our Bodies he
speaks in a Style more proper unto Seeds, that they are sown; to show, says
Theophil. the parallel Identity in the Resurrection of Both. And after this
curious Solution of the difficulty, as a Philosophical Enquiry, he would not
indulge these Men in the least Thought, as if there were not ineffable Mystery
in the Resurrection, for he tells them it is a Mystery, but he has showed it not
unreasonable; but a Mystery it must remain after all that can be said, since
this corruptible puts on Incorruption, and this mortal Immortality. And this
St. Paul, after he had been rapt up into Heaven, could neither express nor
explain, but tells us, it cannot be understood, nor can it enter into the Heart
of Man to conceive.

I hasten now to take notice of one Objection, which the Adversary brings,
directly to confront my chiefest Argument, by which I would establish the
Article of the Resurrection, which was by the Authority of the sacred Canon,
and the Prophecies of inspired Penmen.

Obj. And it is objected, upon the Authority of the wisest of Men, that that
which befalls the Sons of Men, befalls Beasts; as the one dies, so dies the
other; yea, they have all one Breath, so that a Man has no preeminence above a
Beast, Eccles. 3.19. And upon the Authority of David, a Man as eminent for
Piety, as Solomon his Son for Wisdom, we are assured the Article is plainly
given up, for he in his very Devotions to his God (and sure he was in earnest
then) says, that after Death he was to be no more, Ps. 39.13.

Ans. Now whatever real weight there is in this Objection, it is certain, they
that offer it lay none upon it, but despise it. For the Deists, whose it is,
(we must no more call them Atheists, because they profess to believe a God)
though they own the Being of a God, yet desire to be excused the believing any
thing he says. And therefore you must know, when they read the Scriptures, it is
only to learn how to make Speeches in their Disgrace, and blaspheme God in the
Words of his own Mouth. However somewhat must be said to it, and since the
reconciling any one of these Texts, will take off the force of both, I shall
therefore attempt it upon the last, as that which in its sound, and form of the
Expression, does more literally and directly import a denial of Man's
Immortality, and consequently of his Resurrection.

But the most ignorant will easily perceive this could not be David's Meaning,
that after Death he was to be no more, when they are showed the scope of his
Prayer; for though he was an extraordinary Man, and had labored hard to recover
the Favor of God, which by his former Sins he had so desperately hazarded, yet
he knew it was so infinite an Interest he had to secure, that he could never do
too much for it; and now being apprehensive his Life was in danger by the
Violence of his prosperous Enemies, as well as by the frailty of his
Constitution, he earnestly prayed that God would please some way or other to
discover to him the Period of his Days, that he might make suitable
Preparations for such a change; and since after this Life is finished, all our
holy Travels are so too, and nothing can be done for Heaven on the other side
the Grave; he begs for a little more time and strengh, that he might do God
more, and more acceptable Service, before he went hence, and should do no more.
And this was evidently the direct Meaning and Scope of his Supplication. For
that this wise and great King should desire further to spin out this weary
Life, which he had so long experimented to be so full of Sorrows, and more,
that he should pray for more time to spend in Holy Mortifications, and the
Labors of Religion; in recommending himself to the Divine Favor, by more
signal Acts of Faith and Patience, of Obedience and Submission, and yet expect
that after Death he was to be no more; this is so unlikely, that it is hard to
charge him with any thing more absurd. For the Labors of Religion are many of
them so contrary to the ease and happiness of this Life, that it is impossible
to attempt them, but upon the strongest assurances and expectations of another.

Indeed, if David had only aimed at the enlarging of his Conquests, or designed
to pass his days in ease and sloth, had he intended to make his Life a Scene of
costly Pleasures, and to have distinguished himself by an indulgence to mighty
Lusts, sacrificing the Blood and Purses of his subjects to his excessive Riots,
there had been some sense in desiring a long Life, and a brisker health, upon
the supposition, that after Death he was to be no more; but since he prayed for
more Strength, only to Minister to his more vigorous Devotions, and to enable
him to sustain the painful Travels of Repentance, and a severe Virtue; it is
certain he proceeded herein upon the full persuasion and hopes of a better
Life. But enough of this; for the literal meaning of the words without doubt is
embraced at any time by these men, as agreeable rather to their lustful wishes,
than to the sober Sentiments of their minds. I say the sober Sentiments of
their Minds: For even these men I must believe are seldom so far hardened and
debauched, but that they have their Intervals of Recollection, and in this
season to my knowledge, whatever is the occasion, they will frankly profess,
they would willingly exchange their hopes for their fears, and they would give
up their expectancies of any Inheritance among the Saints, if they could but be
assured, they should have their Portion among Dogs. i. e. They would not care
for the Felicities, provided they could escape the Immortal Miseries of the
other Life.

Now these misgiving thoughts are strong presages even to themselves, that
after Death they shall not cease to be. But this vile Epicure that cries, let
us eat and drink, for to morrow we die, is emboldened to make such a profession
over his Wine only, and whilst he is enslaved to the Pleasures of the Palate;
though when that Beast is disciplined into a distaste of his luscious
Entertainments, and is made by adversity to consider, that his Life is more
than Food, and his Belly infinitely less and inferior to his God, he will
scarce fail then, if not to believe, yet to fear and tremble at the
apprehensions of another Life. It Is a prodigious Atheist, that can hold out for
ever remorseless and unshaken: Though they say these men have their Dypticks too,
in which there are enrolled all the famous instances of unrelenting Atheists,
which are carefully Preserved to encourage the weak, and to inspirit those that
are in Danger, by the infinite arts and methods of the Holy Ghost's operating
upon their Souls, to revolt back to God: And considering the Power of God's
wrath, we cannot well question, but these Sinners against their Souls, may be
delivered up to so Reprobate a sense. But however, if these wretches have ever
any Workings of mind, any Snubs of Conscience, any Spiritual Terrors, any
waking Frights, or Ghastly Dreams like other men, these having often no manner
of Relation to, nor dependence upon the Body, are insuperable convictions, that
the Soul is an Immaterial Being, and that as it can act thus independantly upon
the Body, so it is the extremest absurdity to believe it shall die with it.

But whatever such Scoffers may believe concerning the Soul's Immortality, or
the Body's Resurrection, sure I am, the Persons concerned in this Solemnity
must in all good sense be granted to believe it. These expensive Funerals
bespeak our Faith, that this dead Body shall arise. For it was smartly urged by
Tertullian against some Heathens that believed it not, that their cost was vain
which with a Ridiculous profuseness they laid out upon their Dead, because they
had no hopes they should again Live. Alas! If we thought these poor Remains
were never to be used more, it were more Reasonable we left them with more
neglect. But since we know they shall be called for by the Trump of God, and
hope they will become Vessels of Immortal Honor, it is now Piety and Duty in us
to lay them decently and safely up, and our Faith concerning their Resurrection
is a solid Argument to justify our doing so. And if any Judas, upon observing
the Pomp of this Solemnity, should ask to what purpose is this waste? Our
Savior's answer will be our best reply, That what is done is done for the
Burial, and as a Pious Testimony of our Faith, that the Dead Body shall arise.

Upon the supposition of which, I proceed,

II. Lastly, To show for what singular Reasons the last end of the Righteous is
incomparably most desirable; so that it will be our Wisdom, not only to wish
it may be our own, but in the mean time seriously to endeavor it may be so.

Precious, says the Psalmist, Ps. 116.15. in the sight of the Lord is the Death
of his Saints; and in all Senses of the Words (they having more Interpretations
than one) it is true that good Men are very dear to God; and with a peculiar
distinction from the wicked and profane, it is evident at the Death of both.
For,

1. Death to the Righteous comes stripped of all its Spiritual Horrors. Though it
may assault his fleshly Nature with Swoons and Agonies, every step it advances,
yet the Tranquillity of his mind is still the same, and the consolations of his
Spirit do often appear Superior in the conflict, though the anguish of the Body
be never so extreme.

But turn now your eyes upon a poor Creature that has been brought up
delicately, and by the uninterrupted enjoyment of sensual pleasures, has rockt
his conscience 'till this moment dead asleep; when the Harbingers of Death of a
sudden draw back the curtains, and she awakes, with what distraction does it
view it self! But then to look upwards, and behold his God, whom he wished an
Idol, appearing in all the terrible Array of an Omnipotent Avenger, when the
amazed wretch that would never believe it was a God that dyed to save him,
begins to apprehend himself was the Murderer that spilt his Blood; we need not
wonder at the fright He is in upon such a prospect; and sure he can tell you,
there is a vast difference, in the last end, between the Righteous and the
Wicked. For,

2. When the Righteous dye there is a full end of all their Troubles: Death is
their last Enemy, and he disarmed, that he can sting no more. But to wicked and
Impenitent Sinners, except the Truth of God can fail for ever, this Death will
begin their endless miseries. The present Life is to the most faithful Servants
of Christ, for the most part, a state of hardship, for it is a perpetual
warfare. They have innumerable Enemies, and these for the most part in
ambuscade: The snares that are laid for them, often give them falls, and then
the Bruise is long a Curing, and the Operation of the Medicine painful and
afflictive. And St. Cyprian makes such a moving description of this matter,
that he wonders how any pious Soul can forbear longing for Death, or refrain
running into Martyrdom. And St. Jerome, in an Epistle to the Roman Lady
Paulina, comforting her for the Death of her Daughter, tells her, this World is
only a troubled Sea; yea though it were never so calm, yet the breadth and length
of the Waters on which we float here is frightful, so that, Solus exitus est
securitatis portus, we must quit the Stage, if ever we would be free from the
Apprehensions of the Tragedy.

Accordingly Death does certainly put a Period to all these Troubles, and more,
it translates all good Men to such a state of pure unmingled Joys, where there
are no sorrows to embitter, no melancholy to Eclipse, nor any Temptation can
come, to molest them in, or deceive them of their Joys. And,

3. Lastly, There is no comparison between the end of these two sorts of Men,
in another Respect still, viz. of that honorable memory that is preserved
after Death of the one, whilst Stench, not Perfume, gives the other a
Remembrance; who would immediately be forgotten, were it not for what is
registered to their Infamy and disgrace.

Whereas a good Man's Character, like a true Medal, acquires value and
veneration by its Age. His name has the Influence of a Law, upon those that
come after him, and his Example is a Rule, which all Wise Men will obey and
imitate. Yea those that will not do so, will yet pay a deference to it, and
wish they could; and I believe there are few in the world, as corrupt as it is,
but will own, when they are in earnest, that they had rather be Job upon the
Dunghill than Alexander the Great.

So that if we consider the confidence, wherewith Holy Men are encouraged to
expect Death, or the Alacrity wherewith they undergo it, or the Happiness they
are let into by passing through it, or the Honor and Veneration wherewith
their names are embalmed after it, we see sufficient reason to justify
Balaam's wish, and to prompt us to the utmost endeavor, in preparing to dye
the death of the Righteous, and that our last end be like his.

And now what if I should say, that what was this wicked Man's fruitless wish,
was this excellent Lady's Wisdom providently to secure.

I know, and therefore dare appeal to all that knew her, that She was very
early so wise as seriously to consiher latter end; following his Example, who
was her great Master, to Instruct her in the Art of Devotion; and as he did, so
did She carry her Soul continually in her hand, as well to observe its Dangers,
as to be in constant readiness to resign it; for I scarce ever remember to have
converst with her, but first or last She made that Subject part of the
entertainment. And sure; what was so frequently her grave discourse, could not
be seldom her Solemn Meditation. And I have been told, by such as had the most
opportunities to observe her, That, as early as She could understand or learn
any thing, She showed an Inclination to covet the knowledge of the best things.

The care of her Parents in her Virtuous Education, She so ingeniously
requited, by such an uniform and Dutiful observance of them from her Childhood
to her Marriage, that I heard her once very seriously justified by one of them,
in these express words; That through her whole Lifetime She had scarce done any
thing to offend them. And from so steady a Piety shown to her Earthly Parents,
She made her Assent easy to that elevated Devotion, wherewith She discharged
her Duty to her Father which is in Heaven.

Those Books, which some People make all their Study, She would never be
tempted to make her Recreation. Her taste was adapted only to solid Truth, She
had no relish of Romantic Vanity.

She had the Felicity of a severe Temper, that could not be pleased with any
discourse that in the least threatened to taint her imagination, or stain the
purity of her mind. Instructive Histories She chose for her Divertion; but her
studious Application nothing could command, but such Books as darted in Light
upon her mind to discover her Duty, and Heat to inflame her with Zeal to
practice it. And for this purpose She very early began to use the best Arts of
conversing with God, and her own Soul: In the Splendours of a Court (for such
was her Fathers House) She one day in the week constantly spent in the
Retirements of her Closet; and in Conformity to the Discipline of the Church,
her stated day was either Wednesday or Friday, which of them She foresaw She
might be best permitted to make her own, and observe Christ's direction, in
fasting at a time when she should least appear unto men to fast.

This account was given me by a Reverend Person, that had the Honor and
pleasure to Minister to the Family in the Offices of Religion; and with this
surprising Remark upon this noble Saint, that he always observed her on those
days, after she had finished the holy Labors of them, she was ever more
cheerful in Humor, brighter and more agreeable in her conversation and Air,
than She was used to be at any other time. Which showed, that as she took great
care not to play the Hypocrite with the World, so She took true pains, not to
deal deceitfully with her Soul. For it is very observable, that these corporal
severities often operate to quite contrary effects; and where they are overtly
or insincerely managed, they only exasperate and enrage our Lusts, not kill
them, and a whole days humiliation only serves to make the mistaken Votary more
fretful, and peevish, prouder, and more censorious, i. e. worse disposed for
Conversation, either with God or Man, than he was before.

But to dedicate a day to Fasting and Prayer, and holy Meditation, and
afterward come forth with a serene Aspect, a cheerful Countenance, and an
humble, condescensive, and obliging behavior, this shows that one has got the
Mastery over those Appetites, whose Chastisement he undertook, and the Beast is
tamed and made obedient by our discipline.

Thus did this young Ascetic so very early attain to what St Paul called a
Keeping under the Body, which could not have been done at that Age, but by such
a measure of Divine Grace, as in all likelihood would have been and was
sufficient for her in her strongest Temptations.

Besides this, She was accustomed at those years to that which proved of
Infinite use to her, to the Advancement of her progress in the business of
Religion. And that was to rise early, daily: When the first thing She did, was
devoutly to acknowledge the mercy of God, who had watched over her whilst She
had slept: Thus seasoning her mind betimes in the Morning, She seemed to have a
grateful savor of it all the Day after; and when it could be, without
Observation, She diverted to her Closet at Noon, that no distinct Period of her
time might escape her Consecration of her self and it to Gods Honor and Glory.

She was moreover extremely laborious in her preparations for the Lords Supper,
which She would never neglect, unless when She thought She had not due and
timely Notice of the Day of its Ministration. The Hunger and Thirst She had
after this heavenly Food, was always more Eager than her Appetite to her Meals.
She felt this quick and Importunate in her, even in her last Convulsions, when
to every thing else her desire failed. And in the extremity of that Weakness
She was in, so near her Dissolution, her Devotion recovered its wonted Vigor,
and her Spirit appeared able to actuate her Body, under the very Arrests of
Death, to bear its share of Reverence and Worship in that Occasion.

She had an exemplary Charity, and not less so for its Discretion than its
Liberality. She hated a Fragment should be lost, as She once thought nothing
could be which the Poor had; though at length She was persuaded there was a
giving which was not Charity, after which She governed her Charity, as She did
her whole Behavior, with great Prudence. In a word, I have too good warrant to
be afraid to say almost any thing of this great Subject, that might Reflect an
Honor upon her Memory, who was so Rare an Example of almost every Thing praise
worthy.

To forward her growth in these Seize, She was not a little obliged to
the Gifts of Nature, though much more to the Divine Grace; as we are allowed to
distinguish, though it is all of Grace. She had a high Birth, which by being
dignified by a holy Calling, gave Her vast Advantages of Commanding and
Improving her own Time, and set Her above the necessity, or the Temptation of
wasting it upon impertinent Visits. Her bodily Structure was Beautiful and
Exact, which being suitably informed and animated by a Devout Soul, added to
her the further Ornament of a most chaste Conversation. And by all these
together she deservedly challenged the height of Solomon's Character, for as
her Lord was her Head, so She was his Crown.

Her Aversions were strong to whatever was shameful or dishonorable, either in
principles or practice. And I have observed her, to express a peculiar dislike
to that mean, but prevailing Custom, of serving up to the present Company, the
faults or follies of the absent. In short, She esteemed that the best Breeding,
which came nearest the Rule and Example of her Savior; and when all is done,
Religion forms us to the best manners in the World.

And this was it which made this Lady some times take such State upon Her, as
to give occasion for a mistake in judging of the courtesy and humility of her
Temper, which Religion had made natural to her. For She would never put up an
Affront offered to God or Religion, without showing her Resentments, which
could not but gain her such an inward Esteem, among all People of Worth or
Honor, as more than compensated for what She lost of outward Complement and
Respect, from some other Persons. And now to describe her Deportment under her
bodily Afflictions, of which She had a great share, is a task too hard for any
one that wants those Trials, and that measure of Patience, and pious
Resignation wherewith She bore them. This is certain; By these fatherly
Disciplines She was trained up, and admirably accomplished for the discharge of
her Duty in all those Stations and Relations the Divine Providence had
appointed her to sustain. And I truly believe She did so.

That her Parents have absolved her, I have already said; That her Lord has
too, since her conjugal State, I am able to testify in such a manner, that
it is not fit to be Reported, 'till He is himself removed above the Echo of it.
And I am sure no Man can do justice to his noble Character, with respect to his
Behavior toward his Dear Lady, but he must distaste his Modesty, and make his
Complement an Offense.

To her Servants and Dependants She was a Nursing Mother; to her Acquaintance
an obliging Friend; and to all her Relatives and Allies, She even exceeded in
Tenderness and Affection. So that She having with such almost unexampl'd Arts
of Piety and Solicitude acquitted her self to her Parents, with all filial
Obedience; to her dear and sure now most disconsolate Lord with all Ingenuous
conjugal Affection; and Regard to all the World with untainted Honor; and to
her God and Savior with a pure Conscience, She is gone, where her warfare is
at an end, and where her Triumphs are begun, that are never to have an end. To
which God of his Infinite mercy, etc.

FINIS.

