THE Kitchin-Maids ANSWER TO THE London Apprentice's WORD TO THE Wavering
Levite, etc. BEING A Vindication of the Reverend Dr. Sherlock, from the
Malicious Aspersions he casts upon him, for his taking the Oaths.

Psalm CXX.3. What Reward shall be given or done unto thee, thou False Tongue:
Even mighty and sharp Arrows, with hot burning Coals.

LONDON, Printed for W. Rayner, 1691.

THE Kitchin-Maids Answer TO THE London Apprentices Word to a Wavering Levite.
MEETING with a Paper Entitled, A Word to a Wavering Levite, by a London
Apprentice of the Church of England, it incited my Curiosity to read it over at
spare Hours; and having perused it, the very Name of a Prentice, with whom I
have had several Bouts at Fisticuffs, and not a few Verbal Controversies, has
made me long to have an Encounter with him at Paper-War, which I found my self
under a necessity to satisfy, unless I would be at War with my self. And
whether this our Apprentice be a Raw, Half-witted, Disaffected Levite (for
whatever he pretends, some Passages here and there through his Paper, plainly
discover his Cloven Foot) or a Laick Prentice, it is no great matter, (and I
will treat him as such, since he owns that Name) he has more Sauce than Meat,
to abuse so great a Man as the Doctor is, and I think but a very young
Apprentice to the Church of England; for it seems he has not yet learned his
Catechism by heart, which teaches us to submit to (not defame and misrepresent)
all our Teachers, Spiritual Pastors, etc. Were he of the Church and Principles
he pretends to, I cannot see why he would vent his Choler so much at that
worthy Doctor's taking the Oaths; methinks he should rather have rejoiced, that
so Learned a Doctor, who has done as great Service for our Church as any other
whosoever, against all its Adversaries, who was laid aside as useless, and
forced to hide his Candle under a B^shel, by reason of some Scraples that
wounded his Conscience, had now at last got them fully answered, and seen the
Unsufficiency of them (which were, no doubt, greatned by that Gentleman, whose
Spirit he shows himself so much acted by in his long-winded Word, that the
Church might be deprived of so understanding Guides, as he and too many other
Reverend, Pious and Learned Divines, that still labor under the same Scruples)
and again rendered himself useful to serve his Church and Country. But lest I
should seem to have got too much of the Tongue, as our Sex lies generally under
that Slander, I shall briefly enter the Lists with my old Antagonist, and
dispatch him in as few words as possible.

AND first, Brother Apprentice, I must tell you, that you Paraphrase at a
strange rate; were the Scriptures thus commented upon, as I am afraid they
would, were you the Commentator, what Horrid Blasphemies would they speak? By
your thus doing, you have more exposed your own Malice, than the Doctor. And
truly your Paraphrase is so ungenuous, that I should not give my self the
Trouble of tracing you further, were it not that the same Itch of Scribbling
that possessed you, has inflamed me.

In your first Answer to the Doctor, you discover how young an Apprentice you
are to our Church, by your Prodigious Uncharitableness. For it is not possible
for Malice it self to put a worse Construction upon the Doctor's Words, than
you there do. To give you one Scripture for another you gave the Doctor, Tell
it not in Gath, publish it not in Ashkelon, lest the Daughters of the
Uncircumcised rejoice, that a Lay-Member of the Church of England should show
such Rancor toward his Ghostly Father, and yet pretend highly to her, when she
above all other Churches, so much enjoins Charity to all, even Jews, Mahometans
and Heathens, much more to the Household of Faith. And you Maliciously
Insinuate, that the Doctor has taken the Oaths merely to keep his Benefice, or
at the Instigations of his W -- fe. But the Traps you lay to catch him in are
easily destroyed, viz. If the Oaths were Law^^^ (...) did you not take them
before? And if the Oaths were not Lawful, why did you take them now? Brother,
you should have said, If you judged the Oaths were Lawful then, and if you
judge them Unlawful now, etc. and this would have cut the Throat of your
Argument. Now that we are to be acted by our own Judgment (Erroneous or not) is
acknowledged by all that ever I heard; I am sure I have heard many Worthy
Divines say so in the Pulpit. And if this be true, then when we think we may
lawfully take an Oath, it is our duty to take it, and we incur Guilt if we do
not, even tho the Matter be Unlawful: And on the contrary, when we believe an
Oath to be unlawful, we Sin in taking it, if it were the most Lawful Oath in
the World. But it will not hence follow, that if one judged an Oath Unlawful, a
Year or two ago, that therefore he must needs judge it so now, and consequently
that one cannot alter his Judgment, unless upon some Selfish end, which you
plainly affirm, while you impute the Doctor's taking the Oaths wholly to his
desire after Preferment, or his W -- fes Instigation. As to the Inforcement of
your Argument, that he had so long time, and was so Learned a Man, etc. it has
as little strength in it as the rest. For when any Opinion is firmly rooted in
a Man, be he never so Learned, it is not so easy to get clear of it; even tho
that Opinion be contrary to common Sense: This we may see plainly in the
Learnedest Papists (and many of them Honest too) who notwithstanding their
great Learning, cannot free themselves of those False and Idolatrous
Principles, that they had sucked in with their Mothers Milk (ye know where I
had this Sweet Expression, therefore pray remember how far he was from any such
uncharitable Expressions, and follow so great an Example.) And since it is so
in the case of Papists, where the Tenets are contrary to Religion, Reason and
Sense, it is no great Wonder if the Doctor, and a great many more, who had for a
long time been confirmed in such Principles, the Arguments to prove which
seemed to be deduced from Primitive Simplicity, (tho I am afraid a Jesuit was
at the bottom of it, especially considering what our two last Kings were) it is
no wonder, if any Man that had been so long Rooted in those Principles should
scruple an Oath, the taking whereof, seemed so diametrically opposite to them;
and therefore it is rationally to be supposed, that 'twould be no easy matter
for him, or any other, who had been fully confirmed in those Principles, to rid
themselves of those Scruples, unless we should suppose them Men acted merely by
Interest. And when he has got over such a Scruple, we are not to imagine that
his Conscience was more tender then than it is now, or now than it was then)
but that he then judged it not Lawful to take the Oaths; but upon further
search into the Matter, he found that his Scruples, how strong Arguments soever
they seemed to him for some time, yet after a full search into them, they had
no real ground, and therefore thought he might lawfully take them. And this I
am sure all good Christians ought to conclude, till they certainly know the
contrary. I dare say you dare not Swear that the Doctor had no other end in
taking the Oaths, than you allege; which shows how void of Charity you are, to
charge so eminent a Divine with the highest Crime, which yet you durst not
Swear he is guilty of. And if you should say you durst Swear it, every Body
that should hear it, must needs say that you are a Person that makes no
Conscience of an Oath, since it is plain, that no Body can know what is in the
Heart, but only God.

And what you charge the Doctor with, in the end of this Answer, is levelled as
much against many of our Worthy Clergy as against the Doctor, since not a few
of them preached the same Doctrine the Doctor did: Nay, the same Argument might
be stretched as far against those that still scruple the Oaths, since 'twould
be no hard matter, to prove even them to have acted contrary (more or less) to
what they preached and maintained some years ago; if it were no more but this,
that about the time of his present Majesty's coming over, very few of them were
heard to preach up Non-resistance: Nor did any of them mind the People to stand
by King James; besides that, even they who were for the continuing of King
James, were yet for tying up his Hands, which if we look back but a few Years,
we shall find to have been ranked by them amongst the most heinous Sins. So
that one may see how true a Son of the Church of England you are, to start an
Argument against the Doctor, which might (if concluding) be stretched against
most of the Divines of the Church of England. I am afraid you are a Churchman
bred up in Mr. Lobb's or Father Peter's School.

From your next Answer we may shrewdly guess (whatever you pretend) that you
are for the Man's having his Mare again (as you use to Cant in your Cabals.) For
you are pleased to compare Dr. Sh -- 's Case to no other than a Servant taking
an Oath to keep his Masters Secrets, which he is always obliged to do, and
which he can have no plausible Pretense for the breaking of; and you are
pleased to discant upon it at large. But your Comparison is so wide of the
purpose, that it is obvious to any that can but read, and therefore I shall say
no more of it.

In your next Answer you say, How can their Majesty's confide in such a Man,
that has a pair of Consciences, one to take the Oaths, and the other to let
them alone. I wonder any Man should pester the World with such Nonsense!
Because a Man Scruples a thing for some time, and afterward sees his Scruples
have not such weight in them, as he at first apprehended they had, therefore he
must have a pair of Consciences. It would not have been amiss, if thou, in
stead of that Poor Maid in Woodstreet, had met with such a Whipping Mistress,
that she might either have whipped thy puny Soul out of the World, and beat out
thy insipid Brains, or beat more into thee. For if we seriously consider the
Matter, their Majesty's have more reason to believe that Dr. Sherlock is fitter
to be trusted, than some that took the Oaths hand over head, and will be as
ready, it may be, to break them, whenever occasion serves; since he would not
take them till he satisfied all his Scruples, which it is a question whether
some of them did, and whether they have acted accordingly since they took them.

What you say in answer next, is of the same Bran; for it is one thing to be
engaged in a Faction, that is to say, to endeavor to carry on a Faction with
all Eagerness and Industry, by Word and Writing, etc. and another thing when
one is asked his Opinion, and at the Importunity of the Asker declares it. The
former is Properly said to make Proselytes, who (as the Jews are said by our
Savior to do) compass Sea and Land to do it; that is to say in plain Terms, go
from place to place, from one Company to another, to delude simple People,
amongst whom I may reckon you our London Apprentice (as many of our Jacobite
Levites have done, some of whom have had the Law inflicted upon them, tho in
the opinion of many Honest Men, with too great a Mixture of Lenity, which has
rendered others too Malapert, and occasioned not a few's being led aside with
their Dissimulation.) And not the latter, since they do not go about to promote
a Faction, but only if any scrupulous Person comes to them for Advice, barely
deliver what their present Sentiments are, which yet, if they are not strangely
puffed up beyond what is becoming, they dare not assert will always be so.

Your Ignorance next makes you believe it a strange Paradox, that the Doctor
seemed so concerned at some Persons taking the Oaths, and yet at the same time
believed them to be Honest Men. Why Good Man Fool, this is not so strange a
Paradox as your weak Brains fancy. There is no doubt to be made, but many
Honest Men do many things, and mean honestly, which yet are not justifiable at
the same time. I suppose Mr. Apprentice, you will not deny but St. Peter was an
Honest Man, when he did those things for which he was reproved by St. Paul, tho
there was something of Humane Frailty in the case. Nay, St. Paul himself
declares, that when he persecuted the Christians, he did it in Sincerity,
thinking that he did God good Service. All good Churchmen are heartily
concerned for the Dissenters going off from the Church and yet at the same
time, 'twould be very uncharitable, to conclude that none of them were Honest
Men. Not to say more, to show how unreasonably you concluded this so strange a
Paradox.

You next question the Doctor, since he thought it Lawful to pray for their
Majesty's King William and Queen Mary; Why not as lawful to take the Oaths then
as now? John Sheep, because the Doctor thought it not so Lawful, which was
sufficient for him, since he was endeavoring all he could to satisfy himself
in this Point. Nor can he be blamed, with Reason, for Praying for their
Majesty's, tho he at the same time scrupled the Oaths to them, since there was
an Act past in the late Convention, declaring them King and Queen, and so he
could lawfully pray for them as such, since they had not any ways sought after
it, but 'twas the voluntary Act of the People of England, done by their
Representatives, and was universally approved, which cannot be said of
Usurpers. But because of the former Principles, which by reason of their being
so much for some Years inculcated in our Church, and which the Doctor at that
time was so strongly possessed with, he thought it not Lawful to take the
Oaths: And for this you may blame and vomit out your Gall against others than
the Doctor; for you cannot say that he was the first Broacher of
Non-resistance, the Divine Right of Succession, with all the other precious
Stuff with which our Church has been pestered these many Years, to the no small
Grief of many Worthy Divines and Gentlemen of her Communion. And if he has at
last discovered the Falsity of these Tenets, which not only he, but the major
part of the Clergy of the Nation have been infected with, and now retracts
them, and to show that he is in earnest in so doing, takes the Oaths to their
Majesty's, why should any rational Man question the Honesty of his Design in so
doing? And why this uncharitable Censure that 'twas because K. James being now
fled, he must either take the Oaths or lose his Living? This manner of Judging
was more becoming a Dissenter from our Church, many of whom are ready to
construe our actions in the worst Sense (in which I must ingenuously confess,
we are not much behind with them, tho at the same time I must say, that it is
long of that sort of Men that are now Jacobites, that Differences betwixt us
and them have been so far widened) or a Tory Jacobite; and I make no doubt but
all Understanding Readers will take you for no other than one in Masquerade: So
that Jesuit-like, you can put on a William's Face, when the Devil and Lewis are
at your Heart, on purpose that so far as your shallow Wit can reach (and Fools
commonly are most confident they can do great things) you may deter other
Persons from taking the Oaths; tho they must be as Silly as your self, that
will be Bugbear'd with what you lay to the Doctor's Charge.

As for what follows of your Pamphlet, it is much the same with what has been
taken notice of, and therefore I pass it. Any Reader may easily see, that it is
a Dissatisfaction to their Majesty's Government, that raises your Spleen
against Dr. Sh -- k, however cunningly you pretend to be of another Temper. And
this is plain enough, if we consider, that whereas all others that have meddled
with the Doctor, seem only offended at his not vindicating their Majesty's
Government, or retaining some Principles which they think are diametrically
opposite to his taking the Oaths, but you are downright Angry for his taking of
them, and your Bait to delude the Simple is, Why he took them not sooner, as if
you were angry that he did it no sooner, whereas, had he been acted by your
Principles, it is obvious enough he had never taken them.

Thus you have a little Touch, what Improvement I have made in Politics: A
Science never so common as it has been within these three Years, which is all
owing to Gentlemen of your Kidny, who have compassed Sea and Land, gone from
House to House to Proselyte People unto Slavery, that when you had done so, you
might make them Sevenfold more the Children of the Devil or the Pope than your
selves; or if you could not do that, that you might have Power to send them to
the other World in a Fiery Chariot. You should have had a taste of my skill in
Poetry too, but that you know I must wait on my Mistress's as you on your
Master's Affairs. But a few spare Hours may possibly furnish you with an
Elogium in Rhyme according to your Merit, till which time I must bid you Adieu.


