THE ALCORAN OF MAHOMET, Translated out of Arabic into French. BY THE Sieur du
Ryer, Lord of Malezair, and Resident for the French King, at ALEXANDRIA. AND
Newly Englished, for the satisfaction of all that desire to look into the
Turkish Vanities.

To which is prefixed, the LIFE of MAHOMET, THE Prophet of the Turks, and
Author OF THE ALCORAN.

With a Needful Caveat, or Admonition, for them who desire to know what Use may
be made of, or if there be danger in Reading the ALCORAN.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers Hall.
MDC LXXXVIII.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE Christian Reader.
THERE being so many Sects and Heresies banded together against the Truth,
finding that of Mahomet wanting to the Muster, I thought good to bring it to
their Colors, that so viewing thine enemies in their full body, thou may the
better prepare to encounter, and I hope overcome them. It may happily startle
thee, to find him so to speak English, as if he had made some Conquest on the
Nation; but thou will soon reject that fear, if thou consider that this his
Alcoran, (the Groundwork of the Turkish Religion) has been already translated
into almost all Languages in Christendom, (at least, the most general, as the
Latin, Italian, French, etc.) yet never gained any Proselyte, where the Sword,
its most forcible, and strongest argument has not prevailed: And indeed the
greatest Doctors of their Religion have never alleged any thing for the truth
thereof; but the success of their Wars, and greatness of their Empire, than
which nothing is more fallacious: for that which both in former, and these
latter Ages has been common to the bad with the good, cannot be a certain
evidence of the justice of a Cause, or the truth of Religion.

Thou shall find it of so rude, and incongruous a composure, so farced with
contradictions, blasphemies, obscene speeches, and ridiculous fables, that some
modest, and more rational Mahometans have thus excused it; that their Prophet
wrote an hundred and twenty thousand sayings, whereof three thousand only are
good, the residue (as the impossibility of the Moons falling into his sleeve,
the Conversion and Salvation of the Devils, and the like) are false and
ridiculous. Yet is the whole esteemed so sacred, that upon the Cover thereof is
inscribed -- Let none touch it but he who is clean. Nor are the vulgar
permitted to read it, but live and die in an implicit faith of what their
Priests deliver; which indeed (as says Grotius de ver. Rel. Christ.
the learned Grotius) is a manifest argument of its iniquity: For that
Merchandise may justly be suspected, which will not be sold, unless unseen: and
though all Men are not alike perspicacious in the knowledge, and discerning of
things, some by arrogance, and vain conceit of themselves, others by affection;
Some by custom, being drawn into error: yet should we believe that the way to
eternal life cannot be understood by them, who without any respect of profit or
preferment, seek it, submitting themselves, with all they have, to God,
imploring his assistance, we should sin against his infinite goodness.
Therefore ( Christian Reader) though some, conscious of their own instability
in Religion, and of theirs (too like Turks in this) whose prosperity and
opinions they follow, were unwilling this should see the Press, yet am I
confident, if thou have been so true a votary to orthodox Religion, as to keep
thy self untainted of their follies, this shall not hurt thee: And as for those
of that Batch, having once abandoned the Sun of the Gospel, I believe they will
wander as far into utter darkness, by following strange lights, as by this
Ignis Fatuus of the Alcoran. Such as it is, I present to thee, having taken the
pains only to translate it out of French, not doubting, though it has been a
poison, that has infected a very great, but most unsound part of the Universe,
it may prove an Antidote, to confirm in thee the health of Christianity.

THE FRENCH EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THE Book is a long conference of God, the Angels, and Mahomet, which that
false Prophet very grossly invented; sometimes he introduces God, who speaks
to him, and teaches him his Law, then an Angel, anon the Prophets, and
frequently makes God to speak in the plural, in a style that is not ordinary.
He declaimeth against such as worship Idols, particularly against the
Inhabitants of the City of Mecca, and against the The Coreis were ^ powerful
family in Arabia, in Mahomet ^ time.
Coreis, who were enemies to his design. He entitled this Book the Alcoran, as
one would say, the Collection of Precepts: He likewise termed it El Forcan,
that is, that distinguishes good from evil: He divided it into many Chapters,
to which he gave what inscription he thought good: he most commonly intituleth
them with words that are in their first line, without regard to the matter they
treat of, and speaks little of their Inscription; He divided it into many
signs, or Verses, that contain his ordinances and fables, without observation
either of the consequence, or connection of the discourse, which is the cause
that thou shall find in this Book, a multitude of incongruous pieces, and
diverse repetitions of the same things. It has been expounded by many Mohammedan
Doctors, their exposition being as ridiculous as the Text; They affirm the
original of the Alcoran to be written upon a Table, kept in Heaven, that the
Angel Gabriel brought this Copy to Mahomet, who could neither write nor read,
and style him Prophet, or Apostle, in honor. Thou shall find at beginning of
some Chapters letters of the Arabic Alphabet, which some Men will not expound:
They fear to utter things that may displease their false Prophet: Most of their
Doctors affirm those letters to be the first letters of the Names of God. Thou
shall find the exposition in this version: Thou will wonder that such
absurdities have infected the best part of the World, and wilt avouch, that the
knowledge of what is contained in this Book, will render that Law contemptible.

A SUMMARY OF THE Religion of the Turks.
THE Turks believe one sole God, in one sole Person, Creator of Heaven and
Earth, the rewarder of the good, and punisher of the wicked; who has created
Paradise for the recompense of the righteous, and Hell for the last punishment
of crimes. They believe that Mahomet was a very great Prophet, whom God sent
into the World to teach men the way of salvation, and call themselves
Musulmans, that is to say, recommended to God, or saved.

They believe the Decalogue of Moses, and are obliged to observe it; they
celebrate Friday as the Christians Sunday, that day they assemble in Temples at
noon, to pray.

They are obliged to pray five times a day, viz. in the morning, at noon, at
the evening, when the Sun sets, and an hour within night.

They fast the Month, or Moon, which they call Ramazan; during this Month, they
neither drink nor eat all the Day, until the Sun be set, but in the Night drink
and eat, according to their appetites, Flesh and Fish, except the Flesh of
Swine, and Wine, that is at all times forbidden them; after this fast they have
the feast of great Bairan, as the Christians Easter after Lent. They are great
founders of Temples, and Hospitals, and are obliged to give to the poor the
first day of the year, the tith of what they have gained during the preceding
year.

They believe, that after being well washed, saying some prayer appropriate to
that Ceremony; they have also the Soul purified from all Filthiness and Sin,
which is the cause that they wash and bath often, especially before they pray.

They have no Sacrament, but Circumcision; they cause their Children to be
circumcised at the age of seven or eight years; and when they can pronounce
these words La ilha illa allha Mehemet rasoul allha, that is, There is but one
God, Mahomet is his Prophet and Apostle; this is their profession of faith;
nevertheless there is no mention of Circumcision in all the Alcoran; they say
they observe it in imitation of Abraham, whose Law is recommended to them by
Mahomet: they believe that the Alcoran was brought to him at several times by
the Angel Gabriel, in the City of Mecca, and that of Medina, because the Jews
and Christians had altered the Holy Scriptures, and the Law of God.

They are permitted to have four Wives, married at the same time, and as many
Concubines as they are able to maintain.

They can put away their Wives when they think fit, paying them what they
promised them in contract of marriage, and marry again at their pleasure; but
the Women are bound to tarry until they are assured that they are not with
Child before they marry again, and their Husbands are obliged to keep, and take
the care of the Children. The Children which they have by their slaves are
indifferently esteemed with those of their Wives, and are all held as
legitimate.

They have Temples, Colleges, and Hospitals well revenued; they have covents of
Religious, that live exemplarily; obey their Superiors without contradiction,
and dance after the sound of Flutes and other instruments when they make their
prayers.

They have moreover another sort of Religious Vagabonds through the World,
clothed like fools of that Country; they often go naked, and cut their skin in
many places, are held to be holy persons, and live by alms, which are never
refused them; both the one and the other sort of Religious are called Dervis,
they are known by their habit, and can retire and marry when they please.

They deny Jesus Christ to be God, or the Son of God; neither believe they in
the Holy Trinity: they say that Jesus Christ was a great Prophet, born of the
Virgin Mary, a Virgin both before and after her delivery; that he was conceived
by divine inspiration, or by a divine breath, without a father, as Adam was
created without a Mother; that he was not crucified, that God took him into
Heaven, and that he shall come again on earth at the end of the World to
confirm the Law of Mahomet; they likewise affirm that the Jews thinking to
crucify Jesus Christ, crucified a man among them that resembled him.

They pray to God for the Dead, they invoke their Saints, of whom they have a
large Legend, nevertheless they believe not Purgatory; and many among them A
great question among Mahometans.
imagine that the Soul and body remain together in the grave until the day of
Judgment.

They have Mecca and Medina, that are two Cities of Arabia, in great
veneration, because Mahomet was born at Mecca, and buried at Medina: they make
thither great pilgrimages, and believe that Land to be Holy: They bear likewise
singular respect to the City of Jerusalem, for that it has been the
Birthplace, and habitation of many Prophets.

They use no Clocks; at the hour of their prayers their Priests ascend the
highest part of a Tower, that is in a corner of the Temple, and with a loud
voice call the people to prayer, singing prayers, composed for that purpose.

WE the Consuls, Governors, Protectors, and Defenders of the Privileges,
Freedoms, and Liberties of the City of Marseillis; do certify, and attest to
all to whom it shall appertain, that Mr. Andrew du Ryer, Lord of Malezair,
Gentleman in Ordinary of the King's Chamber, and heretofore Consul to his
Majesty in Egypt, has executed the charge for the said Consulship like a Man
of honesty and honor; no complaint having been made at any time, or his
administration, or deportment during the time of his abode there, and that he
exercised that office; Neither was any complaint ever made of the said Mr. du
Ryer during the time he sojourned at Constantinople for the service of his
Majesty; but all the Captains and Officers of Merchant Vessels, and of others
that negotiated in the same parts, received of him all favor, as in matters
that concerned them, as in affairs that did relate to the service of his
Majesty, and the advantage of his Subjects traffic: in testimony of which, We
have drawn and signed these Presents, and have put and affixed to them, the
Seal, and accustomed Arms of this City.

At Marseillis the 12. day of Feb. 1633. De Bourgongne, Consul. I. Savornin,
Consul. Meinardet, Consul. By the said Consuls Boet.

To Mr. du Ryer, Lord of Malezair, Gentleman in Ordinary of the Kings Chamber
at Constantinople.
SIR,
HAving heard by the report of many Merchants of this City, the good offices
that you have daily performed toward them of our Nation, and particularly our
fellow Citizens, who all unanimously much commend your affection, and singular
care to protect and defend them; We thought our duty to return you by these
lines, a thousand thanks, and that the more affection, for that your courtesy,
and not their merits, carried you to all those good offices, of which they and
we shall ever keep a perpetual memory, to render you any acknowledgment when
occasion shall be offered, and give you a testimony by our services, that you
have not cast your Seed upon barren Ground: In the mean time, Sir, we beseech
you, be pleased to continue to us the honor of your friendship, and effects of
your favor, as we shall desire in all emergent occasion to testify that we
are really,

Sir, Your most affectionate Servants, the Consuls, Governors of the City of
Marseillis. Monthouliau, Francis Nappollon, Du Pont.
From Marseillis this 24. of August, 1632.
A Translation of the Command of the Grand Seignior, concerning Mr. Malezair.
ILlustrious and Excellent Commanders, refuge of the great Triumphant, Eminent,
Glorious, and Honorable Lords, endued with the special Graces of God, Bashaws,
or Viceroys, Beys, or Governors, that are upon the Roads of our most August
Port to the Realm of France, God. perpetuate your glory, just Judges of the
Musulmans; Minerals of Virtue and Knowledge, that are upon the Road of our most
August Port to the Realm of France, God increase your Virtues, Honorable and
trusty Governors, Captains of Frontiers and Castles, Captains and Patrons of
Galleys and Vessels, Customers that are upon the Road of our most August Port
to the Realm of France, God augment your Honors and Glory. When this most
August command shall come to you, know, that the Lord of Ryer, a Gentleman of
France, is sent from us into France for many important Affairs; when he shall
arrive, going and coming to the places, of your command, by Sea, or by Land in
our Ports, our Cities under our Castles, and in any other place whatsoever, I
command you to receive with all affection, and good reception, and suffer no
displeasure to be done to him, directly, or indirectly. You shall cause to be
given to him whatsoever shall be necessary for him in paying, and shall
facilitate with your whole power his passage, with his two Servants, his
Coffers, and Baggage; and when he shall have performed in France what has been
commanded him, and shall return to our most August Port, you shall do in like
manner, and shall be careful not to violate this our High command, or
capitulations; Thus know him, and having seen these my most August command, you
shall leave it in his hands, and shall give full and entire credit to this my
most illustrious mark.

Given at Constantinople the last day of the Month of Diel Heget, 1041. Sealed
above with the Mark, or the Seal of the Grand Seignior, Amurat Sultan, and
Signed at Base-Hussein.
THE LIFE and DEATH OF MAHOMET, THE Prophet of the Turks, and Author OF THE
ALCORAN.
MAHOMET, the Son of Abdalla, a vicious Pagan, was born Posthumus at Now a City
called Medina-talnabi, [i e.] the Town of the Prophet.
Iesrab, then a Village of Arabia Foelix; his Mother a Jewess, both by Birth
and Religi on, dying when he was two years old, left him to his Some will have
him to be his Grand father.
Uncle Abdal Mutalib, who being of vile condition, and unable to give him
education, above the common ignorance and irreligion of his Country, at the age
of sixteen years, abandoned him to fortune, or after the barbarous custom of
the Arabians, sold him to the Ismaelite Merchants, who exposing him to sale in
the Markets, he was purchased by Abdemonople, a wealthy Merchant; He after some
observation, and experience of his wit and industry, withdrew him from the
common drudgery of a slave, to employ him with his other Factors in Commerce,
and finding him apt for those Affairs, gave him the conduct of his Camels into
Syria, Egypt, Persia, and elsewhere. By which, in a short time, he became so
expert in his Trade, that as he increased the wealth and profit of his Master,
so he gained his good will and affection.

At that time Heraclius being Emperor of the East, and the seamless Coat of the
Church torn by variety of Sects, and Heresies, the Bishops and Governors in
Constantinople justly fearing Divine vengeance, by reason of the Nestorian
Heresy, which, with that of the Monothelites, began afresh to infect their
Clergy, deliberated on some Ecclesiastical censure against them: When Sergius a
Monk, and Sectary of Nestorius, conscious of his error, and dreading the
punishment, fled secretly into Arabia, and found retreat and entertainment with
Abdemonople, the Master of Mahomet, where finding slender hopes of propagating
his infectious Heresy (the Family being Pagans) and less of overthrowing his
opposites in Religions, he resolved to take revenge on Christianity it self,
and to that effect began to practice on Mahomet, as a subject prepared to
receive the impression of his design.

In the mean time, Abdemonople died, his Riches being augmented through the
care and industry of Mahomet, who having before insinuated into the favor of
his Mistress Ajissa, by Presents of rare Toys, procured in his Travels, by them,
or through Sorcery (of which he was held guilty, and labors to purge himself
in his Alcoran) so charmed her affection, that of her slave, he was advanced to
be Lord both of her Person and Fortunes.

Being thus grown opulent, he sometime continued his Trade, but then willing to
take ease, as he had, during the Voyages through several Countries, been a
seeker, and inquisitive concerning the diversity of Religions professed through
the Universe; so now (though irresolute which to follow) he rejected all, as
vain, and foolish, except Judaism and Christianity; and approving the latter as
the best, accordingly framed his life, assuming a specious form of Sanctimony,
which bred admiration in them that considered his former Education, and gave
him a repute above his expectation. But this hasty Fruit was soon corrupted,
and with the touch of Ambition (like the Apples of Sodom) soon vanished into
stink and filthiness.

For Sergius, as subtle, as malicious, observing his disposition, and withal,
after some discourse concerning the two Religions, of both which he found him
excellently ignorant, seeing it no difficulty to distill into him the poison of
his Heresy, easily persuaded him, That Jesus Christ was but Man simply, that
for the merit of his virtues he was held as Deified: that the sufferings of his
death were but humane inventions; that he was transported from this life to an
immortal, and glorious, by another way than that of Death; That there is but
one God, in one Person; so that the Faith of the Christians is vain, and
invented, and that of the Jews too loose, and lean, through their own
obstinacy. That the Arabians being a dull and ignorant people, inclining
neither to the one nor the other, but all (as many as had been touched with the
fame of his new sanctity) admiring his perfections; The Jews and Christians
being likewise enemies to each other, and the Christians at variance among
themselves; He might in that juncture of affairs, assume the title of a Prophet
sent from God, to disabuse the one, and the other, and save the World by
another Law. This Counsel of Sergius took the desired effect, and Mahomet's
thoughts, before enflamed with his new gotten wealth, and fame, now entertained
more ardent desires of being esteemed a Prophet, looking upon all other
attributes of Religion, and sanctity, as vile and abject.

To this effect, on a sudden he retires to a solitary Cave, not far distant
from Mecca, while Sergius proclaimed the vain perfections of his Life, and
filled the ears of the people with the noise of his deservings. The term of two
years expired, Mahomet again appears to the World, and as if newly returned
from the Oracles of Heaven, styles himself a Prophet sent from God, who
willing through his mercy, to withdraw him from that precipice of his
everlasting ruin, and admonish him of his error, afflicted his body with the
falling sickness, which Mahomet, instead of repenting, made an advantage to
promove his wicked design. For his Wife lamenting to see her self yoaked to one
so diseased, and tormented with an hideous infirmity, he excused it, and easily
wrought in her a belief, that being constrained frequently to converse with the
Angel Gabriel, his frail body, unable to abide the splendour of his heavenly
presence, fell into that distemper, and at the departure of the Divine
Ambassador, recovered its former condition. His Wife believing this, was not
wanting to divulge the rare qualities of her husband, his admirable sanctity,
and frequent converse with the Angel, which gained him the esteem of a Prophet
in his own house, and reverence among his Neighbors.

That this Infant repute of his Holiness might be the better strengthened,
Mahomet thought it requisite to promulgate some Chapters of his Alcoran (as a
Remonstrance of his Commission) which as he saw occasion, he shaped (though
illfavouredly) to his designs, giving out that he received them from the Angel
Gabriel, as the Counsel and precepts of God, who for that he had not saved Men,
either by the Law of Moses, the Psalms of David, or the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
did now promise them infallible Salvation by the means of the Alcoran, which
though rudely, yet cunningly contrived, as complying with the loose humor of
the Arabians, enjoining nothing strict or burdensome, but leaving all to
liberty; as the sole means to allure them to a belief of it, induced first the
Parents and allies of his Wife, then the more ignorant and meaner sort to
embrace it, and esteem Mahomet as the Messenger of God sent to guide them into
eternal felicity, and the enjoyment of Paradise, which the easier to ensnare
them, he feigned to be full of such pleasures as fall under sense, and a
plentiful fruition of those delights, that in those more barren and desert
parts of Arabia they exceedingly wanted.

Having thus drawn to his devotion, a numerous, though vulgar party of the
people, who in opinion of his Prophetical Function were prompt to his
obedience; he thought it altogether as easy to obtain a Kingdom, as he had
found it not difficult to attain to the title of a Prophet; and to effect this,
having before, under pretense of Reformation of Religion, gained many
followers, while more stood as lookers on, not at all regarding that Decoy; he
resolved to yoke to it that other concomitant in popular disturbances, liberty,
proclaiming it to be the will of God, that all Men should enjoy it, and that
the Edict might be first obeyed in his own family, enfranchized his Slave,
called Zeidi.

This bait, as it inhaunced his fame, so it added to his retinue; for as
multitudes, affecting novelty, and a mutation of condition, daily added
themselves to his party; so slaves from all parts of Arabia forsook their
Masters, and fled to him as their Redeemer, and embraced his Law, as the means
of their salvation. These through a fond conceit of his piety, ready to
sacrifice their lives at his command, he divided into troops, and sent to rob
the Caravans of Merchants that traveled through the deserts; and by this
means, having added to his treasure by spoil; and his retinue daily increasing
by a multitude of Fugitives and Vagabonds, who by reason of this liberty, to
act any villainy, resorted to him; he at length took up thoughts of employing
them in the confirmation of his Law, which he knew to be the ready way to his
establishment, in that power to which he aspired.

To this purpose, he marches with his Troops toward Medina (the place of his
Birth and Burial) to preach in a Synagogue of Jews there inhabiting. These less
stupid than the Arabians, could not endure his impostures, and instead of
believing, did handsomely beat him, and drive his train from the Town. This
repulse rather irritating than terrifying him, he drew all his force into the
field, and assailed the Jews in two several conflicts; in one of which, by a
wound on the face with a sword, that broke out his fore teeth, He signed the
Articles of his Law with his Blood, and continued a long time as dead in a
ditch; but being rescued by his Slaves, and recovered of his wound, he again
sought and vanquished them, and converted their Synagogue into a Temple, for
his own use.

The fame of his exploits increasing, with the number of his Sectaries (to whom
some Princes, and eminent persons of the Country began to incline, giving him
their Daughters in Marriage) awakened the Nobles of Mecca, particularly the
family of Coreis, who wisely judging a new form of Religion, propagated by a
new way, force of arms, must inevitably introduce a new Government, of which
Mahomet, of base and obscure beginnings, would be chief, as the Author, opposed
themselves to his designs, expelled all such as seemed to favor him out of the
City, and several times gave him battle; in which he so valiantly deported
himself, that though he was sometimes put to the worst, yet he more often
prevailed; and giving freedom to such prisoners as would embrace his Law,
incorporated them into his Army, strengthening himself, and weakening his
enemies. Being in fine a complete Conqueror in the field; he assaulted the City
of Mecca, took it, and after some slaughter of the Nobility, his enemies,
proclaimed impunity to all that would acknowledge him a Prophet of God, by
whose favor (as he affirmed) and appointment, not by his own valor, he had
attained to that honor. After this proclamation, many for fear of present
danger, and apprehension of future bondage, more out of ignorance, embraced his
belief, and he enjoyed the vain felicity, to see himself General of an Army,
Lord of a vast Country, and to be esteemed, and reverenced as a Prophet.

About that time Heraclius the Emperor, disposing himself rather to improve the
Heresy of the Monothelites, than to defend the Confines of the Empire, not
only permitted Mahomet to domineer in Arabia, but gave advantage to Cosroes,
the Persian King, to invade his dominions: but at length awakened by the alarms
of so puissant an Enemy, levied a strong Army, and summoned the Sarra signifies
in their tongue a Desert, and Sahen to inhabit. See Sands his Travel.
Saracens (a people so called from their inhabiting the Desert) to his
assistance. The Persian vanquished, and the Saracens expecting the salarie of
their labors, and with some importunity demanding it, were answered, that the
Emperor had not sufficient Treasure to pay the Christian Troops, and therefore
those Heathen Dogs must attend the convenience of their Prince. Incensed by
this contempt, they retired and marched by the way of Africa, where finding
Mahomet busy to enlarge his Power; he aggravated their discontents, affirming
it to be the will of God, that all Men should enjoy their Liberty, that God was
offended at their oppressions, and willed them to oppose the tyranny of the
Christians, and that whosoever died in that holy War, his soul should be
instantly transported to Paradise. These motives raised them to a resolution of
making defection; so that they elected Mahomet their General, who incontinently
deprived the Emperor Heraclius of his Tribute, and his Officers (who were slain
in demanding it) of their lives. After this act, the whole Province, with that
of Egypt, revolted, and the people generally esteeming the success of Mahomet's
arms (which he was diligent to employ) as a sure testimony of the goodness of
his Cause, embraced his Religion.

Heraclius having neglected to strangle this rebellion in its birth,
endeavored to extinguish it, being now grown to considerable strength; and to
that end sent an Army under the conduct of Theodosius his Favorite; his Army
was twice overthrown, the General slain, and the Mahometans pursuing their
victories, took from the Greeks, the Countries of Egypt, Syria, and other
Provinces of Africa, where Mahomet increased his Triumphs and erected his
Trophies.

Being now grown impotent, rather through his inordinate life, than burden of
years, he retired full of glory, as a King and Prophet, to Mecca, where he
resolved to end his days, having affirmed it in the Alcoran to be the most holy
City of the World: as that wherein stood the Temple of Abraham, built
miraculously by Angels, to be the Sanctuary of all that repair thither in
Pilgrimage. And therefore it was, that when he had by his Armies taken the City
of Antioch, he durst not enter into it in person, lest by the delightful and
fertile situation of it, he should have been enticed to desert Mecca, and
contradict his own Prophecy. His life now drawing to a period, a Pleuri^ie
surprised him; On the seventh day, for Crisis of his disease, he became
frantic. Haly, one of his successors, astonished at his distemper and frenzy,
not esteeming it one of the rare qualities of a Prophet, and Redeemer (as he
styled himself) of so much People, derided him, yet willing to continue his
Law, that he might inherit his Power, carefully concealed it, and according to
his commands (yet living) watched his Body after his decease. For he told his
followers that he should rise again the third day, and ascend to Heaven. They
observed this, and guarding his Corpse four days entire, with impatient
expectation of his Resurrection, were at length compelled, by reason of its
putrefaction, to take him up, and bury him at Medina, where his Relics are
annually visited by the superstitious Pilgrims of his Religion. (...) Earth to
crow: This Angel recommended him to another, he to a third, and so one to
another, until he came to the Heaven, where God kept his residence. God
courteously received him, asked him how his People did, how they entertained
his Law, and familiarly laid his Hand upon his Shoulder, which was so cold,
that it pierced to the marrow of his Backbone. God had soon done with him,
only telling him how often his People should make their Prayers, which were so
many, that as he was returning, in the fourth Heaven, Moses advised him to go
back to God, and entreat him that fewer Prayers might serve his turn, for his
People were not able to make so many; which he did, and after many returns,
brought the number to five. This done, he went back to his Elborach, which in a
moment brought him to his House in Mecca, where he went to bed again to his
Wife, she not once dreaming her Husband would leave Heaven for her company, or
thinking he had been there; all this he performed in the tenth part of a Night.
The Turks at this day fondly believe this as a Truth; but the Arabians of his
time requiring him to do as much in their view, he (unwilling to take again so
long a Journey) replied, Praised be God, I am Man, and an Apostle. He had other
slights, which in sight of the People, by Art or Sorcery, he performed, and
they stupidly believed, and entertained as Miracles: as a Pigeon being by him
taught to come and pick a Pease out of his Ear, he told them it was the Holy
Ghost that came to tell him what God would have him do; so an Ox brought him a
Chapter of the Alcoran upon his Horns, in a full Assembly. He likewise
persuaded them, that being at dinner at the House of one that pretended to be
his Friend (who had an intent to poison him, or he at least was so informed) a
shoulder of Mutton served in to the Table, forewarned him that he should not
eat of it; and though many were present, none but he heard or understood the
Language of the Mutton, and yet he permitted one of his dearest Friends to eat
of it, and die impoysoned. Such, and many of the like nature were his Miracles:
As the bowing of Trees, shaken by some sudden gust of Wind; the howling of
Wolves, and braying of Asses, which is their Language, desiring Mahomet to pray
for them; and he Prophetically understanding, as religiously performed. His
custom was often to inculcate into the Ears of his Auditors, that God gave him
commission to fulfill his own desires in all things; and to that purpose
introduces God speaking to him. To thee, O Prophet! It is permitted to lie
with all Women that are given thee, or thou do purchase, thy Aunts and
Kindred, and all good Women that freely desire thy company; and this is lawful
for thee alone. His Issue was one only Son, called Cassim, who died before
him, and many Daughters; Fatione the eldest (in high esteem at this day among
the Arabians, and honored as the royal root of Aben Alabecy) was Wife to Haly.
Zeineb the second, was married to Osmen, after Son to Mahuvias, and perhaps to
both successively, for they both succeeded in the Empire of Arabia; to her is
attributed the original of the other Family of Aben Humeia. Imiaultim and
Naphisse are diversely mentioned by the most faithful Historians; some
delivering them as his Daughters, others as his near Kindred. On the Seal which
he used, were engraven these words, Mahomet, Messenger of God. Heaven ordained
him to be a scourge for the punishment of Christians, who in multitudes at that
time had forsaken the Truth, to follow the Sects and Heresies of the Arrians,
Donatists, Nestorians, and others. The day of his death was no less prodigious,
than the course of his life, a Comet, resembling a Sword, appearing at high
noon, pointing from South to North, when it was beheld the space of thirty
days, which that age interpreted to portend the fatal rising and splendour of
the Arabian Empire.

A needful Caveat or Admonition for them who desire to know what use may be
made of, or if there be danger in reading the Alcoran: By Alexander Ross.
GOod Reader, the great Arabian Impostor now at last after a thousand years, is
by the way of France arrived in England, and his Alcoran, or gallimaufry of
Errors, (a Brat as deformed as the Parent, and as full of Heresies, as his
scald head was of scurf) has learned to speak English. I suppose this piece is
exposed by the Translator to the public view, no otherwise than some Monster
brought out of Africa, for people to gaze, not to dote upon; and as the sight
of a Monster or misshapen creature should induce the beholder to praise God, who
has not made him such; so should the reading of this Alcoran excite us both to
bless God's goodness toward us in this Land, who enjoy the glorious light of
the Gospel, and behold the truth in the beauty of holiness; as also to admire
God's Judgments, who suffers so many Countries to be blinded and inslaved with
this misshapen issue of Mahomet's brain, being brought forth by the help of no
other Midwifry than of a Jew and a Nestorian, making use of a tame Pigeon
(which he had taught to pick corn out of his Ears) in stead of the holy Ghost,
and causing silly people to believe, that in his falling sickness (to which he
was much subject) he had conference with the Angel Gabriel.

I know the publishing of the Alcoran may be to some dangerous and scandalous;
dangerous to the Reader, scandalous to the higher Powers, who notwithstanding
have cleared themselves by disliking the publishing, and questioning the
publishers thereof: but for the danger, I will deliver in these ensuing
Propositions my opinion, yet with submission to wiser judgments.

1. Though it may be dangerous to such as like Reeds are shaken, and like empty
clouds carried about with every wind of Doctrine; yet to staid and solid
Christians, the reading of Mahomet's Heresies will be no more dangerous, than
the reading of those errors which are recorded in Scripture, for in them are
mentioned many damnable errors and abominations of the Egyptians, Canaanites,
Hittites, Sidonians, and other Gentiles, and of the Hebrews themselves, of the
Sadducees who denied Spirits, Angels, and the Resurrection. 2. Is there more
danger in reading the Alcoran, than in reading the Errors of ancient and modern
Heretics? surely Tertullian, Irenaeus, Epiphanius, Austin, and other Fathers
were not of this opinion, who have left upon record to posterity, the damnable
Heresies of Arians, Eutychians, Nestorians, Macedonians, and others: and in the
Alcoran there are not such dangerous errors as among the Tetratheites,
Angelites, and Theodosians, who held there were four Gods, or the Tritheites,
who affirmed there were three, or the Gnostics, Manicheans, Cerdonians,
Marcionites, who maintained there were two contrary gods, the one good, the
other bad, whereas the Alcoran sets down there is but one true God; and
although it denies with Arius, the Divinity of Christ, yet it holds him a
great Prophet; nor does it speak so blasphemously of Christ as the Simonians,
who held Simon Magus; or the Ophites, and Manicheans, who said, the Serpent was
Christ; or Menander, who affirmed himself to be Christ, and the Savior of the
World. Besides; Are not the damnable Heresies of the modern Familists, who deny
Christ's Divinity, making as many Christ's as there be illuminated Elders in
their Congregations? are not also the Heresies of the Socinians,
Anti-trinitarians, Adamites, Servetians, Antisabbatarians, and many others
exposed to the view of all that will read them? why then may not the Alcoran?
Besides, are Men debarred from reading the Greek and Latin Poets? nay, are not
many of them translated into our English tongue? as also the modern Histories
of the East and West Indies, wherein are more damnable Tenets than any in the
Alcoran, and they who have read the Jewish Talmud, and Cabala, will find them
as ridiculous pieces as the Alcoran. 3. If there were any loveliness, beauty,
excellency, or any thing else in the Alcoran that might win the mind, and draw
the affection after it, I should hold the reading of it dangerous, but whereas
it is such a misshapen and deformed piece, I think the reading of it will
confirm us in the truth, and cause us love the Scripture so much the more: for
as a beautiful body is never more lovely than when she is placed near a
Black-More, neither is truth more amiable than when it is beset with Errors.
Opposita juxta se posita clarius elucescunt, the Gem receives luster from the
foil, the Stars from the night, and Fire is most scorching in Frost; even so by
an Antiperistasis truth is fortified by error. Who can think that the sight of
a Hob-Goblin, or deformed Vizard should draw the Child from the Nurse or breast
of the Mother to embrace it; whereas the sight thereof will rather cause the
Child hold faster by the Mother. The wise Spartans often times brought Drunkards
into the room, where their sons were, not that they should be induced thereby
to love, but to abhor drunkenness, which they could not have done, had they not
seen the unseemly and rude carriage, the undecent behavior, and uncomposed
gestures of the drunkard. When Zisca had destroyed the Adamites of Bohemia, he
preserved two alive that they might reveal to the World the wicked errors of
that Sect. Who is so mad as to prefer the embracements of a filthy Baboon, to
his beautiful Mistress, or the braying of an Ass to a Consort of Music? he
deserves the ears of Midas that will prefer the Cuckows song to the sweet notes
of the Nightingale. 4. Though the Alcoran be received among many Nations, yet
this reception proceeds not from any love they bear to it, or any loveliness
they find in it, but partly out of fear, being forced by the Sword, partly out
of a preposterous desire of liberty and preferment, and partly out of
ignorance, as not being suffered to read the Scriptures, nor to hear
Philosophy, by which the errors thereof may be detected, nor to enquire into
the absurdities thereof, or to dispute and question any thing in it: for which
cause also it is not suffered to be Printed, nor are Christians permitted to
enter into Mecca, lest the absurdities and impieties of their Religion should
be manifested: and thus are those silly souls kept in blindness and ignorance,
and therefore I never read that any Nation did voluntarily receive the Alcoran,
except the theevish Saracens of Arabia, because it was a friend both to their
theevery and lechery, as permitting multiplicity of Wives and Concubines, and a
reward for those that shall murder and rob. 5. The Alcoran is translated into
French and other vulgar Tongues, and the chief heads thereof by Purchase in his
Pilgrimage, by Heylin in his Geography, and by others, into our own tongue
without scruple or exception; and I pray you, why is the Arabic tongue, the
language of that false Prophet, and in which he writ his Alcoran, so much
learned and taught in Schools and Christian Universities, but that by it we may
come to the knowledge of Mahomet's Laws and Religion? and how should we know
this little horn in Daniel that spoke high and proud things against the
Almighty, if we read not his life and Doctrine? 6. There is a kind of necessity
we should know evil as well as good, falsehood as well as Truth, that we may
avoid the one, and so much more love the other* he that has smelled a stinking
weed will smell with more delight the sweet Rose; he that reads the Alcoran
will find it smell worse than Mahomet's carcass did, which after his death lay
putrefying upon the ground, which his disciples permitted for many days
together, hoping he would have been as good as his word, who made them a
promise that he would rise again the third day; but at last finding he had
forgot himself, and that his body smelled not so sweet as Alexander's did after
his death, they were forced to bury it, or otherwise the Dogs who were
beginning to bury him in their guts, had saved them a labor; though Sugar be
sweet in it self, yet it is much more sweet to him that has tasted Aloes, and
though Italy in it self be a delicious Country, and garden of the World, yet
it is much more delightful, pleasant, and beautiful, to him who has passed
over the mountainous, craggy, and rugged Alps: Did not the Prodigal love the
bread of his Fathers house evermore the better after he had been fed on husks
with Swine? doubtless we shall find, that after we have fed a while upon the
course husks of the Alcoran, with the Arabian Swine, we shall with much more
eagerness covet after the plenty of our Fathers house, exhibited to us in his
Word, where we shall find the hidden Manna, the bread of Life, that came down
from Heaven. 7. Books of Palmistry, Physiognomy, judicial Astrology,
Necromancy, and other superstitious and impious Arts have been permitted to
come abroad, that Men might see the vanity of those Arts, the knavery and
wickedness of the Artists, the foolishness of credulous people, who suffer
themselves to be deluded by them, and the malice of Satan the arch enemy of
mankind, whose delight is to abuse, delude, and destroy Men: why then may not
the Alcoran be read, that Men may see the vanity, impiety, and foolishness of
it, by which the World have been so many years cheated and abused? 8. They that
learn Arts and Sciences, desire the knowledge, not only of the good things, but
of the evil things also, and the abuses of them, to the end they may avoid
them; therefore Logic speaks as well of sophistical and fallacious syllogisms,
as of demonstrative and topical; Ethics treat of Vices as well as of Virtues;
Natural Philosophy handles the natures, not only of useful and beneficial
creatures, but also of hurtful and venomous, as of Serpents; Physic speaks of
poisons as well as of cures; Historians describe both the virtuous and vicious
actions of Princes; in Divinity we learn, not only what God and good Angels
are, but also what Satan is and his wicked Angels; in Navigation we must know,
not only what places are Navigable, but also what are not; how shall we avoid
Rocks, Quicksands and Shelves, if we know them not? even so Christian Religion
permits not only the reading of Scripture but also of heretical and heathenish
books, as is said, that we may know what to embrace, what to shun; therefore if
you would know what be the damnable errors to be avoided by Christians, read
the Alcoran, and you shall find in it the sink of all, or most part of ancient
Heresies. 9. In reading of the Alcoran, though it be, as Cato said of the three
Roman Ambassadors, that were to go to Antiochus, headless, heartless and
footless, the one being maimed in his head, the second a fool, and the third
lame in his Feet: I say, though it be without head or tail, as we use to speak,
being immethodical and confused, contradictory in many things, written in a
rude Language, the Author himself being no Linguist or Scholar, nay, not able
to read or write, though also it consist of lies and senseless follies, yet this
benefit we may reap; I say, in reading of it, that we shall be forced to admire
and praise the goodness of God toward us Christians who having suffered a
great part of the World to sit in the valley of the shadow of death, to be
oppressed with Cimmerian, yea more than palpable Egyptian darkness, has placed
us in the Temple, where we have the Golden Candlestick of his Word, and a
clearer and more durable Lamp than that of Salomon's Temple, yea even the Sun
of righteousness shining upon us in the land of Goshen, whilst a great part of
the World does follow the Antichristian beast, we follow the Lamb upon mount
Sion; while they hear the voice of Satyrs, Ostriches, and Schrich Owls, we
hear the voice of the Turtle, and the Songs of Sion in our own Land: whilst
they feed on husks with Swine, and drink the corrupted puddles of Mahomet's
inventions, we are fed with Angels food, and eat celestial Manna, and drink of
the pure river of life clear as crystal: Again, we may tremble at the reading
of this Alcoran, when we consider the severity of God's Judgments, and the
fierceness of his anger, who for the contempt of his Gospel, in those Countries
where Mahomet is worshipped, has suffered so many millions of people to be
deluded, blinded, abused, and inslaved by that false Prophet, to believe his
lies, and by loathing the sweet Evangelical Manna, to devour greedily the
poysonable Quails of his doctrine, and with it the wrath of God which has fallen
on them whilst the flesh is between their teeth, so that they must needs perish
everlastingly. Who would have thought that those Countries which were honored
by God's own presence, by the Oracles of the Prophets, by the presence,
miracles, and preaching of Christ, by the planting of the Apostles, by the
blood of so many Martyrs, should be thus besotted, and enslaved by the tyranny
of this grand Impostor? When we think on those things, let us work out our
salvation with fear and trembling, and let him who thinks he stands, take
heed lest he fall: they were not greater sinners than we, therefore doubtless
except we repent we shall all likewise perish; the remissness of Heraclius
Government, his falling into the Heresy of the Monothelites, the contempt of
the Gospel, the slighting of the Pastors, the wickedness of the people, the
continual Schisms, rents, jars, and divisions of their Churches, were both the
causes and occasions of these miseries which have fallen upon them; let us take
heed then we be not partakers of their sins, lest we also partake of their
plagues. 10. The reading of the Alcoran will enable us to beat Mahomet with his
own weapons, to cut off the head of this Goliath with his own Sword, and to
wound this unclean bird with quills picked out of his own wings, for even
unwittingly and unwillingly he is forced to acknowledge many truths of Christian
Religion, in affirming there is but one true God the Creator of all things, and
though he goes about to overthrow the Doctrine of the Trinity, yet he does
plainly confirm it; when he speaks of God, of the Word* and of the Spirit,
which three indeed are one in essence, though distinct in subsistence; though
he labors to overthrow the Gospel, yet he confirms it, when he calls it
good, full, right, a light, and a guide to salvation: for if it be full, good,
etc. what need was then of his Al^ran? and though he endeavors to overthrow
Christ's Divinity with Ar^s and (...), and the Jews his ghostly Fathers* yet he
^ffirms it, in calling Christ the Word; for as the internal word of the mind is
coeternal with the mind, so is Christ the Word of his Father, coeternal with
the Father* he establishes also the Article of Christ's Conception and
Nativity* affirming him to be conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the
Virgin Mary* whom he confesses to have been a pure Virgin, both before and
after Christ's birth: so he confirms the Article of Christ's ascension into
Heaven, and diverse other points of Christianity, to whom we are more beholding
for his reverend esteem of Christ, than the Jews who revile and blaspheme him.
11. In reading the Alcoran, though we find much dung, yet in it we shall meet
with some gold, as* Virgil did in reading of Ennius his Verses. Aesop's Cock
found a precious stone in a dunghill; where is much dross, some pure metal will
be found; even so in the dirt of the Alcoran you shall find some jewels of
Christian Virtues; and indeed if Christians will but diligently read and
observe the Laws and Histories of the Mahometans, they may blush to see how
zealous they are in the works of devotion, piety, and charity, how devout,
cleanly, and reverend in their Mosques, how obedient to their Priests, that
even the great Turk himself will attempt nothing without consulting his Mufti:
how careful are they to observe their hours of prayers five times a day where
ever they are, or however employed? how constantly do they observe their Fasts
from morning till night a whole month together; how loving and charitable the
Muslemans are to each other, and how careful of strangers, may be seen by their
Hospitals, both for the Poor and for Travelers: if we observe their Justice,
Temperance, and other moral Virtues, we may truly blush at our own coldness,
both in devotion and charity, at our injustice, intemperance, and oppression:
doubtless these Men will rise up in judgment against us; and surely their
devotion, piety, and works of mercy are main causes of the growth of
Mahometism, and on the contrary, our neglect of Religion, and looseness of
conversation, is a main hindrance to the increase of Christianity; is it not a
shame that they should read over their Alcoran once every month, and we scarce
read over the Bible in all our life? that they shall give such reverence to
their Alcoran, as to honor the very Camel that carried it to Mecca, and to lay
up for holy relics the napkins and hanke^ chiefs that rubbed off the sweat
from his skin; and we shall prefer lascivious Poems, and wanton Ballads to the
sacred word of Almighty God? do we not make our selves unworthy of such an
inestimable treasure? 12. The Turks are our neighbors, and their Territories
border upon the dominions of Christendom: there have been continual Wars, and
will be still between us: it concerns every Christian who makes conscience of
his ways to examine the cause, and to look into the grounds of this War,
whether they be just or not, which cannot be known but by reading the Alcoran
in which we see the Mahometans to be the enemies of the Cross of Christ, in
denying his Death, and of his Divinity also, in that they deny his Godhead: we
shall find so many passages in it repugnant to, and destructive of Christian
Religion, that Christian Princes are bound to oppose the enemies thereof; after
the example of those glorious Emperors, Constantine, who made War against the
Heathen Euse^. in vit. Coast. and l. 9. c. 9. Hist. The^d. l. 5. c. 24. Socrat*
l. c. ^. 18. Aug. l. 5. de civit. dei, c. 23.
Princes, Maxentius, Maximinus and Licinius, of Theodosius the elder against
the Tyrant Eugenius the worshipper of Hercules, of Theodosius the younger
against the Saracens, of Honorius against the Goths, all enemies of Christ, by
whose assistance they got notable victories, and glorious triumphs. 13. We
cannot do better service to our Countrymen, nor offer a greater affront to the
Mahometans, than to bring out to the open view of all, the blind Sampsons of
their Alcoran, which have mastered so many Nations, that we may laugh at it, of
which even their own Wise Men are ashamed, and are sorry it should be
translated into any other language: for they are unwilling that their grand
Hypocrite should be unmasked, or that the Visard of his pretended holiness
should be taken off, whose filthy nakedness must appear when he is divested:
they know that words and works of darkness cannot endure the light:
Trepidantque immisso lumine manes, the infernal Ghosts tremble at any glimpse
of light; and the wild Beasts return to their dens, says David, when the Psalm.
10. 4 Vt iugulent h^mines, surgunt de nocte latron^s.
morning appears, not daring to seek their prey but in the dark night of
ignorance; this great thief Mahomet has destroyed many thousands, and under
the Lions skin, this Ass has affrighted his beastly minded Saracens, therefore
let us take away the ring from this Gyges, by which he has made himself
invisible, and let us with Hercules, pull out this thieving Cacus out of his
dark den where he uses to hide and shelter himself, and expose his deformed
carcass to the public view, that we may wonder at it: and in detecting his
errors, we follow the practice of Christ, who discovered Mat. 13.
to the World the damnable Tenets of the Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites. 14.
The Turks are preposterously zealous in praying for the conversion, or
perversion rather, of Christians to their irreligious religion; they pray
heartily, and every day in their Temples, that Christians may embrace the
Alcoran, and become their Proselytes, in effecting of which they leave no means
unassaied by fear and flattery, by punishments and rewards; now, is it fitting
that they in charity and zeal should exceed us? we are bound to pray, and
endeavor heartily for their conversion, from darkness to light, from error to
truth; but how shall we do this, if we know not the dangerous and damnable
estate they are in, which we cannot know but by reading their Alcoran? 15. In
reading the Alcoran we shall see what is the force of superstition, and with
what violence Men are carried headlong in the defense and maintenance even of
the most absurd and impious opinions; what Hecuba is more deformed than the
Alcoran? yet how do the Turks fight and struggle, toil and care, hazard life
and liberty, estates and all for it, as if it were the most beautiful Helena in
the World! these Men cannot endure the Image of Christ, or of a Saint in their
Temples, calling this Idolatry, and yet they are the greatest Idolaters in the
World themselves: for never was there such an Idol as the Alcoran, no Man must
touch it, till first he be washed, and that being done, he must not touch it
with his naked hands, but with a clean linen cloth; the Priest must kiss it,
and bow to it; he must when he reads in it hold it up on high, for it is a sin
to hold it lower than his girdle: Every piece of Paper that a Turk finds, he
must use reverendly, because the Alcoran is written in paper, the Mule that
carries it to Mecca is held in great veneration, so that he or she is
sanctified all the year after that can but touch him, and that handkerchief
which wipeth off his sweat is a holy relic: thus do they strain at a Gnat and
swallow a Camel. 16. In reading the Alcoran and Turkish Rev. 20.
Story, we shall see who were Gog and Magog that made War against the Saints,
even the Turks an obscure people of Scythia, therefore called Gog, because they
were hid and unknown a long time, and the Saracens, who were a known people,
and the open enemies of the Church, therefore called Magog; these treacherously
combined together, oppressed first the Persians, and afterward the Greek
Empire, with the famous Churches of Asia, Greece, and Egypt; we shall also find
that by the Star which fell from Heaven, and opened the bottomless pit, whose
smoke darkened the Sun, and out of which came the Locusts, whose terror is
described by St. John, is meant Mahomet that great destroyer, as his name
signifies, answering to the name Apollyon, and Abaddon: for never was there
Rev. 9.
such a destroyer, who by his pestilent doctrine has destroyed so many Souls,
and by the sword of his Locusts has destroyed so many bodies, and ruinated so
many goodly Countries. 17. If you will take a brief view of the Alcoran you
shall find it a hodg podge made up of these four ingredients. 1. Of
Contradictions. 2. Of Blasphemy. 3. Of ridiculous Fables. 4. Of Lies: first, of
Contradictions, he does ordinarily say, and unsay the same thing; one while he
tells us, that he was the first that ever entered into Paradise, and elsewhere
he says he found Men and Women there; sometimes he affirms that Jews and
Christians shall be saved by their own Religion, and sometimes again, that none
can be saved who embrace not his Alcoran; In one place following the Opinion of
Origin, or rather of the Origenists he affirmed that all the Devils shall be
saved; in another place he says, only those Devils shall be saved who hearken
to, and obey his Alcoran. Secondly, of Blasphemy, for he blasphemeth God, in
saying that he prays for Mahomet, intimating hereby that he is inferior to
that God he prays to; he makes God also swear by Flies, Worms, and such base
Creatures, as if he were their inferior, whereas God having none greater than
himself, swears only by himself; He blasphemes the Father, in saying he cannot
have a Son, because he is not married, as if there were no other generation but
what is carnal; he blasphemes the Son with Arius, in denying his Divinity; he
blasphemes the Holy Ghost with Macedonius, affirming him to be the Creature of
a Creature; he blasphemes God also, in making him the Author of his Alcoran,
bragging that his name is written upon the Throne of God, in that he is the
greatest of the Prophets, who has more knowledge than all the Men and Angels
of the World: and many other bragging words he utters of himself, by which we
may see he is that little Horn which did spring up among the ten Horns of the
great and terrible Beast of the Roman Empire, destroying three of the Roman
Horns, to wit, the Asians, Grecians and Egyptians; this is the Horn that has
many Eyes, as being crafty and vigilant, but his mouth speaks proud things, in
blaspheming and bragging, as we have heard. Thirdly, of ridiculous Stories, and
which are more unsavory than the Golden Legend, or Lucian's true Narrations; he
tells us that he divided once the Moon, one half whereof fell into his lap,
(this was not then the Man in the Moon, but the Moon in the Man) the other on
the ground; these two pieces he souldred again. Perhaps in memory of this lying
Miracle, the Turks use yet the half Moon for their Arms: He tells us of a great
Army of Men and Angels raised by Solomon, but much hindered in their march by an
Army of Flies, which Solomon rebuked, where we have a witless conference
between Solomon and the Fly; he tells you a strange Story of Noah's Ark, how
there the Hog was generated of the Elephants dung, and a Rat of the Hogs dung,
which gnawing a hole in the Ark, at which Noah was affrighted; he touched the
Lion on the Forehead, out of whose Brains leaped out a Cat, as ( Minerva did
out of Jupiter's) which caused the Rat to run away: this is Philosophy indeed
for a Hog. Fourthly, of Lies, for he belyeth God, in making him Author of his
Impiety and Heresies; he belyes Christ, in saying he was conceived by the smell
of a Rose; he belyeth the Holy Ghost, in affirming that he inspired Mahomet to
write the Alcoran; he belyeth the Virgin Mary, calling her the daughter of
Amram, and sister of Moses, confounding her with Miriam, whereas there were so
many generations between; he belyeth the Gospel, in saying it is corrupted by
Christians; he belyeth Christians, when he says they worship many gods, and
that they give to God a companion, when they acknowledge the Divinity of
Christ* he belyeth the Jews in saying they make Eleazer a god; he belyes the
Patriarchs, in saying that Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob believed his
Alcoran, being so many thousand years before he was born, or his Alcoran had
any existence; he belyes also the Apostles, in making them his Scholars, who
lived near six hundred years before he was born: by all which we may see who
was the Compiler of this Alcoran, not the God of Truth, but the Father of Lies;
not Christ and his Apostles, whose weapons in propagating the Gospel, were
powerful Preaching, Miracles, and patience in Suffering; not the Sword, the
chief means that Mahomet uses to force his Alcoran, an instrument forbid by
Christ, but used by him who has been a murderer from the beginning; but I
will not take upon me the task of refuting the Alcoran, being already refuted
by Cantacuzenus, Richardus the Monk, Cusa the Cardinal, Woodmanstadius,
Savanorola and others. I only thought good, upon entreaty of some learned and
religious Men, to prefix this brief Caveat, that the Reader might be the better
armed to encounter with any rub or difficulty he shall meet with in the reading
thereof. But before I end, give me leave to clear my self again in this point,
that it is not my meaning all should have the liberty to read the Alcoran
promiscuously. I know with the Apostle, that though all things be lawful, yet
all things are not expedient, there are Children as well as Men in
understanding; the Nurse may use that Knife which the Child may not, and that
Sword which may without danger be handled by a sober Man, cannot without danger
be touched by a mad Man; there are as well queasie as strong stomachs, and what
is Meat to the one may be Venom to the other; though Mithridates could without
hurt eat Poison, others may not presume to escape so; it is lawful for any to
look upon a Monster, but it is not expedient for conceiving Women; that Iron
which an Ostrich can digest, may destroy the stomach of other Creatures; how
many have been deceived in gathering Hemlock for Parsley? It is not for every
Man to meddle with Apothecaries Drugs, he may chance meet with Poison as soon
as an Antidote; if all Men were like Bees, to suck Honey even out of Henbane,
there might be no danger in reading the Alcoran, but most Men are like Spiders,
suck securely Poison even out of the sweetest Roses; therefore they only may
surely and without danger read the Alcoran, who are intelligent, judicious,
learned, and thoroughly grounded in Piety, and principles of Christianity; but
weak, ignorant, inconstant, and disaffected minds to the Truth, must not
venture to meddle with this unhallowed piece, lest they be polluted with the
touch thereof, as they were who came near to a leprous Body; and if we will not
venture to go into an infected House without preservatives, much less should
any dare to read the Alcoran, that is not sufficiently armed with Grace,
Strength, and Knowledge, against all temptations. God grant we may walk in the
light of the Gospel whilst we have it, that we may not be overwhelmed with the
dismal night of Mohammedan darkness, which God may justly inflict upon us; for
our sins, rents and divisions are no lesser than those were of the Greek, and
Asiatick Churches, and doubtless except we repent we shall all perish with
them, who for despising Gods sacred Oracles, are now taught to reverence every
piece of paper they find, which they are made believe shall be put under the
soals of their feet when they walk over the burning grate to their fools
Paradise, as Busbequius in his Epistle tells us, who lived long amongst them,
and was well acquainted with their opinions; but what I have written here
concerning the Alcoran, I submit to the judgment and wisdom of those who sit at
the Stern, and can see more than the Passengers.
A TABLE.
Chapter. THE Life and Death of Mahomet. Folio. i A needful Caveat or
Admonition to the Reader. Chapter 1. Chapter of the Preface, containing Seven
Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 1 Chapter 2. The Chapter of the Cow,
containing Two hundred fourscore and seven Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 2
Chapter 3. The Chapter of the Lineage of Joachim, containing Two hundred
Verses, written at Medina. Folio. 39 Chapter 4. The Chapter of Women,
containing One hundred and seventy Verses, written at Medina. Folio. 61 Chapter
5. The Chapter of the Table, containing One hundred and twenty Verses, written
at Medina. Folio. 83 Chapter 6. The chapter of Gratifications, containing One
hundred sixty and fifteen Verses, written at Medina. Folio. 100 Chapter 7. The
Chapter of Prisons, containing One hundred and six Verses, written at Mecca.
Folio. 120 Chapter 8. The Chapter of the Spoil, containing Seventy and five
Verses, written at Medina. Folio. 141 Chapter. 9. The Chapter of Conversion,
containing One hundred twenty and seven Verses, written at Medina. Folio. 149
Chapter 10. The Chapter of Jonas, containing One hundred and nine Verses,
written at Mecca. Folio. 166 Chapter 11. The Chapter of Hod, containing One
hundred twenty and three Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 177 Chapter 12. The
Chapter of Joseph, containing One hundred and thirteen Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio. 190 Chapter 13. The Chapter of Thunder, containing Forty and
three Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 200 Chapter 14. The Chapter of Abraham,
containing Fifty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 206 Chapter 15. The Chapter
of Hegir, containing Seventy and seven Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 211
Chapter 16. The Chapter of the Be, containing One hundred and eight Verses,
written at Mecca. Folio. 216 Chapter 17. The Chapter of the Voyage by night,
containing One hundred and eleven Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 227 Chapter
18. The Chapter of the Cave, containing One hundred and ten Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio. 237 Chapter 19. The Chapter of Mary, containing Fourscore and
eighteen Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 246 Chapter 20. The Chapter of
Beatitude, and of Hell, containing One hundred and thirty Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio. 253 Chapter 21. The Chapter of the Prophets, containing One
hundred and twelve Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 262 Chapter 22. The Chapter
of Pilgrimage, containing Seventy and seven Verses, written at Mecca. Folio.
269 Chapter 23. The Chapter of True-believers, containing One hundred and
eighteen Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 277 Chapter 24. The Chapter of Light,
containing Seventy and four Verses, written at Medina. Folio. 283 Chapter 25.
The Chapter of the Alcoran, containing Seventy and seven Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio. 290 Chapter 26. The Chapter of Poets, containing One hundred
twenty and seven Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 296 Chapter 27. The Chapter
of the Pismire, containing Fourscore and thirteen Verses, written at Mecca.
Folio. 304 Chapter 28. The Chapter of History, containing Fourscore and eight
Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 311 Chapter 29. The Chapter of the Spider,
containing Sixty and nine Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 320 Chapter 30. The
Chapter of the Grecians, containing Sixty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 326
Chapter 31. The Chapter of Locman, containing Thirty and four Verses, written
at Mecca. Folio. 331 Chapter 32. The Chapter of Worship, containing One hundred
and thirty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 334 Chapter 33. The Chapter of
Bands, and Troops of Soldiers, containing Fourscore and seven Verses, written
at Medina. Folio. 337 Chapter 34. The Chapter of Saba, containing Fifty and
four Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 344 Chapter 35. The Chapter of the
Creator, containing Forty and five Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 349 Chapter
36. The Chapter entitled, O man, containing Fourscore and eight Verses,
written at Mecca. Folio. 354 Chapter 37. The Chapter of Orders, containing
Fourscore Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 359 Chapter 38. The Chapter of
Truth, containing Fourscore and eight Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 365
Chapter 39. The Chapter of Troops, containing Seventy and five Verses, written
at Mecca. Folio. 370 Chapter 40. The Chapter of the True Believers, containing
Eighty and five Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 377 Chapter. 41. The Chapter
of Exposition, containing Fifty and four Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 384
Chapter. 42. The Chapter of Counsel, containing Fifty and three Verses, written
at Mecca. Folio. 389 Chapter. 43. The Chapter of Ornament, containing Eighty
and nine Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 394 Chapter. 44. The Chapter of
Smoke, containing Fifty and nine Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 400 Chapter.
45. The Chapter of Genuflexion, or Knee bowing, containing Fifty and nine
Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 402 Chapter. 46. The Chapter of Hecaf,
containing Thirty and five Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 405 Chapter. 47.
The Chapter of the Combat, containing Fourscore and eight Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio. 410 Chapter. 48. The Chapter of the Conquest, containing Twenty
and nine Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 413 Chapter. 49. The Chapter of
Enclosures, containing Eighteen Verses, written at Medina. Folio. 417 Chapter.
50. The Chapter of the Thing judged, containing Forty and five Verses, written
at Mecca. Folio. 419 Chapter. 51. The Chapter of the Things dispersed,
containing Sixty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 422 Chapter. 52. The Chapter
of the Mountain, containing Thirty and nine Verses, written at Mecca. Folio.
425 Chapter. 53. The Chapter of the Star, containing Sixty Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio. 427 Chapter. 54 The Chapter of the Moon, containing Fifty and
five Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 430 Chapter. 55. The Chapter of the
Merciful, containing Eighteen Verses, written at Medina. Folio. 433 Chapter.
56. The Chapter of Judgment, containing Fourscore and nineteen Verses, written
at Medina. Folio. 435 Chapter. 57. The Chapter of Iron, containing Twenty and
nine Verses, written at Medina. Folio. 438 Chapter. 58. The Chapter of the
Dispute, containing Twenty and two Verses, written at Medina. Folio. 442
Chapter. 59. The Chapter of Exile, containing Twenty and four Verses, written
at Medina. Folio. 445 Chapter. 60. The Chapter of Trial, containing Eighteen
Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 448 Chapter. 61. The Chapter of Array,
containing Fourteen Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 450 Chapter. 62. The
Chapter of the Assembly, containing Eleven Verses, written at Medina, Folio.
451 Chapter. 63. The Chapter of the Wicked, containing Twelve Verses, written
at Medina. Folio. 453 Chapter. 64. The Chapter of Deceit, containing Eighteen
Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 454 Chapter. 65. The Chapter of Divorce,
containing Eighteen Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 456 Chapter. 66. The
Chapter of Prohibition, containing Twelve Verses, written at Medina. Folio. 458
Chapter. 67. The Chapter of Empire, containing Thirty Verses, written at Mecca.
Folio. 460 Chapter. 68. The Chapter of the Pen, containing Fifty and two
Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 462 Chapter. 69. The Chapter of Verification,
containing Fifty and two Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 465 Chapter. 70. The
Chapter of the Ascent, containing Forty and four Verses, written at Mecca.
Folio. 467 Chapter. 71 The Chapter of Noah, containing Twenty and eight Verses,
written at Mecca. Folio. 469 Chapter. 72. The Chapter of Devils containing
Twenty and eight Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 470 Chapter. 73. The Chapter
of the Fearful, containing Twenty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 472 Chapter.
74. The Chapter of the Wrapped, containing Fifty and seven Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio. 474 Chapter. 75. The Chapter of the Resurrection, containing
Forty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 476 Chapter. 76. The Chapter of Man,
containing Thirty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 477 Chapter. 77. The Chapter
of them that are sent, containing Fifty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 479
Chapter. 78. The Chapter of News, containing Forty Verses, written at Mecca.
Folio. 481 Chapter. 79. The Chapter of them that take away, containing Forty
and six Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 482 Chapter. 80. The Chapter of the
Blind, containing Forty and two Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 484 Chapter.
81. The Chapter of Roundness, containing Twenty and nine Verses written at
Mecca. Folio. 485 Chapter. 82. The Chapter of the opening of Heaven containing
Seventeen Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 486 Chapter. 83. The Chapter of them
that weigh with false weights, containing Thirty and Six Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio. 487 Chapter. 84. The Chapter of the Cleft, containing Twenty and
five Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 488 Chapter. 85. The Chapter of the Sign
Celestial, containing Twenty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 489 Chapter. 86.
The Chapter of Star, or of the North Star, containing Seventeen Verses, written
at Mecca. Folio. 490 Chapter. 87. The Chapter of the High and Mighty,
containing Seventeen Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 491 Chapter. 88. The
Chapter of the Covering, containing Twenty and six Verses, written at Mecca.
Folio. 492 Chapter. 89. The Chapter of the Morning, containing Thirty Verses
written at Mecca. Folio. 493 Chapter. 90. The Chapter of the City, containing
Twenty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 495 Chapter. 91. The Chapter of the
Sun, Containing Fifteen Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 496 Chapter. 92. The
Chapter of Night, containing Twenty Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. ibid.
Chapter. 93. The Chapter of the Sun rising, containing Ten Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio. 498 Chapter. 94. The Chapter of Joy, containing Eight Verses,
written at Mecca. Folio. 499 Chapter. 95. The Chapter of the Fig, containing
Eight Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. ibid. Chapter. 96. The Chapter of Blood
congealed, containing Seventeen Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 500 Chapter.
97. The Chapter of Glory or Power, containing Five Verses, written at Mecca.
Folio. 501 Chapter. 98. The Chapter of Instruction, containing Eight Verses,
written at Medina. Folio. 502 Chapter. 99. The Chapter of the Earthquake
containing Eight Verses written at Medina. Folio. 503 Chapter. 100. The Chapter
of Horses, containing Eleven Verses, written at Mecca and Medina. Folio. ibid.
Chapter. 101. The Chapter of Affliction, containing Eleven Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio. 504 Chapter. 102. The Chapter of Abundance, containing Eight
Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 505 Chapter. 103. The Chapter of the Evening.
Folio. ibid. Chapter. 104. The Chapter of Persecution, containing Seven Verses,
written at Mecca. Folio. 506 Chapter. 105. The Chapter of Elephants, containing
Five Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. ibid. Chapter. 106. The Chapter of
Coreis, containing Four Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 507 Chapter. 107. The
Chapter of the Law, containing Seven Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. ibid.
Chapter. 108. The Chapter of Affluence, containing Three Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio. 508 Chapter. 109. The Chapter of Infidels, containing Six Verses,
written at Mecca. Folio. ibid. Chapter. 110. The Chapter of Protection,
containing four Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. 509 Chapter. 111. The Chapter
of the Cord of Palm, containing Eleven Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. ibid.
Chapter. 112. The Chapter of Salvation, containing Four Verses, written at
Mecca. Folio. 510 Chapter. 113. The Chapter of Separation, containing Five
Verses, written at Mecca. Folio. ibid. Chapter. 114. The Chapter of the People,
containing Six Verses written at Mecca. Folio. 511
THE ALCORAN OF MAHOMET.
CHAP. I. The Chapter of the Preface, containing seven Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful; Praised be God, gracious and
merciful: King of the Day of Judgment. It is thee whom we adore; it is from
thee we require help. Guide us in the right way, in the way of them that thou
have gratified; against whom thou have not been displeased, and we shall not be
misled.

CHAP. II. The Chapter of the Cow, containing Two hundred fourscore and seven
Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, Gracious and merciful. See E^pennius his Grammar.
I am the most wise God. There is no Error in this Book; it guides into the
right way those that are righteous, who believe what they see not, who make
their Prayers with affection, and dispense in Alms a part of the Goods that we
have given them. Such as believe the things that are inspired into thee, in
those that have been Preached before thee, and at the end of the world are not
ignorant the^ are guided by their Lord, and shall be blessed* Misery is upon
unbelievers. Whether thou reprove them, or do not reprove them, they will not
be converted. God has shut up their heart, their ears and eyes, and they shall
suffer gre^ torments. Many men say, we believe in God, See the Explication of
Gelaldin.
and the Day of Judgment, and do not believe they think to deceive God, and
them that believe in God; certainly they deceive themselves, and know it not.
God will augment the infi^mity which they have in their heart, and they shall
undergo the rigours of an infinite pain, by reason of their lying. When it was
said to them, Pollute not the earth, they said, We are true observers of the
Law of God; notwithstanding, they were they that polluted the earth, but they
knew it not. When it was said to them, Believe ye as the world believes? They
said, Shall we believe as fools believe? they themselves are fools, and know it
not. When they met with such as believed in God, they said, We See Gelaldin.
believe as you do: And when they returned toward the Devils, their
Companions, they said, We believe as you, and mock at those men: Certainly God
mocketh them, and continues them in their Errors, to their confusion. They
that have purchased Error, for the right way, have gained nothing in their
commerce, and are not well directed; they are like to such as kindled fire, and
when it has enlightened what is about them, God has deprived them of light,
and left them in darkness, deaf, dumb, blind, and they shall never be
converted: or as a cloud of Heaven, full of darkness, thunder, and lightning,
they stop their ears with their fingers, by reason of the noise, and for fear
of death; but God sees the unbelievers, he caused lightning to approach, that
ravished from them their sight; they have followed what appeared to them, and
are detained in darkness: But if God had pleased, he had deprived them, both of
hearing, and sight; for he is Omnipotent. O People, worship your Lord, who
created you, and all that were before you; it may be that you will fear him
that has extended the Earth, that raised the Heaven, and caused Rain to
descend; that caused the production of Fruits to enrich you. Say not, That God
has a Companion equal to him, because you know the contrary. If you doubt that
I have sent my servant, come, and bring some Chapters like to the Alcoran, and
call to witness the Idols that you adore; if you are good men, if you have not
done it, or cannot perform it, Fear the fire of Hell prepared for Infidels, and
Idolaters; and declare to true believers, who do good works, That they shall
enjoy the immense pleasures of Paradise, wherein flow many Rivers; they shall
there find all sorts of fair and savoury Fruits, which God has prepared for
them; they shall consider, if they be like to such as they had before in the
world: They shall there have Wives, fair, and delicate, and shall dwell, in
eternal felicity: God is not ashamed to compare a little The Puny is a stinking
Worm, frequently growing in Beds in hot Countries.
Puny to an extreme Greatness: Now, so it is, that true believers know, that it
proceeds from their Lord. The wicked demand, what God does mean by that
comparison? He by this means mis-leadeth, and directs many men; but
mis-leadeth none, but the disobedient: Such as pervert his Testament, and his
Promises; such as retrench his Commandments, and defile the Earth, are damned.
Why will you be impious, seeing that God has given you life after death? He
will cause you to die, he will raise you again, and you shall all return before
him to be judged. He it is, that created whatever is upon Earth, and ascending
to Heaven, has ordained seven Heavens, knowing all things. Remember to
instruct men, that thy Lord said See Kitab el tenoir.
to his Angels, I would create a Vicar upon Earth; and when they answered, Will thou there place him that shall defile it, and shed Blood, while we exalt thy
Glory, and sanctify thee? I know said he, what you know not. He taught Adam
the Names of all things, who discovered them to the Angels, to whom God said,
Declare to me the Names of all things that I have created, if you know them;
they replied, Praise is due to thy Divine Majesty; we know nothing, but what
thou have taught us, thou alone art knowing and wise. He said to Adam, Declare
to them the Names of all things that I have created. After he had taught them,
God said, Did I not tell you, that I knew what is not, neither in Earth, nor
Heaven; and that I understand whatever you make manifest, and whatever you keep
most secret? Remember thou, that we said to the Angels, Humble your selves
before Adam; they all humbled themselves, except the Devil: He was already
proud, and in the number of the wicked. We said unto Adam, Dwell thou and thy
Wife in Paradise, and eat there what thou likest, but approach not that Tree,
lest thou be in the number of the unjust. The Devil made them to sin, and
depart from the Grace in which they were; then we said to them, Descend you
enemies one to another, you shall have a dwelling upon Earth, and goods
wherewith to live for a time. Adam begged pardon for his fault of his Lord; he
pardoned him, because he is gracious and merciful, and said, Descend, and go
all of you out of Paradise; there shall hereafter come to you, a guide from me.
Such as shall follow him, shall be delivered from fear and affliction (at the
day of Judgment;) such as shall be impious, and conceal my Commandments, shall
The Alcoran in the old and new Testament.
burn eternally in the fire of Hell. O Children of Israel, remember the Grace I
have done you, I will satisfy my Promises, perform yours, fear me, and believe
in what I have sent from Heaven, confirming what was before taught you; be not
the first impious, and forsake not my Law at any rate; fear me, and cover not
the Truth with a lie, neither willingly conceal it: Make your Prayers at the
time appointed, pay Tithes, and worship your Lord with them that adore him.
Will you command people that have no care of their Souls, to do good? Will you
meditate upon Scripture, with observing it? Entreat for succor with Patience,
and with Prayers they abound not, but in them that are obedient, that believe
they shall one day behold their Lord, and shall return before him to be judged.
O Children of Israel, call to mind my favors. I have preferred you to all the
world; fear the day, wherein one Soul shall not be chastised for another; when
Prayer shall not be heard, neither ransom, succors nor protection be found for
the wicked. Remember, that we delivered you from the hands of Pharaoh, who
afflicted you through the violence of torments, who murdered your Children,
abused your Wives; and that your Lord increased your Miseries, because of the
Enormity of your Crimes. Remember, that we divided the Seas to save you, and
that we drowned Pharaoh's men in your view; nevertheless, you worshipped the
Calf, when we detained Moses with us forty Nights, in which you were extremely
to blame; after this, we pardoned you, it may be that you will give me thanks.
We gave unto Moses the Book, that distinguishes good from evil; perhaps you
will be converted. Remember, that Moses said to his people, You were to blame
for having Gelaldin says, the innocent slay the wicked.
adored the Calf; repent, and be converted to your Creator: Slay one another,
that will be a thing acceptable to God; he will pardon your Crime, he is
gracious and merciful. You said, O Moses, we will not believe thee, for that we
see not God; then you were smitten with thunder, you saw your Misery with your
own eyes: We have pardoned you: see Gelaldin.
nevertheless, we raised you after your death; perhaps you will give me thanks.
We covered you with the shadow of Clouds, we caused Manna and Quails to fall
upon you, and said, Eat the good things we have given you. They did us no harm,
when they murmured; they afflicted themselves. We said, Enter into that
Gelaldin says it is Jerusalem. See Kitab el tenoir.
City, and eat therein what shall content you; enter in at the gate, with
humility, and say, Remove our sins from us. I will pardon your offenses, and
increase the Graces of those that are righteous: then the wicked altered their
words that were taught them; but I sent my indignation from Heaven upon them,
according to their demerits. When Moses demanded drink for his people, we said,
Smite the Rock with thy Rod, incontinently there sprung forth twelve Fountains,
and every man knew his place, where to drink: Eat, and drink the good things of
God, and defile not the Earth any more. You said unto Moses, we are not
satisfied with one sort of meat; entreat thy Lord that he give us what the
Earth produces, Beets, Cucumbers, Garlic, Lentils, and Onions; he said,
Desire you to change good for evil? Go down into Egypt, you will there find
what you require. They were beaten with disgrace, and poverty, and returned
into the wrath of God, for that they disobeyed his Commandments, and unjustly
slew his Prophets, for which they were greatly to blame. All those that shall
believe* Christians, Jews or Samaritans, such as shall believe in God at the
day of Judgment, and do good works, shall be recompensed by their Lord, and be
free from fear, and affliction, at the day of the Resurrection. See Gelaldin.
When we received your promise, to believe in the Old Testament, we raised a
Mountain over you, to over-shadow you, and said, Comprehend with affection,
what we teach you, and remember; perhaps you will fear the fire of Hell, and
disobedience; nevertheless, you have gone astray; without the mercy of your
Lord you shall be in the number of the damned. You know what befell those that
observed not the Sabbath; we said unto them, Be ye abhorred, and despised as
Apes; We left this punishment, as an Advertisement to their Temporaries and
Posterity, and particularly, to be for an example See Kitab el tenoir.
to the true Believers. Remember thou, that Moses said unto the people, God
commands you to sacrifice a Cow. They answered, do thou mock us? He
replied, God defend me from being in the number of the ignorant. They said,
Call upon thy Lord, that he instruct us what Cow that ought to be. He said, it
must be a Cow of a middle age, neither young, nor old, and do what is commanded
you; They said, pray unto thy Lord, that he show us of what color it ought to
be. It must, said he, be of a bright, yellow color, that it may delight the
eyes of the beholders. They said, invoke thy Lord, that he instruct us, what it
ought to resemble, and we shall (if it please him) be obedient to his
Commandments. He said, God answers you, that it must be a Cow, that never
bare the yoke, to till the earth, neither water the fields, round, and that
has never labored, neither has spot upon her Body. They said, thou have now
spoken truth; they then sacrificed her, and it wanted not much, but they had
not done it: When you have slain any one, you are then full of wrath, and
become proud; God brings to light whatever you conceal; We said, smite that
dead Body with a piece of that Cow: so God raises again the dead The Turks
believe that a man shall rise again, being smitten with the tongue of that Cow.
, and manifests to you his Miracles; it may be you will comprehend them, yet
your hearts are hardened, more obdurate than Rocks; for Rivers flow from Rocks,
when they cleave and appear, or when they fall, and overturn by the permission
of his Divine Majesty. God is not ignorant of your actions. Do you desire the
Jews should believe you, because many among them write the word of God, and
alter it at pleasure, after they have See Bedaci.
comprised it? When they meet with true Believers, they say, we believe in God,
and being assembled, they say among themselves, have you entertained those true
Believers, for that God has instructed you, that they may find no excuse
against you at the day of Judgment, before his Divine Majesty? Understand you
not that they See Gelaldin.
would excuse themselves upon what you have said to them? Know they not that
God knows whatever they conceal, and what they bring to light? There be some
that know neither to read nor write, that understand nothing of Scripture, but
what they have learned from the lies of their Doctors, yet they think to be
knowing Men. Misery is upon them that conceal the Scripture in their hands,
that alter it, and say, that what they read proceeds from God to profit any
thing thereby. Misery is upon them, because of what their hands have written;
Misery is upon them, and upon what they have gained, in blaspheming against
God. They have said, we shall continue in Fire but a certain number of days:
Say* unto them, have you capitulated with God? He will not act against his
Promises: Will you speak of God what you know not? Such as have gained ought,
and were entangled in the sin of their gain, shall for ever remain in the
flames of Hell; and they (...) have faith in God, and do good works, shall
^nally enjoy the delights of Paradise. ^ber thou, that we taught the Command^
of the Law, and how we said to the (...) of Israel, worship one only God, do
good unto your Farher and Mother, to your Allies, Orphans, and the Poor: speak
mildly unto the People, make your Prayers at the time appointed, and pay your
Tithes; nevertheless they were disobedient, except some very few among them.
When we received the Commandments of God, and that we said, shed not your
Blood, neither forsake your Houses, you approved it, your selves are Witnesses;
Nevertheless you slew many, and constrained a great number to desert their
habitation, you assisted each other in injustice, and impiety. If Slaves have
recourse to you, you shall redeem them, their deliverance is appointed you: Do
you believe one part of the Scripture to abjure the other; The reward of any of
you that shall do this thing, is ignominy in this World, and to be precipitated
into the most grievous torments of Hell at the day of Judgment. God is not
ignorant of your actions. Such as purchase the Life of the World, to quit
Paradise, shall not be eased in their Miseries, and be utterly deprived of
succors. Certainly, we gave the Law to Moses, and after him sent many
Prophets; We inspired knowledge into Jesus the Son of Mary, and strengthened him
by the Holy Ghost, but you arose against the Prophets, that came contrary to
your affections, you belyed one part, and slew another. The unbelievers said,
our heart is hardened; It is God that has cursed them, by reason of their
impiety, and few of them will believe the Commandments of his Divine Majesty.
When God has sent them any Book, confirming the Scriptures, which they before
approved ( viz. the Old Testament and the Gospel) they demanded succors when
they met with the wicked, and being succored, they either understood it not,
or would not receive it. ^ The curse of God is upon Infidels, especially upon
them that have sold their Souls, and through Envy disobeyed his Commandments:
He bestows his grace on whom he pleases, they are returned in the
displeasure of his Divine Majesty, who has prepared for them grievous
torments, because of the Enormity of their Crimes. When it was said to them,
Believe in the Commandments of God; they said, Do we See Kitab el tenoir.
not believe in what has been commanded us? Nevertheless, they have no faith
in the truth which God has sent, confirming the Prophecies, and the Precepts
that they before approved; Say unto them, had you heretofore slain the
Prophets, if you had believed in his Law? Moses certainly had caused you to see
Miracles; but ye adored the Calf after his departure, wherefore you were
greatly to blame. We received your Promise, to observe the Commandments of the
Law, and raised a The Turks believe that God raised a Mountain over the
Israelites, to overshadow them.
Mountain over you; Understand with affection what we teach you, and hearken to
what is commanded you; they answered, we have heard, and disobeyed, and
inclined their heart to the adoration of the Calf, because of their impiety.
Say to them, does your faith command you to do it, if you believe in God, and
life eternal? Think upon death, if you be righteous; They regard not their past
errors, but God knows the unjust: Thou shall find them with diligence, and
desire to live a long time; The wicked hope to live a thousand years; but they
shall be exempt from the Punishment to live long; God beholds all their
Actions. Say to them, who is an Enemy to Gabriel? He by the permission of God
has inspired into Mahomet.
thee the Alcoran that confirms the ancient Scriptures, and guides the good
in the way of their Salvation, and declares to them the joys of Paradise. He
that is an Enemy to God, the Angels, his Prophet, to Gabriel and Michael, shall
be rigorously chastised, God is an Enemy to Infidels. We have sent thee
Precepts, clear, and intelligible, none will abjure them but the wicked: Some
of them have acted against their own Promises, and the greatest part is
incredulous; Many of them that have knowledge in the written Law, have forsaken
it, even when God sent them any Prophet to confirm the Scriptures, that they
had before received, and approved: They cast the Book of God behind their
Backs, as if they knew it not, and adhered to what the Devils taught in the
Reign of Solomon, (yet Solomon sinned not, but the Devils only, that instructed
the People in Magic) and what was taught by the two Angels, Arot Arot and
Marot Magicians.
and Marot in Babylon. Before they taught the people, they said, We are not
sedition, neither be you impious. The people learned of them, what concerns
the Separation of the Man and the Woman, and what breeds hatred betwixt them.
They did not harm to any by their Magic; but through the permission of God,
the people learned of them what might hurt, and not be profitable to them; they
instructed in Magic them that sold their part in Paradise, at the loss of
their Souls, although they knew their error, that they had before believed in
God, and feared his Divine Majesty. Repentance inspired by God is exceeding
profitable, if they understood to know it. O you that fear God, say not, honor
us; say, regard us, and hearken to what is commanded you. To Infidels are
prepared dolorous torments; the Jews and Christians desired not that God should
send you good, but God very liberal, gratifieth with his mercy whom he
pleases: he will not alter his Commandments, neither forget them; he will
moreover teach others more profitable, or of the like nature; know you not that
God is Omnipotent? understand you not that to God appertains the Kingdom of
Heaven, and of Earth; who except God will be your Protector? Will you question
your Prophet, as Moses was heretofore questioned? He that shall change
faithinto impiety, shall forsake the good way. Many that have The Jews and
Christians who have the written Law: See Gelaldin.
knowledge in the Scripture, endeavored to mislead you through impiety and
Envy, notwithstanding they are not ignorant of the Truth; forgive them, and
beware of them, until God has (otherwise) disposed, he is Omnipotent. Make
your Prayers at the time appointed, and pay your Tithes, you shall find before
God the good that you do for your Souls; he beholds all your Actions. They
have said, that none but the Jews and Christians shall enter into Paradise, it
is their false invention; say unto them, if you be good Men, bring your Reasons
on the contrary, he that resigneth himself to God, and is a just Man, shall be
recompensed by his Divine Majesty, there needs not be any fear for him, he
shall not be tormented in the fire of Hell. The Jews say, the Christians are
void of reason; and the Christians affirm the Jews to be without reason,
nevertheless they study the Scripture, so speak the ignorant, God will
determine their difference at the day of the Resurrection. Who is more unjust,
than he that hindered, that God be remembered in Temples, and that studieth
naught but their destruction? Such men cannot enter therein, but with fear and
terror; they shall have on Earth shame upon the Forehead, and, in the other
World shall suffer exceeding great torments. The East and West are Gods,
whithersoever men turn themselves, the Face of God does there meet them, his
Divinity extends through the whole Earth. They said, believe you that God
has a Son? Praised be God on the contrary; whatever is either in Earth or
Heaven, appertains to his Divine Majesty, and all things obey him; he has
created Heaven and Earth, and when he wills any thing, he says, Be thou, and
it is. The unbelievers said, if God speak not to us, or if thou performest no
Miracles, we will not believe thee; their Predecessors have said as much, and
their words have been like unto their hearts; we have caused Miracles to appear
to the righteous, and have sent thee to preach and instruct the people; inquire
not why those that shall descend into Hell will not believe thee; the Jews and
Christians will not be satisfied of thee, until thou follow their opinion; say
unto them, there is no better guide in the World than God: take heed lest thou
follow their Appetites, after that thou have comprehended the knowledge which
we inspired into thee; who except God, will be thy defender? They whom we have
taught the Scripture, that study and read it with truth, believe the contents
of it; and they that do not believe, are damned. O Children of Israel, call to
mind the favor that I did you; I preferred you before all the World, fear the
day wherein one Soul shall not be able to assist another, when a Ransom shall
not be accepted, neither excuse; and when the wicked shall not be protected.
Remember thou, that Abraham requested of the Lord an accomplishment of his
Word; he said to him, I will establish thee among the people, to teach them the
Mysteries of my Law: and he said, what shall become of my Lineage? He answered,
Paradise shall not be open to the unjust. We have established the Temple of
Mecca for a sure refuge of the people, in Repentance; he made his Oratory at
Abraham's Abraham's place is an Oratory in the Temple of Mecca.
place; and we have commanded Abraham and Ismael to keep clean my house for
them that shall repair thither in Procession, with humility and adoration. When
Abraham received this command, he said, Lord fortify this City, and enrich its
people with all good things, and all the inhabitants thereof, that shall
believe in thy Divine Majesty, and the day of Judgment. God said, I will for a
time enrich the Infidels also, and precipitate them into the fire of Hell,
where they shall remain to all Eternity. When Abraham and Ismael raised the
Foundations of the Temple of Mecca, Abraham said, Lord accept our Vows; thou
understandest all, and know all things: Lord give us the grace to be
obedient to thy Commandments, and let a people issue from our Loins that may
observe thy Law: Show us the way we ought to follow, and have mercy upon us;
thou art gracious and merciful: Lord send to this thy people a Prophet of their
Nation, to preach to them thy Commandments, to instruct them in Scripture and
knowledge, and to purify them, thou art Omnipotent and wise. No man shall
abandon the Law of Abraham, but to his own damage, I have chosen him in this
World, and he is in the other, in the number of the just. Remember thou, that
his Lord said to him, Be thou obedient to thy Lord, and trust thou in him; he
said, I resign my self to God, Lord of the Universe: He commanded Jacob and his
Children, to follow the Law of God. My Children, God has taught you his Law,
trust you in him, be obedient to him even unto death. Were you present when
Jacob was near unto death? and when he said to his Sons, Whom will ye adore
after me? They answered, We will worship thy God, the God of our Fathers,
Abraham, Ismael, and Isaac, one sole God; we resign our selves to his pleasure.
The good that those men gained, remained to them, and the evil that you shall
commit, shall be against you; enquire not after what they did. They have said,
Be ye either Jew, or Christian, you shall follow the right way. Say unto them,
contrariwise, The Law of Abraham is most just, he was not of the number of them
that believed in many Gods. Say ye, We believe in God, in what he inspired into
Abraham, Ismael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, in what was taught Moses, Jesus,
and all the Prophets, we rely upon God. If they believe as you do, they shall
not err; if they abandon your faith, they will have a controversy with you,
but God shall protect you; he understands whatever they say, and what they
do; he has purified his Law, and what better Purification is there, than that
of his Divine Majesty? Say unto them, Will you dispute with us concerning God,
who is your, and our Lord? We will answer with our Actions, and you shall
answer with yours; all our confidence is in his Divine Pleasure. Will you say,
that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, were Jews or Christians? Are you
more knowing than God? Who is more unjust, than he that concealeth the Miracles
that he has seen to proceed from God? He is not ignorant of all your Actions.
The good that those men have done, remain to them; and the evil that they shall
commit, shall be against you: enquire not after what they did. Some ignorant
among the people will say, Their Prophet does not appoint them to turn the face
to that side, to which they turned heretofore, when they made their Orisons.
Say unto them, The East and West belong unto God; he directs in the right way
whom he pleases. As we have conducted you into the right way; we have likewise
commanded you to do that which is just; that you be witnesses See Gelaldin.
against the people at the day of judgment, and the Prophet witness against
you. I have not ordained, that you turn your face as heretofore, when you made
your Orisons; to the end, they may be known that follow the Prophet, from them
that return to their impiety. It will be irksome to the people to turn to that
side, except to such as God has guided into the right way. God will not make
vain your belief; he is gracious and merciful to his people. I see that thou
liftest up thy face to Heaven, turn which way shall please thee; but turn thou
toward These are the Jews and Christians that follow the written Law.
Mecca, wheresoever thou art: They, to whom heretofore the knowledge of
Scripture was given, knew that the Truth proceeded from their Lord; what they
do is not concealed from God, when thou shall meet them; and that they will not
turn themselves, as thou, in making their Prayers; do not thou likewise turn,
as they, they turn not all the same way, follow not their Appetites, having
comprehended the knowledge that has been inspired into thee, left thou fall
into the number of the unjust. Many, to whom we have given the knowledge of the
written Law, understand it perfectly, as also do their Children; nevertheless,
they conceal the Truth, and are not ignorant that it proceeds from thy Lord:
Be not thou of the number of them that doubt. Turn thy self always toward
Mecca. Do good wheresoever thou art, God will be with thee; he is Omnipotent.
From what place soever thou go forth, turn thy face toward Mecca: This is
reasonable, and ordained by thy Lord. Whatsoever you do, is not hid from God;
wheresoever you are, turn toward Mecca, that none may find wherewith to
reprove your actions, but the unjust; fear not them, but fear me. I will
accomplish my Grace upon you, and you shall be guided through the right way. We
have sent unto you a Prophet of your Nation, that shall teach you my
Commandments, and purify you. He shall instruct you in the Scripture, in
knowledge, and in what you understand not. Remember me, I will remember you;
praise me, and be not in the number of the wicked. O ye that are So the Turks
style themselves.
True believers! implore succor with Patience and Prayers. Certainly, God is
with such as are patient: Say not, that those that are slain for the defense of
their Law, are dead, contrariwise they are alive, but you know it not. I will
try you, and afflict you through the loss of your Goods, and disease of your
Persons: Paradise shall be for them that shall be patient, and shall say in
their affliction, We are given up unto God, and shall return before him to be
judged; his Grace shall be upon them, and they shall not err. Safa and Meroa
are Mountains near Mecca.
Safa and Meroa are Tokens of his power: He that shall go on Pilgrimage to
Mecca, shall not do amiss to visit those two places; he that obeys, shall do
well. God rewards them that do good works, and knows all things. I will lay
my Curse upon such as conceal my Commandments, they shall be accursed above
whatever is in this world; except them that shall be converted, that shall do
good works, and bring to light what they concealed, I will give them my Grace;
I am gracious and merciful: The wicked that died in their impiety, shall be
eternally accursed of God, of Angels, and of all the World, they shall never be
eased in their torments, and shall be, without end, deprived of protection.
Your God, is one sole God; there is none other God, but God gracious and
merciful. The Creation of the Heavens, and the Earth, the difference of the day
and the night, the Ship that saileth on the Sea for the advantage of Commerce,
the Rain that falls from Heaven, to give Life to the Earth after it is death,
the diversity of Winds, and the Clouds that move between Heaven and Earth, are
Signs of the Unity of God, to those that can understand it. There be, that
adore Idols, and love them; the True believers love but one sole God. When thou
shall see the wicked, know, they shall one day see the punishment of other
Crimes. All strength and Virtue proceeds from God, most severe in his
Chastisements. When that a part of them that had embraced the true Law,
separated themselves from the Company of True believers, and that any mischief
befell them, they could not reunite themselves: Then they said, in their
affliction, If we another time meet our Companions, we will separate our selves
from them, as they have separated themselves from us: Thus shall God give them
to understand See Kit^ el te^oir.
their Error, with exceeding sorrow, and they shall be eternally confined in
the fire of Hell. O ye people! eat what is good and savoury in the Earth, and
follow not the steps of the Devil; he is your open enemy, he will command you
that which is evil, and filthy; and to speak of God what you know not. When it
was said to the Infidels, obey the Commandments of God, they said, We will
follow the steps of our Fathers; we will observe, what they observed: surely
their Fathers were unwise, and mis led; they are like to him that cries, and
understands nothing of what is spoken, but the voice; they are deaf, dumb,
blind, and without judgment. O ye, that believe in God, eat the good things
that he has given you, and give him thanks, if it be him that you worship. He
forbids you* to eat Carrion, Blood, Swines flesh, and whatever is not
killed, in pronouncing the name of his Divine Majesty, except it be in extreme
necessity, and in this case, it shall not be reputed disobedience, nor sin; God
is benign, and merciful: what they eat, that conceal the Word of God, for any
profit or advantage, shall be nothing but matter of fire in their bowels, God
shall not speak to them at the day of judgment, but with fury; he will not
purify them, and they shall suffer rigorous torments. They that have purchased
Error for the right way, and punishment for pardon, shall burn in the fire of
Hell; for that God has sent the most true Book that contains his
Commandments; they that impugn what is contained in that Book, are in an
exceeding great Error, far from the truth. It is not justification to turn the
Face, making your Prayers toward the East or West; he shall be justified, that
shall believe in God, the day of judgment, the Angels, the Scriptures, and the
Prophets; and that in Charity shall impart some part of his Goods to his
Parents, to Orphans, to the Poor, to Pilgrims, and to Slaves. Such as believe
in God, and have his fear before their Eyes, persevere in their Prayers, pay
Tithes; they satisfy their Promises, and are patient in their adversities. O
ye that believe! the Talio is commanded you in murder, the free for the free,
the Slave for the Slave, the Woman for the Woman. But if any one pardon the
blood of his Brother, he shall prosecute the Malefactor, according to what he
shall see most advantageous, through damages and interests: It is a facility
which God has given you, through his mercy. He that shall do injury to the
Malefactor, having received satisfaction of him, shall suffer grievous
torments; at the day of Judgment you The Talio is a pain equal to the offense.
shall find life in the Talio. O you that are wise! it may be you will fear
God: He commands you to make your Testament, when you approach unto death;
give Legacies of your substance to your Father, and Mother, your near Kindred,
and bestow Alms on the poor. If any man alter your Testament, the sin shall be
upon him, and upon all them that shall alter it: God understands, and knows
all things. If any one fears that there is an Error in the Testament, that
opposes Reason, he shall do well to reconcile the parties with affection, God
is gracious and bountiful. O ye that believe! Fasting is commanded you, as it
was them that were before you; you shall fear God, and Fast, particularly, a
certain number of days; but if any one among you is sick, or in travel, at the
time of Fasting, he shall count the days that he fasted not, and shall fulfill
them at another time. Such as are not of strength to Fast, shall satisfy for
Fasting, through Alms; he that shall obey, shall do well: If you Fast, you
shall do well. Fast the month of Ramazan is their Easter, which continues
thirty days; during which they Fast.
Ramazan, in which the Alcoran descended from Heaven, to guide men into the
right way; it contains Precepts of Divine Right, and distinguishes good from
evil, all those that live to this Month, ought to Fast. He that is sick, or in
a Voyage, shall accomplish the days that he* Fasted not another time, at his
Convenience: God wills that his Law should be light unto you, and not a
Burden; his Will is, that you observe the days of Fasting, and that you return
him thanks, for that he has guided you in the right way, perhaps you will give
him thanks; I will be near unto my Servants, when they shall enquire of thee
concerning the Mysteries of my Law; I will hear their Supplications when they
invoke me, that they may persevere in obedience to my Commandments;
peradventure they will follow the right way. It is lawful for you See Gelaldin.
to know your Wives the night of Fasting, they are necessary to you, as your
Clothes, and you are to them as necessary as their Garments: God knows, that
otherwise you should have betrayed your Souls; he is bountiful to you, and has
pardoned you, know them, and perform what God has appointed you. Eat and
drink, until you may distinguish a white thread from a black by the light of
the morning, then begin to fast until night; Know not your wives when you are
in the Temple: Such are the limits prescribed of God, transgress them not: So
God manifests his Commandment to the people, perhaps they will have the fear
of his Divine Majesty before their eyes. Dispend not your Goods unprofitably,
and with Vanity, and corrupt not the Judges with Gifts, and Presents, to eat
maliciously the substance of another, they will question you concerning the new
Moon, say ye, That it is the sign of the time appointed for Pilgrimages; It is
not reasonable that you should enter the house of another a back way, he that
fears God, does well to enter through the gate. Fear God and you shall be
happy; Fight for his Law against them that assault you, and do wrong to no man,
he loves not them that are unjust, fly Infidels wheresoever you find them,
and expel them out of the place, from which they shall have driven you;
Sedition is worse than murder; fight not against them at Mecca, until they
assault you; if they there fight you, kill them, such is the punishment of
Infidels: if they set a period to their infidelity, God will be to them
gracious and merciful: Fight against them to avoid Sedition: Faith proceeds
from God: If they desist from their impiety, you shall exercise no hostility
against them, but only against the wicked: If they fight you in the Month of
Mharam, you shall fight them also in that same Month, and observe Reciprocation
in honors. Offend them that shall offend you in that Month, in the same manner
that they shall have offended you. Fear God, and know that he is with them that
fear him, dispend for his Glory, and throw not your selves into your own
destruction; do good, he loves those that do good, accomplish the Pilgrimage
appointed, if you be not hindered by your enemies, or have not Convenience to
perform it; Shave not your heads, until you arrive at the place appointed for
Sacrifices; if any of you be diseased, or sick in the head, he shall there give
satisfaction by fasting, Alms, and Sacrifices, when you shall be in a place of
safety, and secure from your enemies. Such as shall be hindered to accomplish
Pilgrimage, and such as have not means to satisfy for the Sacrifices ordained,
shall fast three days, during the time of Pilgrimage, and seven days at their
return, which is in all ten days, if they be not inhabitants at Mecca, with
their Wives and Families. Fear See the explication of Chasai.
God, and know, that he is severe in his punishments; Pilgrimage ought to be
performed in a certain Month, they that shall desire to perform it, at the time
prescribed, shall not know their Wives, they shall be humble, and shall have no
quarrel in that Voyage; God knows all your good Actions, he shall augment
your faculties, he is a great rewarder. Oh you that are wise, fear me, you sin
not in demanding good from your Lord, and making Merchandise in that Voyage.
When you shall depart from the Mountain of Arefat, remember God in that of
Mouchar, remember how he has guided you, Bedaci says, pass where Adam and
Abraham passed.
and how you were before out of the way; pass through the place, through which
that people were wont to pass, and implore pardon of God, he is gracious and
merciful. Having finished your Orisons, remember God with affection, as your
Fathers remembered you; There be among the people, that say, Lord give us good
in this World, and have no part in the other. Others there be, that say, Lord
bestow on us the good of this World, Paradise in the other, and deliver us from
the fire of Hell; They shall all find the good and the evil that they have
done, God is exact to keep account; He that shall advance his Voyage two days,
shall not sin, neither he that shall retard it, if he fear God; Fear God, and
know, that you shall all one day appear before his Divine Majesty to be judged.
There be men whose Speech will be pleasing to thee in this World, they will
call God to witness what is in their hearts, nevertheless they are very
pernicious, when removed from thee, and traveling upon the earth, they there
commit filthiness, and (...) both Village and Fruits. God loves not disorders;
When it was said to them, fear God, Pride, with si^, possessed them, but Hell
shall be their habitation. Some there be among the people, that sell their own
Persons, out of a great desire to please God, surely he is gracious to them
that serve him. Oh ye that believe in God! be obedient to his Commandments, and
pursue not the steps of the Devil, he is your open Enemy; if you sin against
God, having once learned his Commandments, know, that he is Omnipotent to
chastise you, and prudent in all his works. Will the wicked expect that God
should appear to them in the obscurity of a Cloud? Or else the Angels with
Command to extirpate them, they shall be assembled before his Divine Majesty to
be judged. Demand of the Children of Israel, how many Miracles were made appear
to them? He that alters the grace he shall have received of God, shall be
severely punished. The wicked esteem the Life of the World, and scorn those
that believe in God; but such as believe God, shall be above them at the day of
Judgment; he enricheth with innumerable good things whom he pleases. The Sea
Kit^ el teno^r.
World was all of one Religion, before impiety took place: God sent his
Prophets to instruct the people, to show them their Error, and declare to them
the joys of Paradise; he sent with them, the Book of truth, to judge the
differences among men, no man contradicted the Contents of it, but The Jews and
Christians.
such as had knowledge of the Scripture, and this caused the Envy that is risen
among them; God guided them that observed his See Gelaldin.
Commandments, and such, as with his permission, obeyed his Will, he directs
in the right way whom it pleases him. Do ye believe to enter Paradise, unless
that happen to you, that befell your Predecessors? They were touched with
Miseries, and Diseases, and trembled, until that very instant that the Prophet
said to the true believers that were with him; When shall Divine succor come?
notwithstanding Divine succor was not far off; They shall question thee
concerning what they ought to expend; Say unto them, you shall assist with your
goods, your Father and Mother, your Allies, Orphans, the Poor, and Pilgrims.
God will understand all the good you shall do; Fighting is enjoined you,
although it be against your Will; it may chance that you will shun that which
is profitable to you, and likewise love what is pernicious to you, God knows
what you know not. They shall ask of thee, if they shall fight in the Month of
Mharam; say unto them, great Battles shall happen in this Month, that shall
shut up to the people the way of the Law of God; and impieties, that shall
hinder the multitude to go to Mecca. To drive the people from Mecca is an
exceeding great sin: Sedition is worse than murder; The wicked shall not cease
to fight you, until they have, if they can accomplish it, mis^led you from your
Religion. His good works among you, that shall quit his Law, and die an
Infidel, shall be vain in this World, and himself be confined in the fire of
Hell; Such as believe in God, that separate themselves from the impious, that
abandon their Houses for the service of his Divine Majesty, and that fight for
the Faith, hope for his Mercy, he is gracious and merciful. They will enquire
of thee concerning Wine, and Games of hazard; say unto them, that it is in them
a very great sin, and yet of Utility to Men; but the evil that they cause, is
much greater than the profit they reap. They will demand what they ought to
expend in good works; say unto them, what shall remain to you, your own Affairs
being done. So God teaches you his Commandments, peradventure you will call to
mind the things of Earth and Heaven. They will enquire concerning Orphans; say
unto them, if their substance be intermingled with your own, do them no wrong,
they are your Brethren in God, he knows them that do good, and those that do
Evil: if it had pleased him, he had detained much more from you, for he is
Omnipotent and just. Marry not women that believe in many Gods, until they
believe in one sole God; a Slave that is a true Believer, is of more value than
a free Infidel, notwithstanding she is beautiful. Infidels shall be summoned to
Hell fire, and God calls men to Paradise, and to his mercy, through his mere
good Pleasure, and declares to them his Commandments, perhaps they will
remember them. They will enquire of thee concerning the Monthly terms of Women;
answer, that they are unclean; separate your selves from your Wives when they
are menstruous, and come not nigh them until they be purified; when they shall
be clean, approach them, according to what God has commanded: he loves them
that repent of their Errors, that are clean and purified; your Wives are your
Tillage, go to your Tillage at your Pleasure, and do good for your Souls; you
shall one day find it, fear God and preach his Commandments to the true
Believers. Your Religion does not permit you to swear by God in vain, and
oftentimes to justify your selves; God understands and knows all things,
he will not regard what you shall speak at Random, that shall not be hurtful to
any, but he will see what it shall be in your heart. He will be gracious and
merciful to such as shall swear, not to touch their Wives for the space of four
Months; if they return to them, he is gracious and merciful; but if they desire
to repudiate them, he understands, and knows all things. Women divorced,
shall tarry until their Terms be past four times, before they Marry again, it
is not permitted them to conceal what God has created in their Womb, if they
believe in his divine Majesty, and the Day of Judgment; if they fly from their
Husbands, they shall be brought again to them, which is a thing reasonable.
They ought to honor them, and their Husbands likewise ought to honor them,
but the Husbands have a degree of advantage above them. God is Omnipotent, and
most wise in what he ordains. Divorce the first and second time, ought to be
performed with mildness, courtesy, and good deeds; it is not lawful for you to
take any thing from your Wives, of what you have given them, if you both fear a
disability of not satisfying the Commandments of God; but if you both fear to
transgress the bounds prescribed by God, you shall do well to accord together,
such are the commandments of his Divine Majesty, transgress them not, such as
transgress them are exceedingly to blame. He that shall have repudiated his
Wife thrice, shall not resume her, until she has been married to another that
has divorced her: then they may return to each other, and marry again without
Sin, if they think themselves able to continue within the limits prescribed by
God, which he manifests to the wise and prudent. When you shall repudiate
your Wives, appoint them the time they must tarry, before they again marry,
take them with civility and modesty, and in the like manner dismiss them, give
them presents according to your abilities, and take them not, to abuse nor
torment them; they that do this, offend their own Souls. Mock not at the
Commandments of God: Remember his favors, and how he has taught you
Scripture, Knowledge, and the mysteries of his Law; Fear God, and know that he
understands all your actions. When you repudiate your Wives, appoint them
they ought to tarry, before they marry again, and hinder them not to marry
according to the Commandments of God. These things are preached to them among
you that believe in God, and in the Day of Judgment, it is requisite so to make
use of them. God knows what you know not. The Women shall give suck to their
Children two years entire; if they desire to accomplish the time appointed to
suckle them, the Father shall nourish and cloth the Wife; and his Children,
according to his faculties; expend not, but according to the measure of your
goods: the Father and Mother shall not necessitate themselves for their
Children: the heir shall perform what is above ordained, (he shall entertain
his Father and Mother according See Gelaldin.
to his abilities;) if the Parents desire to wean their Children before two
years be expired, they may do it without offending God, if they both agree to
it. If you cause your Children to be nursed by other Women than your own Wives,
God will not be offended, in giving them their sallary, according to reason and
honesty: fear God, and know that he sees what ever you do. Widows shall tarry
four months and ten nights after the death of their Husbands, before they marry
again; this time being accomplished, they shall do what shall seem good to
them, according to reason and honesty, God knows all your actions. You will
not offend God in speaking a word in secret to Women that you research in
marriage, although you conceal in your mind your design to espouse them, he
understands what ever you think of them; know them not secretly, until you
have pronounced the words appointed by the Law; and enter not the bonds of
marriage, until the time set down in writing be accomplished, God knows
whatever is in your hearts: take heed unto your selves, he is gentle and
gracious to them that fear him. It is no sin to repudiate your Wives, before
you have touched them; you shall give them some presents, and do good unto
them, according to the proportion of your wealth, or poverty; and civilly
entreat them, as is the custom of honest Men. If you repudiate them before you
have touched them, and have bestowed on them any presents of garments,
movables, and other things, they shall have the moity, if they release it not
to you, or if the Husband, remitting with his own hand the tie of marriage,
does not leave to them the whole, of courtesy: it is requisite to gratify
them, and to forget nothing of the benefits between you, God beholds all your
actions: stand upon your guard, when you make your prayers, especially, that at
noon, and be obedient unto God. If you fear your enemies, and cannot place your
selves on your knees, neither perform the Ceremonies that are appointed you;
omit not to say your prayers on foot, or on horseback, and being freed from
fear, remember God, and how he has taught you what you know not. Such as die,
shall be good to their Wives by their Testament; they shall bestow on them
wherewith to live during the time they must tarry before they marry again;
drive them not from your houses: If they willingly depart, the sin of what they
shall do in their own persons, shall not be upon you. God is Omnipotent, and
just; you shall likewise do good to your Wives that you have divorced,
according to your power, it is a thing reasonable among such as fear God: Thus
God teaches you his Commandments, perhaps you will learn them. See you not
them that departed their houses for the fear they had of death? they are
thousands in number; God has said to them, die: after this, he raised them
again: God is the Benefactor of the People, but the greatest part return him no
thanks for his favors. Fight for his Law, and know, that he understands and
knows all things. Who is he that will afford him a good turn? He will augment
him with multiplicity of increase; he gives good, and takes it away from whom
it pleases him; you shall all return before him to be judged. Know thou
not, that a company of the Children of Israel, after the death of Moses, said
to their Prophet, send us a King, we with him will fight for the Law of God? He
answers them, have you disobeyed the Commandments of God? If they enjoin you
to fight, you will not do it: They said, we have no greater desire, than to
fight for the glory of his Divine Majesty; we for this Cause have abandoned our
houses, and those of our Parents: nevertheless, when they were commanded to
fight, they all, except some few of them, retired; but God knows them that
sin against him. Their Prophet said to them, God has sent Saul to be your
King; they answered, why shall he be our King? we rather deserve the Royalty
than he, he is not rich enough; he replied, God has chosen him to command you;
he has increased his knowledge, and Stature, he gives Royalty to whom he
lists, he is liberal and prudent in all his Actions. Their Prophet said to
them, the sign of his Reign shall be, that the Ark shall appear to you from
God, to confirm your hearts; wherein shall be contained the remainder of what
the people of Moses and Aaron left, and it shall be born by Angels; this shall
be to you the sign of his Reign, if you believe in God. When Saul went forth
with his Troops to fight his Enemies, he said, God shall try you by a River; he
that shall drink of that River, shall not be mine, unless he drink with his
hand; they all, except some few of them drank at their Pleasure; and having
past that River with the true Believers, they said, we have not this day
strength sufficient to resist Goliath and his Troops; but such as believed in
God, and feared his Divine Majesty, said, how often, through the permission of
God, has a small Troop defeated a great Army? He is with them that are
patient: when they saw Goliath with his Troops appear; they said, Lord, give us
patience, confirm our steps, and give us Victory over the Infidels. They,
through the permission of God, vanquished their Enemies; David slew Goliath, and
God See Gelaldin.
gave him the Royalty, and knowledge of future things. Had not God raised the
people one against the other, the whole Earth had been full of disorders; such
are the Miracles of God, as I declare to thee with truth; thou art indeed one
of the Prophets of his Divine Majesty. We have conferred our graces on the
Prophets, on some more than on others; many have spoken to their Lord, and some
have been more elevated than others. We gave knowledge to Jesus the Son of
Mary, and fortified him through the Holy Spirit. Had it pleased God, the
Prophets that came heretofore, had not been slain, after they had taught his
Commandments. Men were of different Opinions; some believed in God, others were
impious; had it pleased God, they had not been slain, but he does what pleases
him. O ye that are true Believers! dispense in Alms some part of your wealth
that we have given you, before the day arrive, wherein you shall find no
Ransom, Alms, Protection, nor Prayers that can succor you. Certainly Infidels
are greatly to blame. God! There is but one only God, living and eternal; think
not that he slumbereth or sleeps; whatever is in Heaven or in Earth is his;
who shall intercede for thee with his Divine Majesty unless by his permission?
He knows all the Actions of men, and whatever they have done; they know
nothing, but what it has pleased him ^o teach them. The largeness of his
Throne contains Heaven and Earth, and the Conservation of both is not
troublesome to him, he is Omnipotent and glorious. The Law ought not to be
abjured, it manifests the difference of Faith and Impiety: He that believes
not in Tagot, or the Devil, and has Faith in God, lays hold on the strongest
knot, that cannot be dissolved, broken, or cut asunder. God understands and
knows all things; he aideth and assisteth them that believe in his Unity; he
will cause them to come out of darkness, and will guide them into light: the
wicked shall have Tagot, and the Devil for their Protector; he shall cause them
to forsake the light, and shall lead them into darkness: such men shall remain
eternally in the fire of Hell. Consider you not his Action, to whom God had
given the Royalty? When he disputed concerning That is Nebrot. See Gelaldin.
God with Abraham, Abraham said to him; My Lord is he that gives life, and
death; He said I, even I, give life and death to my Subject, when I see good:
Abraham answered, God causes the Sun to rise in the East, make thou it to
arise in the West; then the Infidel was confuted, God is not a guide to unjust
Persons. Have thou considered the action of him that came into a Village
desolate and ruined, and said, How is it that God can be able to give life unto
this Village after it is death, and re-establish it after so great a ruin? Then
God caused him to die, after the space of an hundred years raised him again,
and said to him, How long have thou continued here; he answered; I have
sojourned here a day and a half; On the contrary, thou have been here an
hundred years; consider thy Meat and Drink, that they are not altered through
length of time; and behold, thine Ass is dead, see his bones, that are white;
thou shall become an example to all the World, and to Posterity; see the bones
of thine Ass; I will recollect and revest them with flesh: Seeing this Miracle,
he said, I affirm that God is Omnipotent; Remember thou, that Abraham said,
Lord show me how thou revivest the dead; God said, Do thou not believe my
Omnipotency? He answered, yea, Lord, but hear my Prayer for the repose of my
heart; God said, Take four Birds, cut them altogether in pieces, and carry the
pieces upon those Mountains; this done, call them, they shall speedily return
to thee; God knows all things, and is most prudent in all his works. The
action of them that dispend their Goods for his glory, is like unto a Grain of
Corn that produces seven ears, and every ear an hundred Grains: God
multiplieth the wealth of whom it pleases him, he is liberal and omniscient:
Such as dispend their substance for his glory, without repining, and reproach,
shall be recompensed by his Divine Majesty, and be delivered from fear and
affliction at the day of Judgment. Good words and pardon are preferred to
Alms, followed with repentance: God is most rich and merciful. Oh ye that
believe in God! render not your Alms unprofitable through repining and
reproach, as do those, that give Alms with Ostentation and hypocrisy; they
believe, neither in God, nor the day of Judgment, their good works are like to
a Rock, whereon was little Earth, there fell great Rain that carried it away,
and left nothing thereon: their Labor shall be in vain, and they reap no
merit, for God loves neither the Hypocrites nor the impious. The action of
such as do good, to please God or to save their Souls, is like to a Grain sown
upon an high place, whereon fell great and small Rain, that caused it is Fruit
to multiply: God beholds all your Actions. Is there any one among you that
desires to have a Garden enriched with Palms, and Grapes, wherein flow many
Fountains and Rivolets, and that is filled with all manner of Fruits, that old
Age should overtake him with young and infirm Children, and that an hot wind
come, and burn up his Garden? God so teaches you his Mysteries; peradventure
you will bear them in mind. Oh ye that believe! dispend in pious works, and
give Alms of the wealth you have acquired, and of the Fruits of the Earth that
God has given you; desire not wealth ill gotten, or wherewith to give Alms;
such are not received but to your shame; And know, that God is most rich, and
worthy of praise. The Devil will cause you to fear Poverty, and will command
you filthiness, and God promises to you his Grace and Mercy; he is munificent,
and omniscient, he gives knowledge to whom it pleases him, and to whom
knowledge is given, on him is bestowed an exceeding great Treasure, which none
but the wise do value; God beholds your alms, and vows, and the wicked shall
be deprived of protection at the day of Judgment. If you suffer your alms to
appear, it shall not be amiss; if you conceal them, you shall do well, that
will cover many of your sins; God knows all your actions. You are not obliged
to lead Men into the right way, God guides whom he lists; the good and the
alms that you perform, shall be for your Souls; give not alms but for the love
of God, you shall be rewarded for the good works that you shall do, and no
injustice shall be done against you; Be benefactors to the poor, that are not
accommodated for the service of God, and that cannot labor. The ignorant
believe them to be rich, by reason of their probity and goodness, you shall
know them by their Physiognomy, and in that they demand nothing with
importunity; God will know the good you shall do toward them; They that give
alms, by day or by night, secretly or publicly, shall be rewarded of God;
there needs be no fear for them, they shall be exempt from affliction at the
day of Judgment; Usurers shall rise again, like to Men possessed with Devils,
because they have said, that traffic is like unto Usury; God permits
traffic, and prohibiteth usury; he to whom the word of God comes, and who
has abandoned Usury, what is past, is to himself, God will pardon his fault;
but he that shall return to exercise Usury, having once abandoned it, shall be
punished in the fire of Hell; God abhors Usury, he loves them that are
alms-givers, and hates Infidels; Such as believe in God, that do good works,
and that make their prayers at the time appointed, and pay their Tyths, shall
be rewarded by his Divine Majesty, they shall be delivered from fear and
affliction at the day of Judgment. O ye that believe in God! have the fear of
him before your eyes, and forsake Usury, if you will obey his Commandments; if
you do not this, God and his Prophet will make War upon you; if you be
converted, your principal remains unto you; Do injustice to no Man, it shall
not be done unto you. If your debtors be unable to pay you, and are in want,
you shall do well to stay their convenience; if you give them alms, you shall
do well; fear the day when you shall return before God, and that every one
shall be paid, without injustice, of what he shall have gained. O ye that
believe in God! when you shall charge your selves with any debt, cause an act
to be drawn; the Notary shall write the Contract between you, conformable to
Justice, and shall not refuse to write it, as God has instructed him, but the
debtor shall entirely satisfy what he shall owe, and shall have the fear of
his Lord before his eyes; if he that is a debtor is a fool, or sick, and is
unable of himself to discharge it, his Guardian, or he that shall oversee his
affairs, shall give satisfaction for him. Call with you two witnesses, if you
cannot find two Men, one, with two Women shall suffice, whose testimony you
shall accept; if the one be wanting to her duty, the other shall cause her to
remember; these witnesses shall not refuse their testimony, notwithstanding
they be called in a great number. Make no difficulty to write your testimony,
whether it concern little or much, and limit the time wherein payment ought to
be made; such writings are just before God, give more efficacy to testimony,
and are requisite to avoid your complaints one of another; If your merchandise
be present, you shall take it between you at the same time, then shall you not
sin in not drawing a writing, or contract. Call witnesses when you sell or buy;
neither the witnesses, nor the Notary shall receive any damage; If you shall do
that which is forbidden, you shall do very ill: Fear God, he will teach you his
Commandments, he knows all things. If you are in a journey, and cannot find a
Notary, you shall give earnest; If one trusts in the other, he that shall be
trusted in, shall satisfy his promise, and fear God his Lord; no Man shall
conceal his testimony; he that shall conceal, shall sin in his heart; God
knows all your actions. Whatsoever is in Heaven, or in Earth, belonging unto
God, whether you conceal, or reveal what is in your minds, he shall require an
account of you, he pardons, and chastises whom it pleases him, he is
Omnipotent. The Prophet believed in all that God sent to him, as likewise all
the true believers: Such as believe in God, the Angels, and Scriptures, and
generally all the Prophets, without exception, say, We have heard and obeyed;
Pardon us, O Lord! Thou art our refuge; God requires of no Man more than he is
able to perform; the good that a Man shall do, shall be for himself, and the
evil that he does shall be likewise against him. Lord excuse us, if we have
forgotten thee, or sinned; Lord charge us not with any heavy burden, as thou
did charge them that were before us; charge us not with that which we are not
able to support, blot out our sins, and give us thy mercy; Thou art our Lord,
give us victory against the Infidels.

CHAP. III. The Chapter of the Lineage of Joachim, containing two hundred
Verses, written at Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful; I am the most wise God. God! There
is but one only God, living, and eternal; He has sent to thee the Book that
contains truth, and confirms the Scriptures, that were sent before it. He
sent the Old Testament, and the Gospel, that were heretofore guides to the
People; He has sent the Alcoran, that distinguishes good from evil; they that
believe not in the Law of God, shall be severely chastised. He is Omnipotent
and revengeful; Nothing is hid from him in Heaven, or in Earth; It is he that
formed you in the Wombs of your Mothers, as it pleased him, there is no God,
but the Omnipotent, and Wise God. He it See Kitab el tenoir.
is that sent to thee the Book, whose precepts are necessary, they are the
original, and foundation of the Law, like in purity one to the other, and
without contradiction. Such as in their heart incline to depart from the truth,
do often follow their inclination, desirous of Sedition, and to understand the
explication of the Alcoran; but none understand it is explication, but God, and
such as are profound in learning; they say, we believe in God, all things
proceed from his Divine Wisdom, nevertheless none remember, but the wise. Lord
cause not our hearts to err, after thou have guided us into the right way,
give us thy mercy, thou art most bountiful toward thy Creatures. Lord thou art
he that shall assemble the World at the Day of Judgment, at which day nothing
shall be found doubtful, when thou will not go against thy Promises, and when
wealth and Children shall not serve to the wicked, but to kindle the fire of
Hell. The Infidel Lineage of Pharaoh, and those that preceded him, blasphemed
and abjured the Law of God, but he surprised them in their sin; he is grievous
in his Chastisements. Say to the Infidels, they shall be vanquished, and shall
be gathered together into the fire of Hell, that is prepared for them. You have
an example in the two Troops that fought for the glory of God, they beheld with
their eyes, Infidels become true Believers, like unto themselves; God
strengthens with his Aid, whom it pleases him; this shall be for example to
such as shall clearly see. The love and desire of Women, of Children, of
Riches, abundance of Gold, and of Silver, of Horses, Cattle, and of Tillage,
are pleasing to Men; such are the Riches of the life of this World, but the
most assured refuge is in God. Say unto them; I will declare unto you things
much better for them, that shall have the fear of God before their eyes: they
shall dwell eternally in Paradise, where flow many Rivers, with Women
beautiful, and Lean, and all manner of Content. God beholds them that adore
him, and that say, Lord we believe in thy Law, pardon our sins, and deliver us
from the torments of Fire. The Patient, the persevering, true Believers, the
obedient, the good Men, such as beg Pardon of God in the Morning; the Angels,
the Learned, that love Justice, testify that there is but one only God. The
Law of Salvation, is a Law pleasing to his Divine Majesty; no man contradicts
this Truth, among The Jews and Christians. See Gelaldin. The Jews and
Christians.
such as know the written Law, but through Envy. He that shall not obey the
Commandments of God, shall find his Divine Majesty very exact to call him to an
Account. If the impious dispute with thee; say to them, I am wholly resigned to
the Will of God, with all such as have followed me. Ask of such as know the
written Law, and them that know it The Arabians.
not, if they resign themselves to God; if they do, they will follow the right
way; if they go astray, thou have none other Obligation, but to preach to them;
God beholds them that adore See Kitab el tenoir.
him. Declare grievous torments to those that conceal his Commandments, that
kill the Prophets, and injure them that instruct the people in Justice; the
good Works that they do, shall be unprofitable to them on Earth, and they shall
be in the other World deprived of protection. See thou not a party of them
that know the written Law, how they were called to a Lecture of the Book of
God, to the end they might judge with Equity the differences that are among
them? but many are returned to their sin: they contemned the Scripture, in that
they said, the fire shall not touch us, but for a certain number of days; They
are deceived in their blasphemies, what will become of them, when we shall
assemble them at the day of Judgment, when nothing shall be doubtful, and every
one shall be recompensed, as he shall have merited? No injustice shall be done
unto them. Say, Lord, thou possessest the Kingdoms of the World, thou give
Royalty to whom thou see good; from thy hand, O Lord, proceeds all good,
thou art Omnipotent, thou causest day to enter the night, and night the day;
thou causest life to come out of death, and death out of life; thou enrichest
without measure whom thou see good. The Believers shall not obey the
unbelievers, to the exclusion of true Believers; he that does this thing,
observes not the law of God; but if you fear your Enemies, God wills that
you fear him also, he is the assured refuge of the righteous; say to them
whether you conceal what is in your heart, or whether you manifest i^, God
knows all things; he knows all that is either in Heaven or Earth, he is
Omnipotent; think on the day wherein every one shall find the good and the evil
that he has done, then shall you desire to be cleansed from your sins, and
that the number of your good works exceed that of your evil, God wills See
Gelaldin.
that you fear him, he is gracious to them that worship him. Say to them, If
you love God, follow me, God shall give you life, and pardon your sins, he is
gracious and merciful. Say to them, obey God and his Prophet; If they return in
their sin, God will very severely punish them, he loves not Infidels. God
elected Adam, and Noah, the Lineage of Abraham, and the Lineage of Ioachim, the
one proceeds from the other, God knows and understands all things.
Remember thou, how the Wife of Ioachim said, Lord, I vow unto thee the Fruit
that is in my Womb, free, and exempt from all Affairs, to serve thee in thy
Temple: Accept him from See Kitab el tenoir.
me, who offer him to thee with affection: thou understandest and know all
things: When she was delivered, she said, Lord I am delivered of a Daughter,
thou know thou have given her to me; I have named her Mary, I will preserve
through thine assistance, her and her Posterity from the malice of the Devil;
accept her Lord, with a pleasing Acceptance, and cause her to produce good
Fruits. Zachary had the care of the Education of this Daughter, and whenever
he went into his Oratory, he there found a thousand sorts of different Fruits
of diverse Seasons. He said one day, O Mary! whence do these good things
proceed? she answered, they proceed from God, who enricheth without measure
whom he pleases. Then Zachary prayed to the Lord, and said, Lord give me a
Progeny that may be pleasing to thee, and that may observe thy Commandments;
Lord hear my Prayers. The Angels called him, and said to him; I declare to thee
from God, that thou shall have a Son, called John, he shall affirm the Messiah
to See Gelaldin.
be the word of God, that he shall be a great Person, Chaste, a Prophet, and
one of the just: Lord, answered Zachary, how shall I have a Son, I am old, and
my Wife is barren? The Angel said to him, so God does as pleases him: Lord,
said Zachary, give me some sign of the Conception of my Wife: The sign that I
will give thee, answered the Angel, shall be, that thou shall not speak in
three days, but by signs; Remember thou thy Lord often, praise him evening and
morning. Remember thou, how the Angels said, O Mary, God has chosen and
purified thee above all Women of the World; O Mary, obey thy O Mahomet.
Lord, praise him, and worship him with them that worship him. I relate to thee
how the matter past: thou were not with the Ministers of the Temple, when they
cast in their pens to draw lots, and to see which of them should have the care
of the education of Mary, neither when they entered upon this difficulty.
Remember thou how the Angels said, O Mary, God declares unto thee a word, from
which shall proceed the Messiah, named Jesus, the Son of Mary, full of honor
in this World, and that shall be in the other, of the number of Intercessors
with his Divine Majesty; he shall speak in the Cradle, as a Man betwixt thirty
and fifty years, and shall be in the number of the just: She said, Lord, how
shall I have a Child, without the touch of a Man? he answered, So God does as
pleases him; when he creates any thing, he says, Be thou, and it is. I will
teach him the Scriptures, the Mysteries of the Law, the Old Testament, and the
Gospel, and he shall be a Prophet sent to the Children of Israel. Jesus said to
the Children of Israel, I come to you with evident signs of my mission from
your Lord, I will make unto you of the slime of the Earth, the figure of a
Bird, I will blow upon it, incontinently it shall be a Bird, and by the
permission of God, shall fly; I will heal them that are born blind, and the
leprous, I will raise again the dead, I will teach you what you shall eat, and
what you ought not to eat; this shall serve you for instruction, if you believe
in God; I am come to confirm the Old Testament, and what has been taught you
heretofore. Certainly it is lawful for you to eat things that have been
heretofore forbidden. I am come to you with signs of my mission, that testify
that I am truly sent from your Lord; fear God, and obey me, God is my Lord, and
your Lord, worship him, this is the right way. When Jesus knew their impiety,
he said, Who shall sustain the Law of God in my absence? The Apostles answered
him, we will substain the Law of God, we believe in his unity; be thou a
witness before God, that we resign our selves wholly to the pleasure of his
Divine Majesty. Lord we believe in what thou have commanded, and we have
followed the Prophet, thy Apostle, write us in the number of them that profess
thy Law. The Jews conspired against Jesus, and God caused their conspiracy to
turn against them, he knows the designs of Conspirators. Remember thou, how
the Lord said, O Jesus, I will cause thee to die, I will elevate thee to my
self, and remove thee far from Infidels, and prefer those that have obeyed
thee, to Infidels, at the day of Judgment. That day shall assemble you all
before me; I will judge the differences between you, and will punish the
impious, in this World, and in the other; none among them shall be of power to
protect them, I will reward them that shall have believed in my Law, and have
done good works; God loves not the unjust. I relate to thee these mysteries,
and teach thee the Alcoran; Jesus is with God, as is Adam, God created him of
the Earth; he said, Be thou, and he was: this truth proceeds from thy Lord,
be not thou of the number of them that doubt; If any one dispute with thee
concerning thy Doctrine, say to them, Come, call together your Children and
ours, your Wives and ours, let us assemble and address our prayers to God; I
will lay the curse of his Divine Majesty upon liars. This Discourse is most
true, there is no God, but God alone the Omnipotent, and Wise. If they depart
from his Commandments, he shall well observe the unbelievers; say to them, The
Jews and Christians.
O ye that know Scripture! come with words alike true between you and us; Do I
worship other than God? I do not associate him with any one, and acknowledge
none other Lord but him; but if they turn aside from the way of faith; God
knows them that shall pollute the Earth; Say to them, be ye witnesses that we
believe in God. O ye that understand Scripture, dispute not the Law of Abraham,
to wit, if he observed the Old Testament, or the Gospel, they were taught after
him, perhaps you will acknowledge your error. Oh ye that have disputed what you
knew not! Abraham was no Jew, nor Christian, he professed the unity of God, he
was a true believer, and not of the number of Infidels: The People, and
particularly those that followed him, of his time, as also the Prophet Mahomet,
and all true believers have known the truth of his Law. Part of them, to whom
heretofore was given the knowledge of Scripture desired, seduced you from the
right way, but they themselves erred, and they knew it not. O ye that know the
Scripture! do not maliciously conceal the Commandments of God, cover not the
Truth with a lie, neither willingly hide it. Many of them that knew the written
Law, said, From the break of day, believe in what has been taught them, that
believe in the Law of God: Nevertheless, at evening, they were themselves of
the number of Infidels, peradventure they will be converted. Believe not, but
such as follow your own Law; Say to them, The true guide, is the guide of God.
The knowledge that was given to you, was not given to any other, but to you: If
the Infidels shall dispute against you, before your Lord, at the day of
Judgment; say to them, Grace proceeds from the hand of God: He is bountiful,
and omniscient; he pardons whom he pleases, and is altogether merciful. If
thou intrustest thy wealth to the hands of many of them that know the written
Law, they will faithfully restore it to thee: There be also many of them that
will not restore it, if thou take not heed; because they have said, They have
no belief in the Arabians, they blaspheme against God, and know their
blasphemies. He that shall satisfy what he has promised, and shall fear God,
shall be beloved of God; he loves such as have fear of him before their eyes;
such as pervert his Commandments for any profit, shall have no part in
Paradise; he will not protect them, neither regard, or pardon them at the day
of Judgment; and they shall be rigorously punished. There be of them, that
alter the Scripture in reading it, and will make believe that what they read,
is in the Scripture, although it be not; they blaspheme, and know it well. God
gave not to Man the Scripture, knowledge, and prophecies, to say to the People,
Worship me instead of God; but indeed, to say, Observe exactly what you have
learned in Scripture, and what you read. God does not command you to adore
Angels, nor Prophets: Will he command you impiety, having instructed you in his
Law? Remember that he received the promise of the Prophets, to preach his
Commandments without fear, and that he has taught you Scripture, and
knowledge; See Kitab el tenoir.
and that after this, came a Prophet, that confirmed the Doctrine that was
taught you, that you might believe his words. Have you not approved it? Have
you not received what was promised unto you? We have received it; be therefore
witnesses against your selves, and against them that have followed you, and I
will be a witness against you, and against them: Such as go astray from the
right way, shall be wicked; Desire they to observe any other Law, than that of
God? Whatever is in Heaven, or Earth* obeys him; either willingly, or by
force: And you shall all one day appear before him, to be judged: Say to them,
We believe in God, in what he has inspired into us, in what he inspired (...)
Abraham, Ismael, Isaac, Jacob, and the The* (...) what was ordained by Moses,
by Jesus, (...) generally all the Prophets from God; (...) are wholly resigned
to his pleasure. The Sacrifices of them that desire to follow other Law, than
the Law of Salvation, shall not be accepted; they shall be in the other World,
in the number of the damned. God guided not those that followed impiety, after
they had professed his Law; and having seen, and testified that the Prophet is
true, by signs, clear and evident, that appeared to them. God guides not the
unjust, they shall be for ever cursed of his Divine Majesty, of Angels, and of
all the World; they shall find no relaxation of their torments, and at the Day
of Judgment be deprived of protection; except such as shall be converted, and
do good works, God shall be to them gracious and merciful. Such as shall be
impious toward Jesus, having believed the Books of Moses, See Kitab el tenoir.
and shall augment their impiety against Mahomet, shall never be converted,
they shall err eternally. All the treasures of the Earth shall not be able to
save the wicked that die in their impiety, great punishments are prepared for
them, and none of them shall be able to protect them. You shall not be
justified, until you have dispensed in pious works, part of the goods you
possess. God will take notice of the alms you bestow. All meats were permitted
the Children of Israel, except what Israel forbad to himself, before the Old
Testament; Say to them, Come, and bring the Old Testament, and consider it, it
will appear if you speak the Truth. These that shall afterward blaspheme
against God, shall be exceedingly to blame, Say, God has spoken Truth, follow
ye the Law of Abraham, that is pleasing to him: He professed the unity of his
Divine Majesty; he was not of them that believed in many Gods. The Temple of
Mecca is the first that God established on Earth, to be therein adored; he
blessed it, and Men shall there find the instructions of the right way, with
clear and evident signs of his omnipotency; to wit, Abraham's place (say the
Turks) is a Stone kept in the Oratory of Mecca, upon which, Abraham ascended,
when he raised the foundations of the Temple of that City: the marks of his
feet are upon the Stone to this day.
Abraham's See Kitab el tenoir.
place: He that shall enter into this Temple, shall be in a place of safety and
privilege. God has commanded that Pilgrimages be made thither, by such as
shall be able. He that is impious, must know that God has not to do with him.
O ye that have knowledge of the written Law, do not willingly conceal the
Commandments of God, he knows all your actions; Say to them, O ye that have
the knowledge of Scriptures, divert not from the way of Salvation them that
believe in the Law of God; you desire to alter, and pervert it, but God is not
ignorant of what you do. O ye that believe, if you obey many of them that have
the knowledge of the written Law, they will mis-lead you into the number of the
wicked. How can you be of the impious, since you are taught the Commandments of
God, and that his Prophet, and his Apostle is among you? He that resigneth
himself to God, is in the right way. O ye that fear God, die in the profession
of his Unity, embrace his Law, and remember the favor he has showed you: you
were all enemies of each other; he has united your hearts, and through his
special Grace you continued united to each other as good Brethren: you were
upon the brink of a pit of fire, from which he withdrew you. Thus God
manifests to you his mercies, perhaps you will follow the right way. Some
there be among you, that exhort the People to do good; they command to do that
which is honest, and abstain from what is unreasonable; these Men shall be
happy: Be not like them that have abandoned the Truth, and followed lies;
notwithstanding the Truth was known to them, they shall suffer great torment in
the day wherein the visage of the good shall be white, and that of the wicked
shall be black. It shall be said to them that have black visages; Have you
followed impiety, after you made profession of the Faith? Taste this day the
torment due to your sin. Such as shall have white visages, shall be in the
favor of God; in which they shall eternally continue. See there the Mysteries
of the Law of God, which instructs thee with Truth. God wills that no
injustice be done to his People; whatever is in Heaven or in Earth,
appertains to him, he disposes all things. There has appeared no Nation on
the Earth that has followed a better way than you; forbid ye to do that which
is not reasonable, and believe in one only God; If those The Jews.
that heretofore had knowledge of the written Law, had believed in God, they
had done very well; there be among them that believe what is veritable, but the
greatest part are impious. They shall not hurt you, but with their tongue, and
shall find no protection against you; if they fight you, they shall turn their
backs; they were beaten with shame and ignominy, where they made a stand,
except, when they embraced the Law of God, and observed the precepts that were
taught the faithful: When they returned in the wrath of God, they were beaten
with poverty; because they believed not the word of his Divine Majesty, but
slew his Prophets without reason, and disobeyed his Commandments. They that
heretofore had knowledge of the written Law, are not all alike: there be among
them that persevered in obedience, and in the night meditate on the miracles of
God, worship him, and believe in his Divine Majesty, and the Day of Judgment;
preach honesty, prohibit to do things dishonest, and apply themselves to good
works; certainly, they are good Men. Hide not the good works which you perform,
God knows such as have his fear before their eyes. Riches and Children shall
be unprofitable to Infidels with God, they shall eternally dwell in the fire of
Hell: The Alms that they give in this World, are like to a Wind exceeding hot,
or extremely cold, that fell upon the Tillage of them that did injury to their
own Souls, and wholly destroyed it. God did no injustice to them, they were
mischievous to themselves through their sins. O ye that believe in God, esteem
no man to be elected of God, that is not of your Religion: The wicked
endeavored to bring you into their disorders, malice appeared in their mouth,
and that which their heart cherishes, is yet greater: We have taught you the
Commandments of God; if you observe them, you shall protect your selves from
the malice of Infidels. O ye! you love them, and they love not you; you believe
generally in the Scriptures, and they believe not what you believe: When they
met you, they said, We believe in God; and when they were gone from you, they
bit for anger their Fingers ends: Say to them, Die with your Choler, God
knows what is in your hearts. If good happen to you, they are displeased; and
when evil befalls you, they rejoice: If you have patience, and fear God,
their malice shall not hurt you; God knows all their Actions. Remember the
morning, Benou Selimeth. Benou Ariteth.
when some of thy people deserted the true Believers in the Field of battle;
and when two of thy Companions forsook the fight, God was their Protector: All
true Believers ought to trust in him. He protected you at Beder, where Beder is
a place between Mecca and Medina where Mahomet gained a Battle.
you were a few Men ill armed, perhaps you will fear him, and give him thanks
for that favor. Say to the true Believers, suffices it not, that God
succoureth you with three thousand of his Angels: Truly, if you have patience,
and fear God, he will come to succor you at need, and your Lord will assist
you with five thousand of his Angels sent from Heaven; he will not send you
this assistance but to declare to you his Protection, and to confirm your
hearts. Victory proceeds from his Divine Majesty: He is Omnipotent, and
prudent in all his works; he will extirpate in this World one part of the
wicked, or will so sharply reprehend them, that they shall become desperate.
Thou have nothing to do, whether he shall pardon, or chastise them, because
they are wicked: Whatever is in the Earth, and in Heaven, is his, he pardons
as he sees good; he is gracious and merciful to the righteous. O ye that
believe! be not Usurers, and fear God; peradventure you will obey his
Commandments; Fear the fire of Hell prepared for Infidels. Obey God, and the
Prophets, his Apostles, your sins shall be forgiven you; beg pardon speedily of
your Lord. The extent of Paradise contains Heaven and Earth; it is prepared
for the good. God loves them that give Alms in joy, and in affliction; that
subdue their Passion, and forgive such as offend them: he loves them that do
good, and that after the Commission of any sin, remember his Divine Majesty,
and implore his Pardon. Who but God forgiveth sins? Such as persist not in
their Errors, and acknowledge their sins, shall be recompensed with the mercy
of God, and enjoy his favor in Paradise. There were heretofore Laws and Means
to conduct men into the right way; but consider what has been the end of
Infidels. The Alcoran was sent to instruct the World, to guide men in the right
way, and to preach to the good. Dishearten not, neither afflict your selves in
fighting; you shall be Victorious if you believe in God; if you have been
wounded, the like hurts have befaln the impious. God so diversifieth days among
men, to the end he may know them that are truly zealous in his Law; and that
among you, Witnesses be taken against the malice of Infidels. God loves not
the unjust, he forgiveth sins to those that believe, and extirpate Infidels. Do
you believe to enter Paradise, and that God knows not them that fought
gallantly? He knows them that were patient in adve^sity, and persevered in
obedience to his Commandments. You expected death before you met it; you saw it
with your Eyes, and were Victorious. Certainly Mahomet is the Prophet, At the
Battle of Beder.
and Apostle of God; there were many Prophets before him; when they died, or
were slain, you returned upon your steps to impiety: They that return upon
their steps, do no harm to God; he will reward only such as acknowledge his
favors; and men cannot die without his permission, and that in a time
prescribed and predestinate. I will give the good things of this World to whom
it pleases me, and will abundantly recompense them that praise me. How many
Prophets, and men with them, that were not dejected through their afflictions
that befell them, in fighting for the Law of God? They were not weakened, neither
humbled to the Infidels. God affects them that are patient in their
adversities, and such as persevere in his Law. They said in their afflictions,
Lord pardon our sins, confirm our steps, and protect us against the Infidels.
God gives them the Riches of the Earth, and the Treasures of Heaven; he loves
them that do good. O ye that believe in God, if you obey the wicked, they will
cause you to return upon your steps, you shall return to the number of the
damned; truly God is your Lord, he is the best Protector; I will put fear into
the hearts of Infidels, because they have without reason adored many Gods, and
the fire of Hell shall be their habitation. God has made the truth of his
Promises to appear to you, when by his permission you slew the Infidels, until
you were weary of fighting; nevertheless you contradicted what the Prophet
ordained, you disobeyed him, after he had caused you to see what you desired
with affection. There be among you that covet the Goods of this World, and
others that love the good things of Heaven; God has withdrawn you from the
Infidels, to try you, he has pardoned your sins, he is bountiful to them that
observe his Commandments. When you retreated from the Combat, and yielded
without reason, the Prophet recalled you, and gave you to know your Error,
with a thousand pains; afflict not your selves with the loss of the spoil that
escaped you at the day of Victory, neither with the mischief that befell you
when you were vanquished, God knows all your Actions. After your Labor, he
sent you great repose, part of you slept in all safety, and the residue
suffered themselves to be carried away at their Pleasures, they had thoughts of
God contrary to the truth. Think on the ignorant, that say, Have we seen any of
the succor that God has promised? Say to them, all things proceed from God.
They conceal in their Souls what they publish not, and say, had we been free of
our own Wills, we had not been slain; say to them, although you had stayed in
your Houses, and in your B^ds, death would have taken away them that were
arrived at the hour of their Destiny; God approves what is in your hearts, and
knows what you have in your Souls: Certainly the Devil seduced them that
fled, when the two Armies were in Battle, and that, because of some sin they
had committed; nevertheless God pardoned them, he is gracious and merciful to
his people. O ye that believe! be not like the Infidels, that said, speaking of
their Brethren that were slain in the Army; that had they continued in their
Houses, they had not dyed; God puts this sorrow in their heart, because of
their impiety; he gives life and death, and beholds all your Actions; if you
be slain for his Law, or die in his favor, it shall be more advantageous to
you than all the Treasures of the World; and if you dye, or be slain, fighting
for the Faith, you shall appear before his Divine Majesty to be rewarded:
Through the grace of God thou have rendered them docile; although thou be severe
to them, they will not depart from thee, pardon them, pray for them. Take their
Advice in occasions offered, and being See Gelaldin.
resolved to do any thing, trust thou in God; he loves them that trust in him,
he protecteth you; none shall obtain Victory over you; if he abandon you, who
shall protect you? All the faithful ought to resign themselves to the Will of
his Divine Majesty. It is not Lawful for the Prophet to deceive; he that shall
be a deceiver, shall appear at the Day of Judgment with his deceit, to be
judged; then shall men be paid with what they have gained, no injustice shall
be done to them that shall have loved God, and Hell shall be the habitation of
them, that through deceit shall return in the displeasure of his Divine
Majesty; They shall not be all equally entreated, God shall appoint them their
Rank and place, he beholds all their Actions, he assuredly rewarded the true
Believers, when he sent them a Prophet of their own Nation to preach to them
his Commandments, and instruct them in the Alcoran; they before his coming were
in a manifest Error: When any mischief befell you, it also befell the Infidels;
you have demanded, when does this mischief come? it proceeds from your
selves, certainly God is Omnipotent. What befell you when the two Camps
encountered, happened through the permission of God, to distinguish the true
Believers, that dispense their Goods with affection for the glory of his Divine
Majesty, from them that abandoned the fight; when it was said to them, Come,
fight for the Faith, and answered, had we thought of fighting, we had not
followed you; then were they nearer to impiety, than to the Faith;
nevertheless, they had not all of them that in their heart, that was in their
mouth, God knows what they keep secret: There be of them that said to their
Brethren; Stay, and go not to the Combat; your Companions had not been slain,
had they obeyed us; say to them, Deliver your selves from death, if you can
avoid it, continuing in your Houses. Believe not that those that were slain for
the Faith are dead: on the contrary, they are alive with God; they rejoice, for
that such as ran to hinder them to fight, did not meet them; fear not for them,
they shall rejoice eternally in the favor of God, he will abundantly reward
them that fight for his Law. Those that obeyed God and the Prophet, after being
overcome, that did good works, and feared his Divine Majesty, shall receive
great rewards. When it was told them, the people have conspired against you,
take heed to your selves; this Discourse increased their Faith; and they said,
it suffices that God is our Protector, they were filled with the grace of God,
no more evil befell them, and they observed the Commandments of his Divine
Majesty. He is gracious to them that obey him. The Devil will cause in you a
fear of the Infidels, fear them not; but if you be good men, fear me. Afflict
not your selves to see the wicked run to impiety, they hurt not God, he will
not give them rest in the other World, where they shall be severely chastised.
I increase the wealth of Infidels to augment their pain, they shall in the end
feel grievous torments. God will not leave the faithful in the state that you
are in; he will one day separate the good from the evil; he does not teach you
what is to come; he, for that effect chooses among the Prophets whom he sees
good. Believe therefore in God, and his Prophets; if you believe in God, fear
to offend him, you shall be rewarded. Believe that such as are too sparing, and
avaritious of the* wealth that God has given them, do well; on the contrary,
they do very ill, what they spare without reason, shall strangle them at the
day of Judgment. The inheritance of Heaven and Earth is Gods, he knows all
things. Certainly God heard the Speech of them that said, God is poor, and we
are rich; he has said, I will write what they have spoken, and keep an exact
account of the Murder they have unjustly committed on the Persons of the
Prophets; I will say to them at the day of Judgment, taste of the torments of
Hell fire, which you have deserved. God does not lead into darkness them that
worship him. There be that say, God has commanded us not to believe the
Prophets, until their Sacrifice be consumed by fire: Say to them, there came to
you Prophets heretofore with Miracles that you demanded, you had not slain
them, had you been righteous; if they belie thee, know, they belyed the
Prophets that were before thee, that came with Miracles, the Psalter, and the
Book of Light. Every man shall taste of death, and your reward shall be paid
at the Day of Judgment; he that shall depart from the fire of Hell, and enter
into Paradise, shall be happy. The wealth of this World is but matter of Pride,
that you may be tried in your Riches and Persons. Hearken not to the Jews and
Christians, that have known the written Law before you, neither to them that
believe in many Gods, they offend God through their blasphemies; if you have
patience, and fear God, you shall make a very good resolution. God has
accepted the Speech of them that know his written Law, when they promised him
to preach to the people his Commandments, and not conceal them; nevertheless
they have contemned them, and changed them for profit of little value, and have
gained nothing but misery; think not that such as rejoice of the evil they have
done, and affect to be commended for what they have not done, have escaped the
punishment of their Crimes, they shall certainly suffer great torments. The
Kingdom of Heaven and of the Earth is Gods, he is Omnipotent; the Creation of
Heaven and Earth, the difference of day and night are evident signs of his
Omnipotency, to such as have judgment. Such as have, remember God, standing,
sitting, or lying down, and considered the Creation of Heaven and Earth, have
said, Lord, thou have not created these things in vain; blessed be thy Name,
deliver us from the torments of Hell fire, thou will render miserable him that
thou shall thither precipitate, and the wicked shall be deprived of protection
at the Day of Judgment. Lord, we have heard them that say, Believe in your
Lord, we believe in thy unity, pardon our faults, blot out our sins, and give
us grace to die in the number of the just; bestow on us what thou have promised
by the Prophets, and suffer us not to be miserable at the Day of Judgment; thou
do not contradict what thou do promise. The Lord heard them, and said to
them, I will not suffer your works to be lost, as well of Men as of Women. I
will blot out the sins of them that went out of Mecca, to separate themselves
from the wicked; I will cover the offenses of them that forsook their Houses,
that assembled to fight for the Faith, and were slain; I will open to them the
Gate of Paradise, wherein flow many Rivers, to recompense their good works.
There is with God great reward: envy not the Infidels, whom thou shall see
possess a little wealth in the Earth, Hell is prepared to be their habitation;
and such as fear God shall dwell eternally in Gardens, wherein run many Rivers,
with all manner of content. God is a great rewarder of the just. Among them
that know the written Law, there be, that believe in God, in what was before
time taught you, and in what was preached to them, surely they obey God, and
forsake not his Law: They shall receive a great reward from God, he is exact in
his account. O ye that are true believers, be patient in your adversities,
persevere to do well, fight for the Faith, fear God, and you shall be happy.

CHAP. IV. The Chapter of Women, containing one hundred and seventy Verses,
written at Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Kitab el tenoir.
O ye People, fear your Lord that created you of one sole person, and created
his Wife of his Rib, of whom issued many Men and Women. Fear God, by whom you
swear, and say, the Belly The ancient Arabians swore by the name of God, and
the Belly of their Wives, because they feared their sterility.
of your Wives, God exactly observes your actions. Give unto Orphans what
appertains to them, and render not evil for good; devour not their substance,
it is a very great sin. If you fear to do injury to Orphans, fear also to do
wrong to Women; marry those that please you, two, three, or four: if you
apprehend you shall not be able to entertain them equally, marry but one, or
the slaves that you shall have acquired; this is most necessary, to the end you
offend not God. Give to Women their Dowry with a good will; if they give to you
any thing that is pleasing to you, receive it with affection, and civility.
Bestow not on fools the wealth that God has given you for subsistence; assist
Orphans, give to them the Garments that shall be necessary for them, and
entertain them honestly; instruct them until they have attained to years of
discretion, and are capable of marriage; if you believe they demean themselves
wisely, restore to them their faculties, and devour them not unjustly before
they be of age. He that shall be rich, shall abstain from their goods, and he
that is poor, shall take with honesty, according to the pains he shall undergo
for them: when you make to them restitution of their goods, take witness of
your action, God loves good accounts. The Children shall have a good part of
what their Father, and Mother and Parents left after their decease, of little
or of much, there appertains to them a portion prefixed and limited. When
they divide their goods, the kindred shall have care of the poor and Orphans;
do good to them, and honestly entertain them. Such as fear to leave after them
a weak progeny of little Children, ought to fear to wrong Orphans, they must
fear God, and courteously entertain them. Those that unjustly devour their
substance, swallow fire into their Bowels, and shall burn in a great fire. God
recommendeth to you your Children, the Son shall have as much as two Daughters;
if there be more than two Daughters, they shall have two thirds of the
succession of the Dead; if there be but one, she shall have the moity, and her
kindred a sixth part of what See Beda^*
shall be left by the dead: if there be no Children, and the kindred be heirs,
the Mother of the dead shall have a third; if there be Brethren, the Mother
shall have a sixth, after satisfaction of the Legacies contained in the
Testament, and of debts. You understand not to whom it is most requisite to do
good, to your Children, or to your Father and Mother, give them their Portion
ordained of God. The moity of what their Wives shall leave belongs to you, if
they have no Children; if they have, you shall have the fourth part of what
they shall leave, after payment of the Legacies and debts; they shall have the
fourth of your succession, if you have no Children; if you have, they shall
have the eight portion. If a Man or Woman be the heirs of each other, and have
neither Father nor Mother, nor Children, and have a Brother or Sister, each of
them shall have a sixth part of the succession; if they be more, they shall
share the third, after payment of Legacies and debts, without fraud, following
what God has ordained, he knows all your actions, and is prudent in what he
ordains, it is so ordained by his Divine Majesty. He that shall obey him, and
his Prophet, shall enter into Paradise, where many Rivers flow, and shall dwell
in eternal felicity; he that shall disobey God and his Prophet, shall be cast
headlong into the fire of Hell, where he shall suffer ignominious torments. If
your Wives commit adultery, take four witnesses of their fault, that be of your
Religion; if they bear witness, keep them prisoners in your Houses until death,
or until God shall otherwise ordain; punish Whoremongers, Concubines, and
Adulterers; if they repent of their fault, do them no harm, God is gracious and
merciful to them that repent. Conversion depends on God, he is merciful to
them that commit sin ignorantly, and speedily repent, he is Omniscient, and
most Wise. Pardon is not for them that do wickedly to the very hour of their
death, we have prepared great torments for them that shall die impious. O ye
that believe in God! it is not lawful for you to inherit what is your Wives by
force, take not violently away what you have given them, unless they be
surprised in manifest adultery; see them with civility, if you have an aversion
from them, it may chance that you hate a thing, wherein God has placed much
good; but if they desire to repudiate your Wives, to take others, and that you
have given them any thing, take not any thing that appertains to them. Will
you take their wealth with a lie, and a manifest sin? How shall you take it,
since you have approached each other, and that you have promised to use them
civilly? Marry not the Wives of your Fathers; what is past was incest,
abomination, and a wicked way. Your Mothers are forbidden you, your Daughters,
Sisters, Aunts, Nieces, your Nurses, and your Foster-sisters, the Mothers of
your Wives, the Daughters that your Wives have had by other Husbands, of whom
you shall have a particular care: The Daughters of Women that you shall have
known, are also forbidden you; if you have not known them, it will be no sin:
the Wives of your Sons are likewise prohibited, and two Sisters; for what is
past, God is gracious and merciful: Married Wives are likewise forbidden you,
except the women Slaves, that you shall have acquired. God has so commanded
you, except what is above forbidden, it is lawful for you to marry at your
Pleasure. If you desire women for money, and neither commit Concubinage, nor
Adultery, give them their Salary for which you shall agree, so you shall not
offend God, he is Omniscient, and most Wife. He that shall not be able to
espouse women of Free-condition, shall marry such women or maids, that are
Slaves, as shall please him. God knows the Faith of the one, and other. Marry
your Wives with the permission of their Parents, and give them their Dowry with
honesty: If women of Free-condition, that have committed neither Concubinage,
nor Adultery, secretly nor publicly, fly into second Nuptials, and come to
commit Adultery, they shall be doubly punished, more than the Daughters of
Love. The Marriage of Slaves is for them that fear Whoredom: See Gelaldin.
If you abstain from Marrying them, you shall not do amiss. God is gracious and
merciful; he is willing to teach you his Law, and direct you in the way of them
that preceded you; he is gracious and merciful to his people. Such as follow
the Appetite of the wicked, decline extremely from the Truth. God wills that
his Law be Light unto you, for that man was created weak. O you that believe in
God, devour not your substance among you with Usury; but if you Traffic, be
peaceable in your Affairs; slay not one another, God is merciful to them that
obey him: He that disobeyeth, through malice and injustice, shall burn in the
fire of Hell; it is an easy thing to God to punish them. If you depart from
mortal sins, I will cover your Faults, and cause you to enter into Paradise:
covet not through Envy, what God has given to your Neighbor; men and women
shall have the wealth they have gained; beg Grace of God, he knows all
things. Give to your Associates what appertains to them. We have ordained a
Portion, prefixed to the one and the other, in the succession of your Father,
Mother, and Kindred, God sees all. The men shall have Authority over the
women; they shall have them in their keeping; they shall have in their power
the wealth that God shall give them; and shall have care of what shall be
convenient to be expended for them. Discreet and obedient Wives observe, in the
absence of their Husbands, the Commandments of God, make Remonstrances to them
that shall be disobedient, and remove them from your Bed, chastise them. If
they obey you, seek not occasion to abuse them unjustly. God is most high, and
most mighty. If you fear there may happen some difference between a Man and his
Wife, send to them some of their Kindred, to put an end to their Quarrel, and
reconcile them. God will give his Peace to them, he is Omniscient. Worship God,
and say not that he has a Companion equal to him; do good to your Father, and
Mother, your Kindred, Orphans, the Poor, your Neighbors, Pilgrims, your
Friends, and your Slaves. God loves not the Proud. We have prepared rigorous
torments for them that are avaricious, that recommend Avarice to the people,
that conceal the Graces that God has bestowed on them, and that are impious.
Such as dispend their wealth with Hypocrisy, believe neither in God, nor the
Day of Judgment; and those that shall have the Devil for their Companion, will
be in exceeding bad Company; he shall not approach them, if they believe in
God, and the Day of Judgment, and give in Alms some part of the Riches God has
given them. God knows them, and does no injustice to any one, of the weight
of a small Ant. If the righteous do good of the quantity of a Pismire, God
shall multiply it, and give them a great reward. In what condition will
Infidels be at the Day of Judgment; for that we have Witnesses of all Nations
against their impiety; and that we will call thee for a Witness against them of
their Deportments? That day, the Infidels that have disobeyed the Prophet,
shall desire to be consumed, like to the Earth; and not to have concealed or
altered, through their Discourse, the Commandments of God. O you that believe,
make not your Prayers, being drunk, until you know what you speak; neither
likewise being polluted, unless in passing on the way, until you be cleansed;
if you be in a journey, or sick, or go to discharge your Belly, or have known
your Wives, and find no water to wash you, you shall lay hand upon the Sand,
and wipe your Face and Hands. God is gracious and merciful to his Creatures.
See thou not how those that know the written Law, purchase Error? how they
desire to mis-lead you through their Riches, and divert you from the right way?
God knows your Enemies, it is enough that he is your defender and Protector.
Such as Iudaize, alter the word of God, and say to the Prophet, we have heard,
and disobeyed thee, they heard without hearing; they say, preserve us, have
care of us; nevertheless do they pervert the word of God; in reading it, and
alter his Commandments; they should do better to say, Lord we have heard, and
obeyed; hearken only to us, and regard us: But God has cursed them, and few of
them will believe in his Divine Majesty. O you that have knowledge of the
Scriptures! believe in the Alcoran, that confirms the Old He speaks to the
Jews and Christians.
and New Testament, before that I deface your Visages, and cause them to turn
behind your Backs. I will curse Infidels, as I have cursed them of the Sabbath;
the Commandment of God is incontinently executed; he pardons not them that
associate him with Companions equal to him, except this, he forgiveth sins to
whom it pleases him: He that says, God has Companions, blasphemeth, and
mortally sins. Consider not such as affirm themselves to be good Men;
contrariwise, God makes those good Men that please him; no injustice shall
befall them at the Day of Judgment. Consider how they blaspheme, it is
sufficient that God manifestly beholds their sin. See thou not them that
have knowledge of the written Law, that believe in Habot and Tagot, Idols; that
say to the Infidels, Behold the way of them that believe in God? Certainly, God
has cursed them; he, whom he curses, shall find none to protect him. Shall
they alone have part in the Kingdom of Heaven, without giving Alms? They will
envy their Neighbor, for the favors God has conferred on him. Certainly, we
gave to the posterity of Abraham, the knowledge of the Scriptures, and
Prophecies; we bestowed on them great abundance of wealth. There were of them
that believed in the Scripture, and others that contemned it; but they shall be
punished in the fire of Hell. I will cause them to burn, and change their
burned skin into a new skin, that they may suffer the more. God is Omnipotent,
and prudent in what he ordains. I will cause those that have believed in God,
and have performed good works, to enter into Gardens, wherein flow many Rivers,
where they shall dwell eternally with most beautiful Women. I will give them to
enter the shade of Paradise: God recommendeth to you, Fidelity among your
selves, to render faithfully what has been entrusted to you; and when you
shall judge differences that shall happen among the people, judge with Equity.
It is a good work that he commands you; he beholds, and knows all things.
O ye that believe! obey God, and the Prophets, and such as command over you; if
you be in Controversy concerning any point, refer it to God, and his Prophet,
to understand the Exposition; if you believe in God, and the Day of Judgment,
you shall do well: this will be the best Interpretation that you can attain to.
See thou not, that they who think to believe in what has been inspired into
thee, and what has been inspired into thy Predecessors, incline to dispute
before Tagot? Nevertheless, they have commanded not to believe in that Idol;
the Devil labors to seduce, and withdraw them from the Truth. When it was
said to them, Obey the Commandment of God, and his Prophet, they departed from
thee: What will they do, when there shall happen to them any punishment of
their past sins? They will return to thee, and swear by the name of God, That
they desire Peace, and to do good Works; but God knows what is in their
hearts, and has abandoned them. Cease not to preach to them, and to declare to
them the Word of God; the Prophets, and Apostles were not sent, but to preach,
and to be heard through the permission of his Divine goodness. If, when they
have hurt their Souls, they come to thee, and demand pardon of God, thou shall
beg pardon for them, they shall find God gracious and merciful: They will not
believe in his Divine Majesty, until they have disputed the difference with
thee, that is among them; and when they shall no more doubt of what thou shall
have done, they will without contradiction obey thee. We have ordained them to
kill each other, and to forsake their Houses; they have not done it, except
very few of them: and although they did it, they did it not, to obey what
should have been to them a great benefit, and exceeding merit; we had given
them very great reward, and guided them to the right way. He that shall obey
God, and his Prophet, shall be with them whom God has endued with his Grace:
He that knows it, resigneth himself to his Divine Majesty. O you that are
true Believers! be upon your Guard, assembled to fight stoutly for the Law of
God. There be among you that be Cowardly, when any discomfiture has befaln
you; they have said, God protected me, that I was not with them: And when God
gave you Victory, they spoke as if there had been no understanding between them
and you. Would to God I had been with them, I should have acquired exceeding
great merit. Fight for the glory of God, against them that prefer the life of
this World, to that of Heaven. I will give an exceeding great reward to such as
shall fight, that shall be Victorious, and to them that shall be slain,
fighting for the Faith. Wherefore fight you not for the Law of God? for the
liberty of Women and Children, weak and afflicted, that cry, Lord deliver us
out of this place; the people This place is Mecca.
thereof are unjust, give us a Protector, give us an assured refuge. They that
believe in God fight for his Law, and Infidels fight for the Devil. Fight
against them that serve the Devil, his Policies are weak. Consider those to
whom it was said, Cease to imbrue your hands in the Blood of Infidels,
persevere in your Prayers, and pay Tithes. When they were commanded to fight,
part of them were afraid of the multitude, as of God, yea, more afraid of the
multitude than of God, and said, Lord thou have not enjoined us to fight,
unless thou have differed us to a near end. Say to them, The wealth of the
Earth is but a small thing, there be great Riches in the other World, for him
that shall have the fear of God before his eyes. No injustice shall be done to
you; wheresoever you are, death will meet you, notwithstanding you may be in
strong Citadels. If good happen to the Infidels, they say it proceeds from
God; if evil befall them, they say, that comes from thee. Say to them, All
proceeds from God, what then is the Will of those Men? they cannot comprehend
this Discourse: The good that happens to you, comes from God, and the evil
that befalls you, is of your selves. We have sent thee to the people, to
teach them the Mysteries of my Law; it is sufficient that I am witness. He that
obeys the Prophet, the Apostle of God, obeys God; if they be disobedient,
thou art not sent to be their Tutor. They say, They will obey thee, and when
they are gone from thee, many of them ponder in their heart other things than
they have spoken, but God shall write their thoughts, and abandon them. Resign
thy self to God, and be content that he is thy Protector. Will they not
meditate on the Alcoran? Were it sent from any but from God, there would be
therein many Contradictions. When they had any assurance of Victory, or feared
to be overcome, they published it, although they had referred all to the
Prophet, to the most knowing among them, and to them that obeyed the Prophet,
who knew what ought to be published, and what to be kept secret. If the grace
of God had not been with you, and his mercy, you had followed the Devil. Fight
for the Law of God, employ See Kitab el tenoir.
but thy Person, and be not troubled, if the true Believers be without Arms,
the misery of the wicked shall never end, God shall augment their Calamity, and
increase the punishment of their Crimes; he that does well, shall find well,
and who does evil, shall find evil, God regards all. When you are saluted,
return the salute with Honor and Affection, God puts all in Account. God!
there is but one only God, he shall assemble you all at the Day This is the
Battle of Beder; the Enemies of Mahomet made two Battles.
of Judgment, of that there is no doubt. Who is more true in his words than
God? What have you to do with those Ones, divided into two Troops? God ruined
and destroyed them, because of their sins; will you direct into the right way
him, whom God has made to err? He, whom he shall cause to err, See Kitab el
tenoir.
shall not find the right way. They desire that you may be Infidels, as they
are, obey them not, unless they shall return to the Law of See Gelaldin.
God; if they forsake it, kill them where you find them, contract no friendship
with them, except with such as shall come to enter league with you, with sorrow
for what is past; to fight against Infidels with you. Had it pleased God, he
had given them advantage over you, and they had beaten you, if they depart from
you, and follow your Religion, God permits not you to do them injury. You
shall find some that shall incline to believe you, and their companions, they
will turn all to confusion, and fall into it themselves: if they separate
themselves from you, if they desire not peace of you, and desist not to do you
mischief, take and kill them, where you find them, we have given you absolute
power over them. One true believer ought not to slay another true believer,
unless it be through ignorance; He that shall slay a true believer through
ignorance, shall redeem from slavery a true believer, or shall pay damages and
interests to the Kindred and Heirs of the Dead, if they through courtesy
discharge him not of them: If he be of your enemies, and a true believer, he
shall ransom from captivity a true believer; If he be of your confederates, he
shall pay damages and interests to the Kindred and Heirs of the Dead, and
redeem from Captivity a true believer; If he shall be destitute of means to
perform this, he shall fast two Months together for a penance appointed of God;
God knows all things, and is prudent in what he commands. He that shall
kill a true believer of deliberate purpose, shall be chastised in the fire of
Hell, the wrath of God, and his curse shall be upon him eternally. O ye! who
are true believers, when you fight against Infidels for the Law of God, cause
your selves to be known, and say not to them that salute you, Thou art not a
true believer; If you desire the good things of the World, God possesses
riches innumerable, you were before like to them, but God has given you grace,
and sees all your actions. The faithful that continue in their Houses without
sickness, are not equal in merits to such as employ their persons and faculties
for the Law of God; he prefers by many degrees, them that fight for his Law,
and employ their wealth and persons for his service; to those that remain idle
in their Houses, he is their protector, and has prepared for them a sure
refuge in Paradise: he gratifieth by many degrees of favor, them that fight
for his Law, above those that live at ease in their Houses, he is gracious and
merciful. The Angel said to the Infidels that they put to death, Where were you
with your Religion? they answered, We were weak and impotent in the City of
Mecca; they said, Was not the Earth large enough for you to depart from the
wicked? Hell shall be their habitation, except the Women and Children that were
weak and impotent; peradventure God will pardon them, he is gracious and
merciful; he that shall depart from the wicked, to follow his Law, shall find
many places favorable to him, assuredly he will recompense him that shall quit
his House, that shall be slain for his glory, and to follow his Prophet, he is
gracious and merciful. When you shall be in a journey, you shall not offend God
to abridge your prayers, that the Infidels may not surprise you, they are your
declared Enemies; when thou shall be near them, and shall appoint the true
believers to make their prayers, keep about thee a party of them for a guard,
while the residue make their prayers; having finished their Orisons, they shall
do as the first; take Arms and keep a guard, during the time their Companions
shall make their prayers: the Infidels desire that you quit your Arms to
surprise you; you shall not do amiss to quit them, if Rain trouble you, or you
be sick, but continue always upon your guard, God has prepared for Infidels
ignominious torments: Having finished your prayers, Remember God, standing,
sitting or lying down, and pray when you shall be in a place of safety; prayer
is commanded the faithful in a prefixed and appointed time. Be not negligent to
pursue the Infidels, if you suffer, they shall suffer like you; but you hope
for that which they must not hope for: God knows all their actions, he is
most prudent in all his works. We have sent to thee the most true Book, to the
end, thou may judge the differences that are among the People, as thy Lord
has instructed thee. Contend not with Traitors, and ask pardon of God, he is
gracious and merciful. Dispute not with those that betray their Souls, God
loves not treacherous sinners, they conceal themselves from the World, he is
with them when they hide in their hearts such things as are displeasing to him,
he knows all their actions: O ye! you dispute for them in this World, who
shall dispute for them against God at the day of Judgment? Who shall that day
be their protector? He that shall implore pardon of God, having offended him,
shall find him gracious and merciful; who does evil, shall find evil, God is
Omniscient, and most Wise. He that commits Gelaldin says a great and little
sin.
a venial, or a mortal sin, and would excuse himself, commits evidently a
mortal sin. Many of them had endeavored to seduce thee, had thou not been
directed by the grace and mercy of God. But they seduce only their own Souls,
and shall do thee no harm; God has sent to thee the Book that contains his
Commandments* he has taught thee what thou did not understand, and his grace
is eminently upon thee: there is no good in the multiplicity of their secrets
or disc^se, except in such as command a^ms, honest ^ and peace among the
people, with desire t^ ^ase God, they shall receive from his Divine Majesty a
great reward. He that shall contradict the Prophet, having had knowledge of the
right way, and shall follow other paths than that of the true believers, shall
relapse into his impiety, I will cause him to burn in the fire of Hell, where
is the habitation of the wicked. God pardons not them that say, He has
Companions, except this, he pardons all things as he sees good: he that
affirms that God has a Companion, greatly erreth, and is estranged from the
truth. If they invoke other than God, they invoke Idols, the Devil, obstinate,
and cursed of God; when he said to him, Thou will not give me power over them
that worship thee, but I will seduce them from the right way, I will prolong
their wicked life, to retard their conversion, I will cause them to cut off the
The ancient Arabians cut off the ear of any beast, and gave him liberty through
their Country for expiation of their sins. See Gelaldin. See Kitab el tenoir.
ears of Beasts, they shall disobey thy commandments, and they shall envy thy
creatures. He that demands succors of the Devil, is in manifest perdition,
he will promise to Men long Life, and retard their repentance, but he promises
them but a vain glory; Hell is the dwelling place of such Men, out of which
they shall find no issue; Such as shall believe in God, and do good works,
shall dwell eternally in Paradise, where flow many Rivers. God is most true in
what he promises, who is more than God in his words? Your lies, and the lies
of them that know the written Law, do him no harm; he that shall do ill, shall
be punished, and shall find no protector; he that shall do well, and shall
believe in the Law of God, shall enter into Paradise, and shall have no
injustice done to him; what better Law is there, than to resign thy self to
God, and to be an honest Man? Follow the Law of Abraham; God chose Abraham, to
love him; whatsoever is in Heaven and in Earth, belongs to his Divine
Majesty, he knows all things. They will question thee concerning Women; say
to them, God teaches you in that, what you were taught in the Scripture
touching Orphans, and Women; give to them what is appointed by the Law, and
desire not to espouse them, only to possess their wealth; God teaches you
likewise to give to Orphans what appertains to them, and not to injure them;
he will understand your good actions. If a Woman fear to be ill entreated by
her Husband, and that he will divorce her, they shall do well, mutually to
accord, for peace is exceeding good. If you be too obstinate, and cannot agree
together; if you do good to your Wives in divorcing them, and fear to wrong
them, God will take notice of your actions. If you believe you cannot keep
equality, and justice among your Wives, although you apply your selves to it;
Incline not altogether to your own appetites, and leave not your Wife, as a
thing left in toleration. If you live in a good accord, and fear to injure
them, God will be merciful to you. If they separate themselves conformably to
the precepts of the Law, God will enrich them with his protection, he is
bountiful and wise, and whatever is in Heaven and Earth obeys him. We have
recommended to you the fear of God, as we have heretofore, to them that had
knowledge of the written Law. If you be impious, know, that whatever is in
Heaven and Earth is Gods; he has no need of his Creatures, and must be
exalted, it suffices thee, he is thy Protector. If he will, he can cause you
to perish, and put other Creatures in your place, for he is Omnipotent. He that
loves the good things of the Earth, shall find in God all the wealth of this
World, and of the other, he understands and sees all things. O you that
believe! be true in your Testimonies, notwithstanding it be against your
selves, against your Father and Mother, and against your Kindred, and consider
the rich no more than the poor, God is the Protector of the one, and the other;
follow not your Appetites, to favor the rich more than the poor, pervert not
the Truth, be not scrupulous to testify what you know, God knows all your
Actions. O ye that believe in God! and his Prophet, and the Book that was sent
before him; know, he that blasphemeth against his Divine Majesty, against his
Angels, the Scripture, the Prophets, and life eternal, greatly erreth, and
departs from the Truth. God pardons not them that have embraced his Law,
and then have forsaken it, having believed in his Divine Majesty, and are
returned again to their impiety; declare to such men, they shall feel heavy
torments. Such as obey Infidels, to be great in this World, extremely delude
themselves; greatness proceeds from God; It is written in the Book that was
sent to you, that the Infidels shall mock you, when they shall hear the word of
God, and you shall obey his Commandments; Tarry not in their Company, if they
change not their Discourse, otherwise you will be like to them, God will
assemble into the fire of Hell all Infidels, and wicked Persons. Some of them
that observe your Actions, said, they were of your party, when any Felicity
happened to you; and when the Infidels had advantage over you, they said, they
were with them, and that they fought against you; God at the Day of Judgment
shall judge the difference that is between you, and will not give advantage to
Infidels, over them that observe his Law. The wicked think to deceive God, but
God deceives them, they are negligent to make their prayers, they are
hypocrites before the World, and remember not his Divine Majesty, except very
few of them, uncertain whether they should follow the faithful, or the
Infidels; he whom God shall cause to go astray, shall not find the right way. O
ye that believe! obey not Infidels, to the exclusion of true believers; will
you give God manifest occasion to chastise you for your sins? The wicked shall
be in the lowest place of Hell, and shall find no relief, except such as shall
repent, that shall do good works, resign themselves to God, and obey his
Commandments, they shall be with the true believers, and receive from God a
very great reward. He will not send you misery, if you give him thanks for his
favors, and obey him; he accepts the acknowledgment of his benefits, and
knows all things. He wills not that what evil is committed, be published;
he that publishes the evil he does, is very much to blame; if you manifest the
good you do, or if you conceal it, and abstain from doing evil, he will be
merciful to you, he is Omnipotent. Such as blaspheme against God and his
Prophets, his Apostles; such as would make a distinction between the
Commandments of his Divine Majesty, and the precepts of his Prophets; such as
affirm' they believe in some of the Prophets, and believe not in all, and take
a middle way between faith and impiety, are indeed impious, we have prepared
for them ignominious torments; but they who believe in God, and generally in
all his Prophets, and Apostles, shall be recompensed of God, gracious and
merciful. They that know the written Law, will require thee to cause to descend
from Heaven a Book, and written Tables; The Jews.
They demanded of Moses greater things, and said, Cause us to behold God with
our eyes, then thunder surprised them by reason of their impiety: They adored
the Calf, after having had the knowledge of our Commandments; nevertheless, we
pardoned them, and gave to Moses an absolute dominion over them. We raised the
Mountain over them, following our promises, and said to them; Enter the Gate of
the Temple with adoration and humility, and no longer transgress the
observation of the day of Rest; We for this matter received from them a strong
promise, but they swerved from what they had promised, and we cursed them,
because of their impiety, by reason of the Murder they committed without
reason, on the persons of the Prophets, and of the words they uttered, viz. Our
heart is hardened; Contrariwise, God imprinted infidelity in their hearts, they
shall never believe in his Law, except very few of them, because of their
malice, and the blasphemies they vomited against Mary: they said, We have slain
the Messiah, Jesus, the Son of Mary, the Prophet The Christians.
and Apostle of God: Certainly they slew him not, neither crucified him, they
crucified one among them that resembled him; such as doubt it are in a manifest
error, and speak not but through opinion. Certainly they slew him not; on the
contrary, God took him up to himself, he is Omnipotent and prudent in all his
actions: Such as have the knowledge of Scripture, ought to believe in Jesus
before his death; he shall be a witness against them of their actions at the
Day of Judgment; We have prohibited them that Judaize, by reason of their sin,
things that were permitted them; We have prepared for them great torment,
because they mis-lead the World from the right way, because they take Use that
is forbidden them, and unjustly eat the substance of their neighbor. Such of
them as are profound in Learning, and all the faithful, believe in the
Scriptures, both ancient, and modern; I will give great rewards to them that
shall make their prayers at the time appointed, that shall pay Tyths, and
believe in the Day of Judgment. We have sent thee our inspirations, as we sent
them to Noah, and the Prophets after him; as we heretofore sent them to
Abraham, Ismael, Isaac, Jacob, the Tribes, to Jesus, Job, Jonas, Aaron, and to
Solomon, and gave the Psalter to David. We have told thee who were the Prophets
that preceded thee; but we have not spoken to thee, concerning the merits of
all of them. Moses spoke to God, as his Prophet, and Apostle; all declared his
mercy, and preached the torments of Hell, to the end Men might have no cause of
excuse; God is Omnipotent and prudent in all his actions: He shall be witness
that the Alcoran was sent to thee with his Commandments, the Angels likewise
shall testify it; but it ought to suffice thee, that God is witness. The
Infidels that hinder the People to follow the Law of God, were exceedingly
erroneous; God will not pardon them, he will lead them into the path of Hell,
where they shall remain eternally, it is a thing easy to his Divine Majesty. O
People! A Prophet is come to you, who preaches to you the Truth from the Lord,
believe him, you shall do well; if you believe him not, know, that whatever is
in Earth, and in Heaven is Gods, and that God knows whatsoever you do. O ye
that understand the written Law! Obey the Commandments of God, and speak not of
his Divine Majesty but with truth; the Messiah, Jesus, the Son of Mary, is a
Prophet, and an Apostle of God, his Word, and his Spirit, which he sent to
Mary; believe therefore in God, and in his Prophets, and say not there be three
Gods, put an end to that discourse, you shall do well; For there is but one
God, praised be God, he has no Son; whatever is in Heaven, and in Earth
obeys him, it is sufficient that he is witness. The Messiah esteems in no
dishonor to be the servant of God, neither the Angel, nor the Cherubins; He
that holds it a dishonor to be at his service, is too proud; he shall
assemble all the World at the Day of Judgment, and every one shall receive the
recompense that he shall have merited, he shall augment his favors upon them
that shall have believed in his Divine Majesty, and have done good works; he
shall chastise them that shall have held it a dishonor to be his servants, and
have been proud upon the Earth, they shall find no safe refuge but in his
mercy. O People! God has sent you a Protector, a most strong argument, and a
most clear light; they that shall trust in God, shall enjoy his grace, and he
shall guide them into the right way. They will enquire of thee concerning
successions; say to them, God teaches you touching successions, as follows;
if a Man decease without issue, and has a Sister, she shall have the moity of
what he shall leave, and shall inherit it, if she have no Children: If they be
two Sisters, they shall have two thirds of what the deceased left; if they be
many Brothers, and many Sisters, the Son shall have as much as two Daughters;
God teaches you his Commandments, depart not from the right way, he is
Omniscient.

CHAP. V. The Chapter of the Table, containing an hundred and twenty Verses,
written at Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. O ye that believe in God! Satisfy
what you have promised; it is permitted you to eat of the Beasts that be in the
World, except of what shall be hereafter declared. Hunting is forbidden you,
during the time that you shall go on Pilgrimage to Mecca. God ordains what he
will O ye that believe! say not, That it is permitted to do what God has
prohibited, perform what is commanded you, during the Month of Pilgrimage; give
no impediment to such as carry presents to Mecca, neither to them that assume
The old Arabians in devotion, put the leaves and branches of Trees upon their
Necks like Collers, as the Peasants in many places in France do the herbs of
St. John. See Kitab el tenoir.
Collers, neither hinder Pilgrims to repair thither, to demand the Grace of
God, and his mercies. It is lawful for you to hunt, when you shall have
finished your Pilgrimage; beware lest some persons cause you to sin, and hinder
your going to Mecca; to oblige you to punish them, repose your confidence in
the justice and fear of God, and not in the sin and malice of your neighbor.
Fear God who is severe in his chastisements. It is forbidden you to eat
Carrion, Blood, Swines Flesh, and whatsoever is not killed in pronouncing the
name of God: you are prohibited to eat Animals strangled, choakt, knocked down,
precipitated, that are slain striking each other, and such as beasts shall have
slain; if you find them not alive, to let out their Blood, in pronouncing the
name of God. You shall not eat of Beasts sacrificed to Idols: Consult not with
Southsayers or Lots, it is a great sin. The day shall come when they that have
abandoned See Gelaldin.
your Law, shall be desperate; fear not them, and fear me: The day will come,
when I shall accomplish your Law, and my Grace shall be abundantly upon you:
The Law of Salvation, is the Law that I desire to give you. If any one be in
necessity, and eats of what is prohibited, without a will to sin, God shall
be to him gracious and merciful. They will demand of thee, what is permitted
them to eat? Say to them it is lawful to eat all sorts of Beasts that are not
unclean, and whatever has been taught you from God, touching Beasts that have
been wounded by Lions or Dogs, eat the Beast you shall take, and remember God
in blooding them; fear God, he is exact to take account. This day it is lawful
that you eat what is not unclean, and the meats of them that know the written
Law, their meats are lawful for you, and yours for them. You are permitted to
espouse Maidens The Jews and Christians.
and Women of free Condition, that are of your Religion, and Maidens and Women
of free Condition, that know the written Law, giving them their Dowry with
civility; commit neither Concubinage, nor Adultery with them, neither secretly
or publicly; the good works of him that shall renounce your Law, shall be
unprofitable, he shall be at the Day of Judgment in the number of the Damned. O
ye that believe in God, when you would make your Prayers, wash your Faces, your
Hands to the Elbow, and pass your hand over your head, and over your feet to
the ancles. If you be polluted, purify your selves; if sick, or in a Journey,
or about to discharge your Belly, or have known Women, and find no water to
wash you, lay hand on the Sand, pass it over your Visage, and wipe therewith
your hands. God enjoyneth you nothing irksome, but wills you be clean, and
desires to accomplish his Grace upon you; peradventure you will give him
thanks. O ye that believe in God! call to mind his Grace, and promise he made
to you, when you said, We heard, and obeyed, fear him, he knows all that is
in your hearts. O ye that believe in God! obey his Commandments, and be true in
your Testimonies, take heed that no man move you to offend God, in diverting
you from what is just; render justice to all, his fear inviteth you to it; have
it before your eyes, he knows all your Actions; has promised his grace, and
great recompenses to the true Believers, that shall do good works in this
World, and has prepared Hell to punish Infidels. O ye that believe in God!
remember his favor toward you, when some Persons would have extended their
hands upon you, and how he delivered you from their Malice; Fear him, Corcis
Enemy to Mahomet.
all true Believers ought to resign themselves to his Will. God received the
Promise of the Children of Israel to observe his Commandments, he established
among them twelve Captains, and said to them, I will be with you when you shall
make your Prayers, pay your Tithes, believe in the Prophets, de^end them, and
shall lend to me any Alms; I will cover your sins, and cause you to enter
Paradise, wherein flow many Rivers; and he among you that shall be an Infidel,
shall be entirely erroneous from the right path. When they swerved from what
they had promised, we gave them our Curse, and hardened their heart; they have
altered the words of the Scripture, and abjured what they had approved. Thou
shall not know them that shall be Traitors, except very few of them; forgive
and depart from them, God loves them that do good. We likewise received the
Promise of those who call themselves Christians, but they have forgotten what
they promised; they have altered what was taught them, and we have cast among
them Enmity and hatred, even until the Day of Judgment. That day God shall
cause them to know whatever they have done for their punishment. O ye that know
the written Law! our Mahomet.
Prophet is come to bring to light many things of the Scripture, which you
conceal, and he likewise leaves in silence many things, that it is not time to
make manifest. God has sent you a Book full of light, to conduct into the way
of Salvation them that love him, to bring them out of darkness, and by his
special Grace, to lead them into the way of Salvation. Certainly he that says,
that the Messiah, the Son of Mary, is God, is impious: Say to him, who can
hinder God to exterminate the Messiah, and his Mother, with whatsoever is in
the Earth, when it shall seem good to him? God is King of Heaven and Earth, he
created with them what seemed good to him, he is Omnipotent. The Jews and
Christians have said, we are the Children of God, his well beloved; Say to
them, shall not God chastise you for your sins? Certainly ye are men; He that
created you, pardons, and punishes as it pleases him, he is the King of all
that is in Heaven or Earth, and of whatever is between them, he is the refuge
of the righteous. O ye that have knowledge in the written Law! The Prophet, the
Apostle of God is come to instruct you in a time that there is none other
Prophet but he on the Earth; Will you say that no man preached to you the
torments of Hell? Certainly the word of God is this day preached to you, the
torment of Hell, and the Omnipotency of his Divine Majesty. Remember thou what
Moses said to his people, O people, call to mind the grace of God toward you,
he has chosen from among you Prophets, and Kings, has conferred on you what
he has given to none in the World: Enter into the Holy Land, as God has
commanded, turn not your Backs to your Enemies, lest you be in the number of
Reprobates: They answered, O Moses! there are Giants and Tyrants in the Holy
Land, we will not enter into it, until they be gone out of it, if they forsake
it, we will enter into it. Then two men of them that were in the grace of God,
said to them, enter at the Gate, and fight against them, you shall be
Victorious, trust in God, if you believe in his Law: They said, O Moses! we
will not enter, so long as those Tyrants dwell therein, go and fight against
them with thy Lord, we will here attend. Then, said Moses, Lord, I dispose but
of mine own, and my Brothers person; separate us from this wicked people; the
Lord said to him, the entrance into the Holy Land is prohibited to this people,
they shall wander forty years upon the Earth, in confusion and amazement,
afflict not thy self with the Deportments of the wicked; teach them the History
of the Sons of Adam, how they offered Sacrifices, how the Sacrifice of the one
was accepted, that of the other was not: he through envy menaced his Brother,
to murder him; his Brother said to him, God receives the Sacrifices, and
Holocausts of such as have his fear before their eyes: assuredly if thou
extendest thine hand to slay me, I will not stretch forth mine to hurt thee; I
fear the Lord of the Universe; If thou chargest thy self with the murder of my
Person, with thy past sins, thou shall go to Hell, where the unjust shall be
punished: The murder of his Brother seemed easy and advantageous for him, he
slew him, and is in the number of the Damned. God sent a Raven that made a Pit
in the Earth, and showed him the manner to bury the Body of his Brother: Then
said he, would to God I had been weak and impotent, that I were like to this
Raven? I must bury the Body of my Brother, and he was penitent for his offense;
by reason of this murder, we ordained to the Children of Israel, that he who
shall slay a Person innocent, shall be punished, as if he had slain the whole
World, and he that shall give him his Life, shall be recompensed, as if he had
given Life to the whole World. My Prophets came to the Children of Israel,
taught them my Commandments, and caused them to see Miracles, nevertheless many
of them were disobedient: the punishment of them that oppose the Will of God,
that of his Prophet, and that endeavor to pollute the Earth, is to be slain,
hanged, to have the right foot, and the left hand, or right hand, and the left
foot cut off, and to be extirpated from the Earth; they shall have in this
World shame on the Forehead, and shall feel in the other, great torments,
except such as shall be converted before their death, and shall know, that God
is gracious and merciful. O ye that believe! fear God, fight for his Law, you
perhaps shall be happy. All the Treasures of the World shall not be able to
redeem Infidels at the Day of Judgment, they shall endure exceeding great
torments, they shall desire to go out of the fire of Hell, but shall dwell
there eternally. Cut off the hands of those Men and Women that steal, they
contract upon themselves the wrath of the World, and the punishment that God
has prepared for the wicked: He that shall turn, and do good works, shall be
pardoned, God is gracious and merciful to the penitent. Know thou not that
the Kingdom of Heaven, and of Earth is Gods? that he chastises and pardons
whom it pleases him? and that he is Omnipotent? O Prophet! afflict not thy
self, to behold them running to impiety; that say with the mouth, we believe,
and have no Faith in their hearts; neither for them that Iudaize, and hearken
to the lies of their Doctors, to relate them to others; they pervert the
Language of the Old Testament, and say; If you be instructed in those Precepts,
you ought to observe them, if they instruct you not in them, take heed to your
selves. Such as make use of the name of God, to move the people to Sedition,
are without Faith, God will not purify their hearts, they shall have in this
World shame upon the Forehead, and feel in the other extreme torments. They
listen to blasphemies, and eat what is prohibited; If they repair to thee, and
submit themselves to thy Judgment, judge their Controversy with Equity,
converse not with them; if thou depart from their Company, they shall not hurt
thee, if thou give judgment between them, judge with Equity, God loves the
Just: How shall they submit to thy judgment, seeing they have the Old
Testament, which contains the Commandments of God? They will not execute thy
Judgment, neither believe in the Old Testament, wherein is the guide of the
right way, and a light to the Prophets, to judge the differences arising among
true Believers, among Jews; their Doctors, and their Priests, who study the
Scripture, and are Witnesses that it contains the truth, fear not the World,
but dread me; sell not, neither exchange my Commandments for any price. Such as
judge not conformably to the Law of God, are Infidels; We have ordained the
Talio, man for man, an eye for an eye, a nose for a nose, an ear for an ear, a
tooth for a tooth, a wound for a wound; he that shall observe it, shall do
well, and such as shall not judge conformably to the Law of God, are unjust. We
sent after many Prophets, Jesus the Son of Mary, who confirmed the ancient
Scriptures, to him we gave the Gospel, full of light, to conduct the people to
the right way, with a confirmation of the Old Testament, a guide and
instruction for the righteous. They that follow the Gospel, ought to judge as
it is commanded in the Gospel; such as judge not conformably to what God has
taught them, are disobedient to his Divine Majesty. To thee have we sent the
Book that contains the truth, and confirms the ancient Scritures, determine
the differences that shall arise among the people, as I have inspired thee, and
follow not the Appetite of men that will abjure the truth which I have taught
thee. We have instructed all of you in a Law, and assured means to lead you
into the way of Salvation; you should all have been of one and the same
Religion, had it so pleased God; he has done this to prove you; Do good, and
know, that you all shall be assembled before him, and he shall resolve the
doubts that are among you. If thou judge the differences that are among them,
judge conformably to what has been inspired into thee, and follow not their
Appetites; be careful they seduce thee not, and move thee to doubt many things
that God has taught thee; if they disobey his Commandments, know, he will
severely punish them, because of the Enormity of their Crimes. The greatest
part of the World are impious; Do they affect the Judgment of the Ignorant?
What better Judge for the good, is there than God? O ye that believe! obey not
the Jews, nor the Christians, they mutually obey each other in their impiety,
he that shall obey them, shall be like unto them, God guides not the unjust.
Thou see such as are unstable in their Faith, flock to them, and say, they
fear a change of times, but God shall give advantage and Victory to his
Prophet, and they shall repent to have concealed in their minds the Miracles of
his Divine Majesty. What will they allege for excuse, who swore by the name of
God, exactly to observe their Religion, and to be with you? Their good works
shall be unprofitable, and they in the number of the Damned. O ye that believe!
if you abandon your Faith, God will put others in your place, that shall love
him, and he them, and this to your great ignominy, and the advantage of
converted Infidels, that shall fight without fear, for his Law: Thus God
bestows his grace, as he See* Gelaldin.
sees good, he is liberal, and Omniscient. You ought certainly to obey God,
and his Prophet, his Apostle; they who believe in God, that make their Prayers
at the time appointed, pay Tithes, and are in the Protection of God and his
Prophet, shall be beloved of his Divine Majesty, and be Victorious. O ye true
Believers! obey not such as scoff at your Religion, who have knowledge of the
written Law; obey not Infidels, and if you are good men, fear God; obey not
them that deride your Prayers, it is the action of those that are unwise. O ye
that understand the written Law! will you not abhor me, if I believe not in
God, in what he has inspired into me, and into them that preceded me? The
greatest part of you are wicked. Say to them, did I instruct you to do evil,
when I preached to you the effect of Gods mercy? Those whom he curses, against
whom he is incensed, whom he has Metamorphosed into Apes, and Swine, and who
have adored Idols, shall be confined in the fire of Hell, they are in a very
evil way. When they come to thee, they will say, they believe in the Law of
God, they will enter thine House with impiety, and go forth in the like manner,
but God knows what they conceal in their heart: Thou shall see many of them
embrace Paganism, follow a lie, eat what is forbidden, and this to displease
their Doctors, and Priests, who have forbidden them to speak lies, and eat
meats that are unclean. The Jews said, The hand of God is shut, contrariwise,
it is their hand that is shut, and they shall be accursed by reason of their
discourse: certainly the hands of God are open, and he does good to whom he
pleases: Many amongst them, through impiety, and disobedience, alter what is
in the Scripture; but we have cast among them hatred, and horror, even to the
Day of Judgment, God has extinguished the fire which they had kindled, to make
War against the righteous; they endeavor to pollute the Earth, but God
detesteth such as cause disorder; he remitteth their sins that know the
Scripture, believe in his Law, and fly impiety, they shall enter Paradise,
that is full of delights. They have read the Old Testament, the Gospel, and all
Scriptures, they enjoy abundance of all good things; nevertheless many have
disobeyed the Commandments of God. O Prophet! preach what God has taught thee;
whether thou do preach it, or do not, he will defend thee from the malice
of men, he abhors Infidels* O ye that know the written Law! if you observe
not the Old Testament, the Gospel, and Scriptures which God has sent you, you
shall be without merit. Many of them through impiety and ignorance, pervert
what is contained in the Scripture; afflict not thy self with the actions of
the impious. The Jews, Samaritans, Christians, all that shall have believed in
God, the Resurrection of the Dead, and have done good works, shall be exempt
from affliction, there is nothing for them to fear at the day of Judgment. We
See Kitab et tenoir.
received of the Children of Israel a promise, to believe in our Prophets, and
Apostles, Yet have they slandred many, and slain such as would not follow their
appetites: they believed there was no punishment for their crimes, and became
deaf, and blind; After this, God pardoned them, nevertheless, they returned in
their sin, and are again become deaf, and blind; God beholds all their
deportments. Certainly, they who affirm the Messiah, the Son of Mary, to be
God, are impious; the Messiah commanded the Children of Israel to worship God,
his and their Lord; the entrance into Paradise is forbidden to him that shall
say, God has a Companion equal to him, Hell shall be his habitation, and the
unjust shall find none to protect them at the Day of Judgment. Such as affirm
there are three Gods, are impious: there is but one God; if they desist not
from such discourse, they shall burn in the fire of Hell; if they turn, and
implore pardon of God, he will be to them gracious and merciful. The Messiah,
the Son of Mary, is a Prophet, and Apostle of God, like to the Prophets that
came before him; his Mother is holy, and both of them did eat and drink.
Consider how I manifest my unity to Infidels* how they blaspheme, and depart
from the Truth; say to them, Will you worship instead of God, what can neither
benefit, nor hurt you? God understands and knows all things. O ye that have
knowledge of the written Law! speak of your Religion with reverence, and follow
not the appetites of such as go astray, and walk in an evil way. The Infidels
were accursed by the Tongue of David, and of Messiah, the Son of Mary, because
of their disobedience; they abstain not from things that are not approved; they
do them, and through obstinacy will continue them. Thou shall see many of the
Inhabitants of Mecca adhere to them, by reason of the sin they conceal in their
hearts. God assuredly will be incensed against them, and they shall be confined
eternally in the torments of Hell. If they had believed in God, in his Prophet,
and the Scriptures, they had not obeyed Infidels, but many of them are impious.
Thou shall find the Jews, and Inhabitants of Mecca, who believe in many Gods,
to be very great enemies to the faithful, and the Christians to have a great
inclination, and amity toward the true believers; for that they have Priests,
and Religious, that are humble, who have eyes full of tears, when they hear
mention of the Doctrine which God has inspired into thee, because of their
knowledge of the Truth, and say, Lord, We believe in thy Law, write us in the
number of them that prosess thy Unity, who hinders us to believe in God, and
the Truth wherein we have been instructed? We desire with passion, O Lord, to
be in the number of the just. God shall hearken to their Prayers, and pardon
them; he shall open to them the Gate of Paradise, wherein is the reward of the
righteous, and the Infidels shall inhabit the abyss of Hell. O ye who are true
believers! inhibit not the eating of what God has permitted, offend not God,
he abhors them that offend him, eat of the meats that are lawful for you,
and have his fear before your eyes, he will not chastise you for what you have
spoken at random, contrary to your faith, without design of offending him, but
he shall punish you for your Oaths, if you observe them not; the satisfaction
of an Oath not accomplished, is to give food to ten poor of your Religion, and
to cloth them, or to enfranchise a Slave that is a true believer; he that is
destitute of means to perform this, shall fast three days immediately
succeeding, such is the satisfaction of a not accomplished Oath; keep exactly
your faith, so does God teach you his Commandments, you will, peradventure,
give him thanks. O ye that believe in God! Wine, Games of hazard, Idols, Lots,
and divinations are abominations, and filthy practices of the Devil, depart
from him, perhaps you will be righteous. The Devil desires to sow among you
dissension, and horror, through Wine, and Games of hazard, to choke your
remembrance of God, and of praying to him; abandon Wine, and Games of hazard,
be obedient to God and the Prophet, his Apostle, and take heed to your selves;
If you disobey God, know, that the Prophet is obliged only to preach publicly
the word of his Divine Majesty; the true Believers, and the righteous have not
provoked God in drinking Wine, and playing at Games of Hazard, before they were
prohibited, they will abstain for the future, and perform good works, God
loves them that do good. O ye that believe! God proves you by one thing, to
wit, by hunting, whether you take the Game with your hands, or coursing on
Horseback, to discern them among you that fear him, and believe in his Law;
whosoever shall offend him, shall be severely punished. O ye that believe! kill
not your Game, during the time of your Pilgrimage to Mecca; whosoever shall
kill of deliberate purpose, shall be judged, as if he had slain his Neighbors
beast, he shall be judged by one among you, and be condemned to offer a Present
at the Temple of Mecca, or to give Food to the Poor, or to fast, or to perform
somewhat of like Nature, for the expiation of his Error; if he have repentance
in his mind, God will pardon what is past; if he return in his sin, God will be
avenged on him, he is Omnipotent, and avengeful. It is permitted that you fish,
and eat of fish during your Pilgrimage, but hunting by Land is absolutely
forbidden in this Voyage; fear God, you shall all one day be assembled before
him to be judged, he has appointed the month of Pilgrimage, he has
established the Temple of Mecca for the Devotion of the people, and has
forbidden to give impediment to such as bring thither oblations, and those that
assume The ancient Arabians put upon their Necks the leaves of Trees, in
devotion, when they arrived at Mecca.
Collers, to the end, you may learn to understand that he knows all things
both in Heaven, and Earth, and that he is Omnipotent. Know ye, that he is
grievous in his Chastisements, and gracious and merciful: The Prophet is
obliged but to preach his Commandments, he knows all that you conceal in your
hearts, and whatever you make manifest: Evil must not be equal to good,
notwithstanding it be pleasing to you: O ye that are wise! have the fear of God
before your eyes, peradventure See Kitab el tenoir.
you shall be happy. O ye Believers! desire not the knowledge of all things,
you will afflict your selves; be not curious to know at what time the Alcoran
was sent from Heaven, God pardons your former curiosity; your Predecessors
were alike curious, and in the number of unbelievers. God has commanded
nothing touching These are the Ceremonies of the ancient Arabians, which
Mahomet renounceth. See Kitab el tenoir.
the she Camel, whose ear is slit, neither that which is at liberty in the
Field, neither concerning the Ewe that has brought forth seven Lambs, neither
the Camel, of whom have issued ten Camels, but the wicked invent blasphemies
against his Divine Majesty, and are unwise; When it was said to them come, and
observe what God has taught his Prophet, they replied, it sufficed them to
follow what their Fathers had observed, notwithstanding their Fathers were
ignorant and erroneous. O ye Believers! be careful of your selves, such as be
in error shall not hurt you; if you follow the right way, all of you shall one
day be assembled before God, who shall discover all your works, and reward you
according to your merits. O ye Believers! make your Testament, when your death
approaches, and take two Witnesses of your own Religion, that are honest men;
If you are in a journey, and sickness surprise you, you shall take two
witnesses, such as you shall meet with to serve your Testament, and having
prayed, shall deliver to them your Will. If you doubt their integrity, cause
them to swear to be faithful in their testimonies, and not give themselves to
be corrupted by your Kindred. Conceal not your testimony, lest you be in the
numof sinners. If you discover those two witnesses to have erred in their
testimony, substitute two other in their place, although they partake in your
succession, and take Oath of them to be more veritable in their dispositions,
than the two others, otherwise they will offend God, and be numbered with the
unjust. It is better to speak Truth, than to be in fear, lest your fashood be
detected; fear God, and hearken to his Commandments, he guides not them that
disobey him. He shall one day assemble his Prophets and Apostles, and say unto
them what did you answer, being questioned concerning my unity? they shall
reply, Lord, we are ignorant, thou alone know all things. He shall say to
Jesus, O Jesus, Son of Mary, remember thou my grace toward thee, and thy
Mother, I strengthened thee with the Holy Ghost; Thou spakest in thy Cradle, as
a Man of forty or fifty years, thee did I instruct in Scripture and knowledge,
the Old Testament, and the Gospel; Thou did form of Earth the figure of a
Bird, did breath upon it, and it did fly, thou did cure the Born blind,
and the leprous, did revive the Dead, I delivered thee from the Jews, when
thou did preach to them my Commandments, and wroughtest Miracles, which the
wicked affirmed to be Magic, and enchantment. Remember, how thou did command
thy Apostles to believe in me, and obey my Prophet, and how they said, we
believe in one sole God, be thou Witness that we entirely resign our selves to
the Will of God. Remember O Mahomet.
thou, that the Apostles said, O Jesus Son of Mary, can thy Lord send us from
Heaven a Table covered with meats to satisfy us? Jesus answered them, Fear
God, if you believe in his Law; they said, we have an Appetite, and desire to
eat of the Food of Heaven, for the repose of our hearts, and to know if thou
speak the truth, of which we shall be Witnesses. Then said he, O God my
Lord, cause to descend upon us from Heaven a Table covered with meat, this day
shall be celebrated by us and them that shall succeed, this shall be a sign of
thy Omnipotency; enrich us with thy grace, thou possessest all Treasure. God
said to him, I will cause to descend from Heaven the Food which thou desire*
and whosoever shall be ^mpious, shall be punished with torments, that no man
yet has suffered. He shall* say at the Day of Judgment, O Jesus Son of Mary!
did thou enjoin the people to worship thee, and thy Mother, as two Gods?
Jesus shall answer, praised be thy name; I will take heed of speaking what is
not, thou know if I have said it, thou art Omniscient, thou know what is
in my Soul, and I have no knowledge of what is in thee; I delivered nothing but
what thou did command me to speak: to wit, Worship God your Lord, and mine, I
am Witness from the time that I was in the World, until thou did cause me to
dye; thou did observe the Deportments of the people, thou feast all; if thou
chastisest Men, they are thy Creatures; if thou do pardon them, thou art
Omnipotent and Wise. Then shall God say, this day shall good works be
profitable to the righteous, they shall enter into Paradise, wherein flow many
Rivers, there shall they dwell eternally, with my grace, in exceeding great
felicity; the Kingdom of heaven, of Earth is Gods, he is Omnipotent.

CHAP. VI. The Chapter of Gratifications, containing an hundred sixty and
fifteen Verses, written at Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful: Gelaldin justifies this Chapter of
Animals. See Gelaldin.
Praise be to God the Creator of Heaven, of Earth, of darkness, and of light;
such as believe not in their Lord are in error. He it is that created you of
the dust of the Earth, and appointed a prefixed time for your death, and
resurrection; nevertheless you doubt, he is God in Heaven and in Earth, he
understands the secrets of your hearts, and whatsoever you make manifest; he
knows the good and evil that you commit, that his Commandments have been
taught the Inhabitants of Mecca, and that they have abjured them; they opposed
the revealed Truth, but shall be chastised for their contempt. They consider
not how much People we have destroyed, in past See Gelaldin*
ages; we gave them places to dwell in, more strong and spacious than those
which you inhabit, sent them about of rain, caused Fountains flow in the places
of their habitation; after this did we extirpate them, by reason of their sins,
and established in their place a new People. We have sent to thee the
Scripture, written in Vellum, the unbelievers have handled it with their hands,
yet say, it is evident sorcery and enchantment, that they will not believe
therein, unless they see an Angel descend to confirm it. Should we have sent an
Angel, they had perished by his presence, unless we had sent him under the
figure of a Man, like unto them, and clothed as they are. They derided the
Prophets, and Apostles, thy Predecessors; derision is fallen upon such as
contemned them. Say to them, go through the World, and consider the end of them
that abjure the Law of God; say to them, to whom appertains whatsoever is in
Heaven and Earth? it is Gods. He will employ his mercy to save you; doubtless
he will assemble all of you at the Day of Judgment. Nevertheless Infidels
believe not in his Unity; they consider not, that whatsoever moves by night,
and by day, and whatsoever is in the World, belongs to his Divine Majesty,
who understands and knows all things. Say to them, require you other
protection than that of God the Omnipotent Creator of Heaven and Earth, who
nourishes all things, is nourished by none? Say to them, I have received a
command to embrace the Law of Salvation. Be not ye in number of unbelievers; I
fear to disobey my Lord, and fear the torments prepared for the wicked at the
day of Judgment; he that shall deliver himself, shall enjoy the grace of God,
which is supreme felicity: If God will punish you, none shall deliver you from
his punishment; if his Will is to do good to you, he is Omnipotent, always
victorious, and has all power over his Creatures; he is most wise and
Omniscient. Say to them, What better testimony is there in the World than that
of God? Say to them, He shall testify between you and me, to whom he has
inspired the Alcoran to instruct you: Will any among you that shall learn it,
say there is any other God, but God; I will not say so; there is but one God,
and I am innocent from the sin you commit, in associating him with a companion
equal to him; many of them that understand the written Law, have knowledge of
the truth of the Alcoran; their Children also know it, but such as forsake
their own Souls, will not believe in God. Who more unjust, than he that
blasphemeth against God and his Commandments? Certainly the wicked shall be
miserable; I will assemble all of them, and say, Where are the gods which you
did associate with God? They shall have none other excuse, but to say, by God,
Lord, we were of the number of Idolaters. Consider how they will lie, and
disavow their blasphemies: some there be among them that hearken to thee, we
have hardened their hearts, they will not learn the Alcoran, because their ears
are stopped. When they shall hear related all the miracles of the World, and
shall see them with their eyes, they will not believe until they have disputed
against thee. The wicked say the Alcoran is but a lie, and ^able of Antiquity;
they forbid the People to believe it, and contemn it; certainly they destroy
their Souls, and know it not; thou shall see when they shall be detained in the
fire of Hell, they will say, Would to God I might return into the World, I
would obey the Commandments of his Divine Majesty, and be in the number of true
believers. They knew the truth, but concealed it; should they return into the
World, they would return to their impiety, they are liars. They affirm, there
is none other life than that of the World, neither any resurrection; when they
shall be before God, they shall acknowledge their errors, he shall cause them
to feel the chastisements due to their blasphemies. Such as believe not in the
Resurrection, are wretched Men, they shall be afflicted for their sins at the
hour when ever death shall surprise them; they shall bear on their back the
burden of their crimes, and avouch the life of this world to be but deceit and
vanity, and the life of the other to be full of felicity for the righteous;
nevertheless the wicked are not converted. I know O Mahomet.
thou will be incensed against such as shall say, they desire to obey thee, and
shall renounce thy Doctrine; they that contemn the Commandments of God are
impious, they have belied the Prophets thy Predecessors; the Prophets endured
their lies, and were patient, until we destroyed them; God declineth not what
he has promised. Thou know what the Prophets foretold: if Men abandon thee,
can thou cove^ to continue on earth (to instruct them) and to be in Heaven at
the same time, to cause prodigies appear (testimonies of thy mission.) Had it
so pleased God, he had brought them all into the right way, nor had they been
in the Sea Gelaldin.
number of the ignorant. Certainly he hears the prayers of the righteous,
that hearken to his word; he will give resurrection to the dead, and assemble
them to receive recompense according to their merits. They have said, we
believe not in the Prophet, if he show not to us some miracle from his Lord:
say unto them, God has showed you many miracles, but most of you do not
understand them; the beasts that walk upon the Earth and the birds that fly in
the Air, are in the number of his creatures: We have not omitted to write any
thing that is written in the Book kept in Heaven; all Men shall one day appear
before God, such as shall not have believed in his Law, shall be deaf and dumb,
and inhabit darkness: God misleadeth whom it pleases him, and guides in the
right way whom he sees good. Say unto them, have you felt the punishment of
God? Have you had knowledge of the day of Judgment? Will you invoke any but
God, if you be good Men? If you implore him, he will deliver you from the evils
that you fear; and if it please him you shall abandon the Idols, which with
unbelievers you adore. We sent our Prophets to them that were before you, when
they contemned them, we sent afflictions to procure their conversion, which had
not been done without the miseries that we brought upon them. Nevertheless
their heart is hardened, the devil caused them to find disobedience more
advantageous, and they forgot what was taught them. When we opened the gate of
happiness, they exceedingly rejoiced, and were ungrateful; but, when they
thought least of it, they were chastised, became desperate, and were
extirpated, for the great glory of God; Lord of the O Mahomet.
Universe, say unto them, If God rendered you deaf, blind, and ignorant, what
other god than God shall restore your sight, hearing, and knowledge? Consider
how I manifest my Unity; nevertheless they will not believe it: say unto them,
have you had a sense of the scourge of God secretly and publicly? Has God
condemned any but the wicked? He sent not the Prophets and Apostles, but to
proclaim the felicity of Paradise, and preach the torments of Hell: He that
shall believe, and do good works, shall be exempt from fear at the Day of
Judgment, and unbelievers shall be punished, because of their disobedience. Say
unto them, I told you not that I had in my power all the treasures of God,
neither that I had knowledge of the future, and past; nor do affirm, that I am
an Angel, I only act what has been inspired into me; is the blind like to him
that sees clearly? Consider what I say. I preach not the Day of Judgment but
to such as apprehend it, they shall find none other than God to protect them;
peradventure they will fear his Divine Majesty. Molest not them that pray unto
God The poor.
evening and morning, and that desire to see his face, thou shall not be
accomptable for their actions, neither shall they give account of what See
Gelaldin.
thou do; if thou disturbest them* thou shall be in the number of the unjust.
We have proved men by one another; they have said among them, with derision,
behold those among us, to whom God has given his graces: does God not know
them that acknowledge his benefits? Salute with affection true believers, when
they come to visit thee; God loves civility, clemency, and humanity, and will
pardon him among you, that shall offend him through ignorance, that shall
repent of his error, and do good works, he is benign and merciful. Thus do I
recount the graces of God, and discover the way of sinners; Say unto them, I am
forbidden to worship what you adore, lest I should go astray from the right
way. I have received from God a light, which ye have contemned; God is Judge of
all things, judges with truth, and is most just in his Judgments. I cannot
forthwith give you a sight of the torments of Hell, neither of the chastisement
of God, which you with so much instance require; this depends on his Divine
Majesty; had I this power, our difference would be soon at a period. God
knows the unjust, in his power are the Keys of the future, none knows but
he; he knows whatsoever is in the Earth, and the Sea, the number of the
leaves that fall from the Trees, and of the Atoms that are in the darkness of
the Earth. There is nothing dry or green in the Earth, that is not written in
the Book of Light. He it is that causes you to die in the night, and knows
the good and evil that you have committed by day; he shall cause you to rise
again at the day nominated; you all shall appear before him, he shall give you
knowledge of your sins, and shall chastise you after your demerits; he is
always victorious and Omnipotent. He shall send to observe your actions; and
when you shall arrive at the hour of death, he shall dispatch his Messengers,
who shall not fail to execute his commands; the People shall repair to him, as
to their Lord, he is extremely exact to keep account. Say unto them, He shall
deliver you from the darkness of the Sea, and of the Earth; when you shall in
secret or publicly invoke him; if he deliver me, I will return him thanks for
his grace: Say unto them, God can deliver you from darkness, and all other
afflictions; yet say you, He has a Companion, associate with him; Say unto
them, We can send punishments from above, and from below; he is able to
disunite, and cause you to taste a thousand miseries, which you shall bring
upon each other. Consider how I show them the effects of my Omnipotency; they
will peradventure comprehend my sayings: Those of thy Nations have rejected
them, notwithstanding they are most true: say unto them, I am not your Tutor;
every thing has its time, you shall hereafter understand the truth. Depart
from them that speak of our Law with contempt, until he speak otherwise; the
Devil would induce thee to forget my Commandments, and cause thee to sit down
with the unjust: the true believers shall not regard their discourse, neither
cease to admonish them, peradventure they will be converted. Depart thou from
such as sport and mock at their Religion, the wealth of this World renders
them haughty; declare, they shall be severely punished; none is able to protect
or hear them but God, no ransom is able to deliver them; they shall find the
good and evil that they have committed, shall drink a liquor extremely cold*
and endure grievous torments, because of their impiety; say unto them, shall we
worship instead of God, what can neither benefit nor hurt us? Sall we return on
our steps to our sins, having been guided by his Divine Majesty, like unto him
whom the Devil has seduced? He left him dismayed, and astonished in the midst
of his Voyage, having forsaken his Companions, that showed him the right way.
God guides Men to the way of Salvation. I will wholly resign my self to the
pleasure of his Divine Majesty: Make your prayers at the time appointed, and
pay Tithes, you all shall appear before God at the Day of Judgment, to give
account of your actions. He it is that created Heaven and Earth. Remember thou
the Day wherein he said, Be thou, and every thing was: he shall reign, and at
that day command an Angel to sound the Trumpet, to call to universal Judgment,
the living and the dead. He knows the future, present, and past; is most
Wise, and nothing is hidden from him. Remember thou that Abraham said to his
Father The Arabians say, Azer is Abraham's Surname, and that his Father was
called Terec Azer.
Azer, wherefore do you worship Idols instead of God? I perceive your Family to
be in manifest error: God showed to Abraham the Kingdom of Heaven, and of
Earth, and he was in the number of the Blessed. Abraham seeing by night a most
clear Star, asked in himself, if it were his God; no, replied he to himself, my
God does not rise and set; seeing the Moon to arise, he demanded if that were
his God; no, said he to himself, certainly God will not guide me to be of them
that are erroneous: when he beheld the Sun rising, he likewise asked, if that
were his God; and when he saw it set, he said to his people, I am innocent of
the sin which you commit, in adoring many Gods, I wholly commend my self to his
Will, who created Heaven and Earth, and profess his Unity: His people would
dispute against him; he said to them, will you dispute against me concerning
the Unity of God, who has instructed me in the right way? I fear not your
Idols, my God does what pleases him, and knows all things, will you not
consider it? How shall I fear your Idols, since you are not afraid to affirm,
that God has Companions equal to him, which you have no reason to adore? If
you understand the truth, who is more true, you, or I? Such as believe in God,
and shall not cover the truth with a lie, shall be delivered from the torments
of Hell, and conducted into the way of Salvation. We instructed Abraham with
reasons to dispute against his people; I give knowledge to whom I see good, and
exalt whom I please. Thy Lord, O Abraham, sees and knows all things; we gave
to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob his Sons; we before instructed Noah and his
Lineage in the right way; we taught it David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses,
Aaron, Zachary, St. John, Jesus, the Son of Mary, Eliah, Ismael, Joshua, Jonas,
and Lot; we gratified them above the residue of the World; we elected their
Fathers, Brothers, and Progeny, and guided them in the right way: Thus God
guides whom he sees good: Men before adored Idols, and believes there were
many Gods; nevertheless he blotted out their past Errors, when they were
converted. If they slander them that have knowledge of the Scriptures, and of
Prophecies, will give power over their Persons to Men that shall mis-lead them
with the Infidels: Those whom God guides, believe in the Unity of his Divine
Majesty. Say unto them, I require no reward for having preached to you the
Alcoran, he teaches to all the World the Commandments of God. The Jews have
not honored him as was their Duty; they understood not his Graces, when they
said, he has instructed the people in nothing that is profitable. Say unto
them, who gave the Tables unto Moses? who instructed him in the Scripture,
which they have written in Vellum, to guide and illuminate the people? They
have published what pleased them, and have concealed much; they shall learn in
the Alcoran what they know not, and what their Fathers understood not: Say to
them, God after that left them obstinate, and amazed in their Errors. We have
sent from Heaven that Book full of Blessedness, it confirms the Scriptures
that were sent before it, to the end thou may instruct the people of Mecca,
them that inhabit about that City, and the rest of the World. Such as shall
believe in the Day of Judgment, believe in what is written in this Book, and
shall pray to God to deliver them from the torments of Hell: Who is more
unjust, than he that blasphemeth against God? that says, God has inspired
into him what he utters, notwithstanding he has received no inspiration from
his Divine Majesty. Who more unjust, than he that says, he will cause to
descend from Heaven, things like to those which God inspired into his Prophets?
When thou shall see the wicked at the point of death, and the Angels stretching
forth their hands to take their Souls: say unto them, This day the torments of
Hell shall be the punishment of the blasphemies that ye have vomited against
God, and your disobedience to his Commandments. God shall say to them, you are
come before us without Riches, and Children, naked as you were created, and
have cast behind your Backs the instructions which we gave you; I see not with
you the Idols you adored; you are separated from each other, and have forsaken
them, that you esteemed on Earth, should have been your Protectors; God
separateth the good from the wicked, as the Corn from the Ear, and the stone
from the Date: He causes the Living to spring from the dead, and the dead from
the living: behold the works of God; why will you depart from his Law? He
divides the Morning from darkness, has established Night for the repose of
Men, and the Sun and Moon to compute Ages, Years, Months, and Seasons; such are
the effects of Gods power, he is Omnipotent, and knows all things. He it is
that created the Stars to give you light, and guide you in the obscurity of the
Earth and Sea; he gratifieth with his Grace, such as learn his Commandments. He
it is that created you of one sole Person, that gave you the Earth to inhabit,
and preserves you in the World, he has conferred his Grace on such as have
obeyed his Commandments, has made Rain to descend from Heaven, and caused the
Earth to produce diverse sorts of Herbs, Green things, and Corn; he has caused
the Date to spring forth, and the Palm Tree, with Gardens enriched with Grapes,
Olives, Pomgranets, and many Fruits alike, and different. Consider how Fruits
increase and multiply; this serves for instruction of Gods Unity, to them that
have his fear before their eyes: the Infidels have adored the Devil, with God,
who created them, and said, that God has Sons and Daughters, such is their
ignorance; praised be God, he created Heaven and Earth; how shall he have a
Son, who has no Wives? He creates and knows all things, he is your God, and
your Lord, there is none other God but he; worship him, he conserveth all
things, he is seen of no Man, and beholds all things, he is benign, and
nothing is concealed from him. O people, there is come to you a light from your
Lord to conduct you, he that sees clearly shall receive advantage; and he that
shall be blind, shall continue his Misery: I am your Tutor, neither observe I
what you do; Thus do I declare the Mysteries of my Law, the wicked shall in the
end confess that thou have taught my Commandments to such as inclined to learn
them. Act what thy Lord has inspired into thee, there is no God but he,
separate thy self from the Society of unbelievers; Had it pleased God, they had
not disobeyed his Commandments, thou art not their Tutor, injure not them that
worship Idols, they injure God through Malice and Ignorance, every Man
esteems what he has done, and pleases himself in his opinion. Certainly
they shall all be assembled at the Judgment, and be chastised after their
Demerits. They have sworn by the name of God to fight for the Faith, if some
Miracle appear to instruct them; Miracles proceed from God, they know not the
time wherein he will make them to appear; although they should see Miracles,
they will not be converted. I will overturn their hearts, blind their sight,
and they shall never be converted, I will leave them in their Errors, and
disobedience, with contempt and confusion. If we should send to them Angels,
should the dead come and speak to them, and should we bring about them all the
Witnesses of the World, they shall not believe, if it so please God, most of
them are ignorant; we have allotted an Enemy to each Prophet; as the Devil is
an Enemy to Men, he tempts them with the Ornament of his Discourses, to
render them proud. If it had pleased thy Lord, they had wanted that power;
depart thou from unbelievers, and their blasphemies, and incline not to their
will; they shall find no advantage in their impiety. Do you desire another
Judge than God, who has sent to you the Book that distinguishes good from
evil? Such as know the Scripture are not ignorant that this Book was sent from
God, and contains the Truth; Be not thou in the number of them that doubt,
the word of God exactly comes to pass, no Man can hinder its effects, God
understands and knows all things. If thou incline to the will of most Men,
they will seduce thee, they believe but their own opinions, and are liars. Thy
Lord knows them that err, and such as follow the right way. Eat what shall be
slain in pronouncing the name of God; they taught you what was forbidden; eat
not, unless constrained through necessity: Many err from the right way, and
pursue their own appetites, and ignorance, God beholds them that offend him;
fly public and secret sin, sinners shall be severely chastised; eat not of
what is not let Blood in pronouncing the name of God, lest you disobey his
Commandments. The Devils will tempt them that serve them, they will persuade
unbelievers to dispute against you; if you incline to them, you shall be
Infidels as they are. I raised again many of them that were dead through their
sins, I converted them, and gave them a light to illuminate them, in the
darkness, wherein Infidels shall dwell for ever, because they delight in their
disobedience: Thus will I place in every City, leaders, that shall seduce the
wicked, and themselves, but shall not understand it: When they beheld any sign
(of the truth of the Prophet) appear; they said, they will not believe in him,
unless he were accompanied with the virtues, and merits of other Prophets; God
makes choice of them on whom he conferreth the grace of prophecy, he shall
chastise such as discourse in that manner, with ignominy in this World, and
they shall feel in the other great torments, by reason of their impiety. God
rejoices the hearts of them that he inclines to lead into the way of
Salvation, and punishes them that digress from the right path; his wrath fell
upon the Infidels so soon as he ascended into Heaven. The way thou followest is
the right way; we have recompensed such as have understanding to profit, they
shall be happy, God shall be their protector, because of their good works.
Remember thou the day wherein we shall assemble the People, and when it shall
be said to the Devils, O ye bands of Devils! wherefore are you risen against
Men? The chief of those Men that shall have obeyed them, shall answer, Lord,
suffer us to be revenged on each other, and let each command in his turn; O
Lord, teach us the prefixed time that thou See Gelaldin.
have appointed to our miseries: The Angels shall answer, Hell shall be your
habitation, you shall there remain eternally, and so long as it shall please
God: Your Lord is most wise, and Omniscient; the wicked shall obey the wicked,
because of their sins. O ye Bands of Men and Devils! have you not seen my
Prophets, and Apostles of your own Nation, who have given you to see Miracles?
Who have preached my Commandments, and the Day of Judgment? They shall answer,
they have seen the Prophets, and Apostles, but that the life of the World
rendered them proud, and shall confess themselves to have been wicked. God
shall not destroy Mecca for the unjustice therein committed, until he has sent
an Apostle to the Inhabitants, to teach them his Commandments; every one shall
be punished according to his works, thy Lord knows whatsoever is done in the
World. He has no need of his People, he is altogether merciful, he can destroy
you if it please him, and establish in your place another People, as he has
established you in the place of your predecessors. If you be not converted, you
shall not escape the torments of Hell; Say unto them, do as you understand him,
I will comport my self, as I shall apprehend him; you shall in the end
understand who shall have the good part in the other World. None shall give
succor to Idolaters, they offer to their Idols of the fruits that God has
created, and say, (following their thoughts) behold our God! Such sacrifices
ascend not to God, their Idolatry has induced many of them to sacrifice their
own Children to their false Gods, they have destroyed them, and were ensnared
in their Religion; which they had not done, had it so pleased God; Separate thy
self from them and their blasphemies, they have said, that the fruits of the
Earth, and the benefits of God were unclean, and would not eat of them. God
gives food but to those whom he is pleased to gratify. They have prohibited
to ride on some beasts that God gave them, and slew them for food, without
pronouncing the name of his Divine Majesty, which is a great sin, but they
shall be punished according to their demerits. They have said it is lawful for
Men to eat what is in the Bellies of Beasts, and that it is unlawful for their
Wives, and when they had slain them, they did eat for company; but God shall
chastise them for their discourse, he is most wise, and Omniscient. Such as
slay their Children are wretched Men, Fools and ignorant, they have forbidden
to eat the good things that God has given them, to blaspheme, and are gone
astray from the right way. It is God who created the Gardens full of Fruits and
herbs of diverse colors with Olives, Pomegranets, and other fruits alike, and
different: Eat of the fruits of the Earth: Pay the dues appointed when you
reap, and dispense not your substance lightly; God abhors prodigals: Of
clean beasts, some there be that have born the burden, and others that are
young, and have not born it; Eat what God has given you, and follow not the
footsteps of the Devil, he is your open Enemy. Say unto them, See Kitab el
tenoir.
behold eight pair of Beasts, viz. two pair of Wethers, two of Ewes, two of
Camels, and two pair of Cowes, of which is it permitted, or forbidden you to
eat? Is it lawful for you to eat the Males, or Females? Which are those that
God has forbidden you? Who is more wicked than he that blasphemeth, to seduce
from the right way the People that are ignorant? God guides not the unjust;
Say unto them, In all that God has inspired into me, I find not that it is
prohibited to eat of those beasts, except they die of some Disease, and if they
be slain without pronouncing the name of God. The Flesh of Swine is forbidden
you; if you eat of it, you incur the wrath of God; If any one be in necessity,
and eats without design to provoke God, he shall find God gracious and
merciful. We forbad the Jews to eat of Beasts whose Feet were cloven, and of
the fat of Beasts, except of such as is interlarded in the flesh; the Entrails
and the Bones. We enjoined this prohibition by reason of their sin, and we are
veritable in our words, and exact in our promises: If they slander thee, say
unto them, The mercy of God is great, and the wicked shall not avoid the
punishment of their crimes. The Infidels have said, Had it pleased God, we had
not been unbelievers, neither our Fathers also, and nothing had been
prohibited. Their predecessors spoke as they, until they felt the punishment of
their sin. Say unto them, Are you assured that God is content with your
proceeding? Tell us, whence arises this assurance? You, in this, follow but
your opinion, you are but liars, Gods providence is great; he had guided all of
you in the right way, had it so pleased him. Cause them come before us, who
said, It is unlawful to eat of clean Beasts; were they present when God made
the Prohibition? If they say they were present, say not as they, neither follow
the appetites of blasphemous Infidels, who believe not in the end of the word,
and worship many Gods. Say unto them, Come, I will instruct you what is by God
forbidden to be eaten; there is but one sole God, say not, he has Companions
equal to him; do good to your Father and Mother, and slay not your Children, in
fear of dying with Famine, God shall bestow on you and them also, what shall be
necessary; commit not whoredom, either privately or publicly; kill no Man, if
justice do not command it: God requires you to observe what is above
(ordained) perhaps you will consider it. Take not the goods of Orphans, but to
succor them, until they be of age, of discretion, measure, and weight, with
good weight, and just measure. I enjoin no Man any thing, but what is in his
power to perform. Judge with equity, although it be against your Parents and
Allies; satisfy what is above (ordained) God commands it, peradventure you
will consider it; it is the right way, which you ought to pursue: go not aside,
God commands it, perhaps you will fear his Divine Majesty. We taught Moses
our Commandments; it is a peculiar grace to instruct the righteous, and guide
the People in the right way; it may be you will believe in the Resurrection. O
ye Inhabitants of Mecca! We have sent to you the Alcoran, full of benediction,
perform what is ordained, fly impiety, your sins shall be forgiven you; say
not, That God has sent his Law to the two The Jews and Christians.
Nations that preceded you; and that it is hid from you. Will you say, That had
God taught you the Scripture, you had been more obedient than they? Certainly
he has taught you his Commandments, it is a special grace to guide you into
the right way: Who is more unjust, than he that blasphemeth against his Divine
Majesty, and departs from his Commandments? Such Men shall be rigorously
chastised in the fire of Hell. Will they expect that the Angels came to visit
them? That God should punish, and declare to them his miracles? Will they look
for the Day of Judgment, wherein repentance and conversion shall be
unprofitable? Such as believe in one part of the Law, and reject the other,
have no foundation in their belief. God shall make them to know their errors,
and shall punish them after the enormity of their crimes: He that shall do a
good work, shall have a reward tenfold. Whosoever acts any wickedness, shall
be punished in like manner; neither shall he receive injustice. Say unto them,
God has guided me in the way of his Law; such as profess the Law of Abraham,
profess the unity of God; Abraham was not in the number of unbelievers: my
prayers, my vows, my life, my death shall be consecrated to God; he has no
Companion, I wholly commend my self to his Divine pleasure. Say unto them, Do I
desire to worship other Gods, than the Lord of the Universe? The good that a
Man does, is for himself, and the evil that he commits is against them; you
all shall one day appear in the presence of God, he shall resolve your
disputes. He it is that prolongeth your Posterity, and exalts some above
others, to prove you; your Lord is exact to chastise the wicked, and gracious
and merciful to the righteous.

CHAP. VII. The Chapter of Prisons, containing an hundred and six Verses,
written at Mecca.
Reader, Mahomet entitled this Chapter, the Chapter of Aaraf, which is a place
between Paradise and Hell, where Men suffer no punishment. See Mokari, Bedaoi,
and Kitab el tenoir.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful: I am God, the most wise, the most
true. This Book was sent to thee, to preach to the True believers; doubt not
the Contents of it. Say unto them, Believe in what was sent to you from your
Lord, and worship none other God but him; few there be among you that consider
it. How many Cities have we destroyed? How often have we inflicted our
punishment on their Inhabitants by day, and by night, when they reposed?
Nevertheless, they said nothing, but that they were greatly afflicted. We will
examine the People to whom we have sent our Prophets, and require account of
what they have learned, and of what they have done. We will examine our
Prophets, and demand an account of such as have followed, and obeyed them. I
will cause them to remember what they have done worthy of reward. We forsook
not our Prophets when they preached to them the Truth; their actions shall be
weighed in the Balance of Equity; the Balance of the blessed shall be
ponderous with good works; and they whose Balance shall be light of good
works, shall be damned, for having contemned our Commandments. We gave you your
habitation on the Earth, and there bestowed on you what was necessary for your
nourishment; but few of you are grateful to me. We created and formed you, and
commanded the Angels to worship Adam, which they performed, except the Devil,
to whom we said, what hindered thee to worship Adam, when we commanded thee? He
answered, I am better than he, thou have created me of fire, and have created
Man of the mire of the Earth; then said we to him; depart out of Paradise, it
is not the habitation of the Proud, thou shall be in the number of them that
shall be laden with Ignominy; the Devil answered; let me alone until the day of
the Resurrection of the dead; wherefore have thou tempted me? I will seduce Men
from the right way, I will hinder them on the right hand, and on the left, and
on all sides, to believe in thy Law, and the greatest part of them shall be
ungrateful: we said to him, be gone out of Paradise, thou shall be abhorred of
all the World, and deprived of my mercy; I will fill Hell with such as shall
follow thee. O Adam! dwell with thy Wife in Paradise, and there eat of
whatsoever shall please thee, but approach not that Tree, lest thou with thy
Wife be in the number of the unjust. The Devil tempted them, and despoyled
their Bodies of their Vestments of grace; he said to them, God bath forbidden
you to eat of the Fruit of that Tree, that you may not be Angels, or eternal;
he swore that he spoke the truth, and filled them with Ignominy, because of
their Pride. They knew their Nakedness, having eaten of that Fruit, and to
cover themselves, took leaves of Paradise; their Lord called them, and said,
Did I not forbid you to approach that Tree? I told both of you, that the Devil
was your open Enemy; they said, Lord, we have offended thee, and injured our
Souls, if thou do not compassionate us, we shall be in the number of the
damned: he said, Depart out of Paradise, ye Enemies of each other, you shall
inhabit the Earth, until the time appointed; you shall there live and die, and
go from the Earth to the Day of Judgment. O ye Children of Adam! we bestowed on
you Vestments of Graces, signs of our Omnipotency, peradventure you will bear
it in mind. O ye Children of Adam! beware lest the Devil seduce you, as he did
your Father and Mother, when he caused their departure out of Paradise; he
dispoyled them of their Garments, and made them know their deformity; he shall
appear to you, with such as follow them, and you shall see him, when you least
think thereon; he protecteth the Infidels: when they commit any Fault, they
say, we follow the Law of our Fathers, God has so commanded us. Say unto them,
Does God command you to offend him? Will you speak of God what you know not? he
has appointed you to do Justice, to worship him, and embrace his Law. Many
shall rise again, as you have seen them; some shall be in the right way, others
shall be damned, because they have obeyed the Devil, and believed they were in
the right way. O Children of Adam, cloth your selves decently, when you shall
repair to the Temples, eat and drink what pleases you; be not Prodigal, God
abhors them that spend their wealth unprofitably: Say unto them, who made
the prohibition of decent clothing, when men go to the Temple to worship God?
Who has forbidden to eat of the Goods that God has given you? This is lawful
for true Believers. God shall so expound his Commandments at the Day of
Judgment. Say unto them, God has forbidden you Whoredom, private and public,
disobedience, injustice, desire to adore any other God but him, and to speak of
his Divine Majesty what you know not; every one has his Predestination, and
none can advance or retard it. O ye Children of Adam, did not the Prophets
teach you my Commandments? Such as shall fear me, and do good works, shall be
delivered from affliction at the Day of Judgment; and they that disobey my
Commandments, that arise against the Faith, shall dwell eternally in Hell fire.
Who is more unjust, than he that blasphemeth against God and his Commandments?
Such shall be punished conformably to the Scripture. When the Angels of Death
shall cause them to die, they shall say, where be the Idols that you adored
instead of God? they shall answer, that those false Gods have forsaken them,
and shall acknowledge their Idolatry; but God shall say to them, enter into
Hell with the Men and Devils that are condemned; they shall execrate the Sects
that preceeded them, and being assembled, they shall say, Lord, judge them,
they seduced us, augment their Miseries in Hell. God shall say, we will add to
their, and your pains, but you understand it not. They shall say among
themselves, we are not the cause that you were unbelievers, you were not such
to please us, suffer with us the torments that you have merited. I will not
open the gate of Heaven to such as disobey my Commandments, until a Camel pass
through the eye of a Needle, so will I chastise sinners, Hell shall be their
Bed, Fire shall be their covering; and such as shall have done good works,
according to their Power, shall dwell eternally in Paradise. I will remove
Deceit far from their heart; Rivers shall flow in their Fields with delights;
and they shall say, praised be God, who has brought us hither, otherwise we
had been in the number of the erroneous: Certainly the Prophets, Gods
Messengers, taught us the truth, in saying, the observance of the Commandments
of his Divine Majesty should render us Heirs of Paradise. Such as shall be
saved, shall tell the damned, that they have found the Grace foretold them of
God, and we will demand of them, if they have not met with the punishment that
his Divine Majesty did denounce against them; they said aloud, Yes, and that
the Curse of God is upon the unjust, that misled Men from his Law, and they
shall be eternally in the number of the miserable. The Mohammedan Doctors
believe, that such as shall have done as much good as evil, and whose balance
shall not decline, neither on the Scale of good works, or of bad, shall dwell
in the place called Aaraf, with them that have done neither good nor evil; and
this place is between Hell and Paradise.
Between the blessed and the damned, there is a separation, and a place called
Aaraf, or Prisons, wherein are many Persons, who know the blessed and the
damned by their Countenances, they call to the blessed and salute them, yet
they go not into Paradise, notwithstanding their great desire to enter. When
they turn their eyes toward the damned; Lord, (say they) involve us not in the
number of the unjust. Such as are in that place, call to the damned, they know
them by their Visages, and say, to what served your Riches? and that ye arose
against the Faith, and Commandments of God? Behold the faithful (whom ye
contemned) you swore they should be deprived of mercy; God has spoken to them,
and has said, enter into Paradise, and fear not, you shall for ever be exempt
from affliction; the damned shall cry unto the Blessed, Give us of the water
which you drink, and the meats that you eat; they shall answer, The drink and
bread of Paradise is prohibited to Infidels, who sported with their Faith, that
were proud of the wealth of the Earth, and that scoffed at the Commandments of
God; he has forgotten them, because they forgot the coming of the Day of
Judgment, and blasphemed against his Precepts. We are come to the Inhabitants
of Mecca to instruct them in the Alcoran; we teach it unto men, to give them
knowledge of the right way, and to acquire the mercy of God, if they believe in
that Book: Shall they expect to believe until they know its explication? Its
explication shall appear at the Day of Judgment; that day, such as shall have
lived without Faith, shall say, Certainly the Prophets delivered the Truth;
shall we partake of their Prayers, will they intercede for us, until we return
to the World to do better than we have done, and to obey Gods Commandments? But
they shall be damned, because of their Blasphemies. God is your Lord, he
created the Heaven, and the Earth in six days, and sits on his Throne; he
causes the Night incontinently to succeed the day; the Sun, the Moon, and the
Stars, move at his Command, and all the World obeys him; praised be God, Lord
of the Uniniverse: Pray to God privately and publicly, he abhors the
unjust; pollute not the Earth, after the Ordure is removed; pray to God to
avoid his Chastisements, and obtain his mercy, which is for the righteous. It
is God that sends the Winds to dissipate the Rain, when they carry the
Clouds; we drive them charged with water, into places dry, dead, and ruined,
and cause the Rain to fall there, that they may produce Herbs and Fruits; so
will we cause the dead to arise again; perhaps, Men will remember the good Land
brings forth good Fruits, through the permission of its Lord, and the bad
Land produces only Darnel. I teach my Commandments to such as are not
ungrateful: Certainly we sent Noah to instruct Men; he said, O ye people,
worship one God alone; if you adore other then him, you shall be punished at
the Day of Judgment; their Rulers answered, O Noah! thou art in a great Error;
He replied, I err not, I am a Messenger sent from God to preach his Will; I
give you most wholesome Advice, God has taught me what you know not. Is it
strange to you, that he has sent you his Commandment by the Tongue of a Man
like your selves, to declare to you the torments of Hell? Fear God, he will
pardon your sins; But they belyed Noah, we saved him in the Ark, with his
Retinue, and drowned those that contemned our Law, they were altogether blind.
We sent Hod to his Brother And, and to his Retinue, he said, O ye people!
worship one God alone, whom will ye adore, or whom fear, but God? The Teachers
answered, thou art in an extreme ignorance; we believe thee to be in the number
of Liars; he replied, I am not a Liar, I am a Messenger sent from God, to
preach his Commandments, I give good and salutary Advice, wonder not that God
teaches you his Precepts by the Tongue of a Man, like you, who declares to
you his Pleasure. Remember that he left you on Earth after Noah, that he
increased you in number, force, and power; Call to mind his grace, you shall be
happy. They answered, are we come to this, to worship one God alone, and to
relinquish what our Fathers adored? Show us the truth, whereof thou do
preach, if thou art true; he said, the wrath and indignation of God shall fall
upon you; will you dispute with us of the Names, that you and your Fathers
imposed on your Idols? God did not enjoin to worship them, neither have you
reason to do it; expect your punishment, I will expect it with perseverance.
Then did we deliver him from their Malice, and all the true Believers that were
with him, and destroyed those Infidels, by reason of their impiety. We sent
Salhe to Temod, and his people; he said to them, O ye people! worship but one
God, he shall show you a Miracle in this The Turk^ believe that Salhe through
Gods permission Metamorphosed a Rock into a Camel.
Camel, suffer it to feed on the Earth, and do to it no harm, lest you be
chastised: Remember, how God left you on the Earth after Aad, he gave you to
dwell in the Valleys, in the Plains, and Mountains; Remember God, and pollute
not the Earth any more. Their Captains who were proud, demanded of the poor, if
they believed that Salhe was indeed the Messenger of God? they answered, We
believe in his words, and in his Doctrine; Then said those proud Men, we abjure
what ye believe, we condemn him, and they sl^w the Camel of Salhe in D^ision,
disobeyed the Commandments of God, and said, O Salhe! Let us now see the
punishment that thou did preach, if thou art of the Prophets; at the same
time, an Earthquake, with Thunder surprised them, and they remained dead as
Carcasses in their Houses. Salhe forsook them, and said, O ye people I declared
to you the Will of God with fidelity, but ye detest them that affect you, and
give you good Counsels. Remember thou how Lot spoke to the People, saying, will
you daily defile your selves with Whoredom? and with a filthiness that was
never yet seen in the World by any your Predecessors? Will you love Men better
than Women? Will you love sin rather than Piety? They said, Let us expel Lot
and his Family from our City, for that they will not contaminate themselves
with us, but God delivered him out of their hands, and those of his House,
except his Wife, who continued with them that were punished: We caused a Rain
to fall upon them, that destroyed all of them. Consider the end of the wicked:
We sent Chaib to the Country of Madian, he said, O ye people, worship one God
alone, weigh with good Weights, measure with good Measure, and retain nothing
from your Neighbor: Possess not the high ways, to give terror to the people,
neither divert true Believers from the Law of God: Remember, that you were but
a small handful of Men, and he caused you to multiply; consider the end of the
wicked; If any among you embrace the Faith, and others contemn it, have
patience, until God judge your differences, there is no better Judge than he;
Their Teachers said; O Chiab, we will banish thee from Madian, thee and those
that are of thy Fath, if thou art of our Religion; he answered, should I not
abhor your Religion, I should blaspheme against God, who has delivered me, I
will follow it, if it please God, he knows all things, I will commend my self
wholly to the Will of his Divine Majesty; Lord judge our Controversy, thou art
the best Judge of the World. Then said their Teachers to the people, if you
follow Chaib, you are damned; not long after an Earthquake, and Thunder
surprised them, and in the Morning they were found dead in their Houses; such
as belyed Chaib, found no safety in their Habitations, they were wretched, he
abandoned them, and said, O ye people! I have preached to you the Will of God
with fidelity; I will no longer afflict my self with the Malice of the wicked.
We inflicted Sickness and Poverty on them that disobeyed the Prophets, whom we
sent to the Inhabitants of Madian; peradventure they will be converted. We
proved them through Diseases and Health, and gratified them in many
Occurrences, yet they said, our Fathers were afflicted with Sickness and
Poverty, we shall be as they, but we chastised them for their sin, when they
least considered it. Had the Inhabitants of Mecca had our fear before their
eyes, and obeyed our Commandments, we had opened to them the blessing of Heaven
and Earth; we will punish them, because they are impious: Some there be, that
shall be afflicted in the Night, when they sleep; and others, that shall be
to^mented by day when they sport, and recreate themselves; they believed God to
be a d^ceiver, and are damned. God guides into the right way true Believers,
and makes them Heirs of the Earth, after their Parents; had he so pleased, he
might have destroyed all the World, he might have hardened the hearts of the
people, and no man had hearkened to his word. I recount what things befell that
To Mecca.
City, many Prophets have been sent to its Inhabitants, and wrought many
Miracles, yet would they not relinquish their former impiety; thus have we
hardened the hearts of Infidels; they violated their Promises, and we found most
of them to be wicked and disobedient. We sent Moses to Pharaoh, and his people,
he to them showed Miracles, which through their Malice they contemned, but
consider the end of those wicked men; Moses said unto Pharaoh, I am a Messenger
sent from God, the God of the Universe; when I speak of God, I deliver the
Truth; I am come, through his Command, to tell thee, thou must dismiss with me
the Children of Israel, and no longer detain them in thy Dominions. Pharaoh
said, if thou come from God, and art true in thy sayings, let us see some
Miracles; then he cast upon the ground his Staff, which was changed into a
Serpent, showed his hand, that appeared exceeding white to the eyes of the
Spectators. The Doctors of Pharaoh said, this Man is a Gelaldin says Moses his
hand was brown.
Magician, he would have us to abandon our Country, what is your opinion?
detain him Prisoner, and his Brother, and send into your Cities, to assemble
Magicians. The Magicians of Pharaoh appearing before him, they said, what shall
be our reward, if we shall be Victorious? He replied to them, you shall be well
rewarded, and shall be of them that approach my Person. They said, O Moses,
will thou first cast down thy Staff on the ground, or shall we ours? Moses bad
them cast down theirs, which they did, enchanting the eyes of the Spectators,
and terrifying them with an extraordinary enchantment; God inspired Moses to
cast down his Rod, which devoured the Staves of the other, and the Truth
appeared above falsehood, and above the Vanity of their Actions; they were
vanquished, to their confusion, forsook their Magic, and prostrating
themselves on the Earth, uttered these words; We believe in the Lord of the
Universe, the Lord of Moses, and of Aaron; Pharaoh said to them, Ye believe in
the God of Moses without my permission; this is a deceit, invented by you, to
drive the people out of my Dominions; but you shall soon know the punishment
that I will lay upon you, I will cut off your feet and hands, and command you
to be crucified. They answered, We recommend our selves wholly to the Will of
God, whatsoever is thy revenge on us, thou shall not hinder us to believe in
the Miracles that we see, neither to obey the Commandments of his Divine
Majesty; Lord give us patience, and to die in the number of true Believers.
Then said Pharaoh's Doctors, dismiss Moses, and his people, that they may go
whither they see good, to pollute the Earth, that they may leave thee in quiet
with thy Gods: He said, I will cause their Children to be slain, their Wives to
be abused, and I will inflict upon them a thousand torments. Moses said to his
people; Implore succors of God with patience, and Prayers, the whole Earth is
Gods, he gives it to inherit, to whom he sees good: the other World is for
the right^ous. They said, O Moses! We before thy coming, desired the death of
our Enemies; he replied, God will not destroy your Enemies, to leave you alone
upon the Earth, he shall behold your Actions. We afflicted Pharaoh and his
Subjects with Famine, perhaps unbelievers will consider it. When any happiness
befell them, they said, they well deserved it, and when they fell into Misery,
they affirmed Moses and his people to be the cause of it; It is God that
punished them, but of this most of them were ignorant. They said unto Moses,
cease to show us thy Miracles to inchant us, we will not obey thee: We sent
upon them a Deluge, Grasshoppers, Lice, Frogs, and Blood, one after another;
nevertheless they were proud, and in the number of the wicked. When our wrath
fell upon them, they said, O Moses! call upon thy Lord, that he give us what to
thee he promised, remove his displeasure from us, we will believe thee, and
will dismiss with thee, the Children of Israel: When we delivered them from
affliction, they sharpened their Tongues, murmured, and violated their Promises:
we avenged our selves upon them, and drowned them in the Sea, for that they
contemned our Miracles, and we gave the West and East to the Children of
Israel, who were humble before us; we gave them our blessing, our word was
accomplished upon them, because of their perseverance, and we destroyed the
Armies of Pharaoh. The Children of Israel having past the Sea, met with Men
that adored Idols, and said, O Moses! make unto us Gods, like to the Gods of
this people; he answered, ye are ignorant; these Men are wretched, what they do
is but ignorance and Vanity; shall I desire that you worship other Gods, than
God that preferred you to all the World? We have delivered you from Pharaoh's
people, who caused you to endure great torments, they murdered your Children,
abused your Wives, and you suffer heavy afflictions for the punishment of your
sins. We detained Moses on the Mountain thirty Nights* and ten other Nights,
which is in all forty Nights; when he went up, he said to his Brother Aaron, be
thou my Lieutenant, command this people in mine absence, and follow not the
path of the wicked. When Moses at the time appointed arrived at the top of the
Mountain, and that his Lord spoke to him, he said, Lord permit me to see thee:
he said, thou shall not see me; behold this Mountain, if it continue firm in
this place, thou shall be able to see me; when the Lord appeared upon the
Mountain with his light, it was reduced to ashes, and Moses amazed, fell on the
ground as dead. When he arose again, he said, Blessed be the name of God, I
desire to obey him, and believe that no Man living is able to behold him. He
said to Moses, I have chosen, and preferred thee to all the World, I have made
thee a Prophet, thou have talked with me, receive the Grace which I have
bestowed on thee, and be not ungrateful. We gave to him the Tables, whereon was
written what was necessary for the Salvation of Men, and we said to him,
receive with affection, what I give thee, and command thy people to observe the
Contents of those Tables. I will precipitate into Hell such as transgress my
Commandments; I will deprive the proud of my Graces, they will not believe in
my Law, although they see all the Miracles in the World; if they see the right
way, they will not follow it; they see the way of Error, and pursue it;
because they have abjured my Commandments, and rejected my Grace, the good
works of them that disobey me, and that believe not in the Resurrection, are
unprofitable, they shall be chastised after their Demerits. The people of
Moses, after his departure, adored the Calf, a bellowing God; saw they not,
that it spoke not to them; neither could conduct them into the right way?
Nevertheless they adored it, for which they were greatly to blame. When this
Calf fell to the ground, and they found their error, they said, if God have
not pity on us, we shall be miserable. When Moses returned, he said to them,
whom did ye obey after my departure? You were too hasty to worship that Idol;
he in displeasure cast against the ground the Tables that God had given him,
took his Brother by the head, and dragging him to him, said, Son of my Mother,
how have thou governed this people? I wanted power, replied he, and could not
divert them from their evil; It wanted little but they had slain me, do me no
harm; rejoice not my Enemies with my misery, and account me not with those that
adored Idols: Moses said, Lord pardon me, and my Brother, give us thy mercy;
thou art the merciful of the merciful. The wrath of God, and the infamy of the
World, shall fall upon them that worshipped the Calf, and blasphemed against
God; he will be pitiful to such as shall repent, and believe in his Divine
Majesty. The displeasure of Moses being allayed, he again took the Tables,
whereon was written the way of Salvation, for such as have the fear of their
Lord before their eyes; he caused to be separated from his people, at a time
appointed, threescore and ten Persons, who were surprised with an Earthquake,
and with Thunder; and said, Lord, thou could have destroyed them, before
they adored the Calf; will thou destroy us all, because of the sin of the
ignorant that are amongst us? Thou have desired to prove this people; thou
guidest, and causest to err whom thou please; thou art our Protector, pardon
our sins; for thou art altogether merciful; give us thy Grace in this World,
and guide us to the Day of Judgment, near to thy Divine Majesty: He said, I
will punish as I see good, my mercy embraces the whole World; it is for such
as have my fear before their eyes, that pay Tithes, obey my Commandments,
follow the right way, believe in the Prophet, This is Mahomet. See Kit ab el
tenoir.
who can neither write nor read, and what is written in the Old Testament, and
the Gospel; he shall command them things honest; he shall prohibit things
uncivil; he shall teach them what meats are clean, and forbid them to eat what
is unclean; he shall deliver them from Ceremonies, weighty and troublesome, and
from the Chains that strictly bind them: Such as shall believe in him, that
shall honor him, that shall defend him from his Enemies, and follow the light
that we shall send him, shall be happy. Say unto the people, I am indeed a
Messenger sent from God, to whom appertains the Kingdom The Turks believe
that Mahomet could neither write nor read.
of the Heavens, and of Earth; there is but one God alone, he gives Life and
Death, as seems good to him. Believe in God, and in his Prophet, who can
neither read nor write. Such as shall believe in God, in his word, and follow
the Prophet, shall not err; they shall follow a very good way. There are some
of the Children of Israel that knew the truth, and judge with equity. We
divided them into twelve Tribes, when Moses required drink for his People, we
inspired him to strike the Rock with his Rod, whence flowed twelve Fountains,
and every one knew the place where he should drink; we covered them with the
shadow of Clouds; we caused Manna and Quails to descend upon them, and
commanded them to eat of the good things which we gave them. They did not hurt
us (when they murmured) but afflicted themselves. It This is the Holy Land. See
Gelaldin.
was said to them, Dwell in this City, and eat therein what shall please you;
enter at the gate with adoration, and beg pardon of your sins. I will pardon
you, and will augment the graces of the righteous; nevertheless, the wicked
that were among them, altered the words that were spoken to them, and perverted
them; and we sent upon them our indignation from Heaven, because of their
impiety. Ask of them concerning a Village that was upon the shore of the Sea,
whose inhabitants observed not the Sabbath, and fished on the day of rest; they
saw in that day, Serpents appear upon the water, and other days they saw none.
Thus were they tried, because of their disobedience: A party of them said, Fish
not O People, it is lost labor; God shall destroy and chastise them with
grievous torments, then their Doctors said, They shall implore pardon of the
Lord, perhaps they will fear to offend him another time. When they rejected
what we taught them; we saved such among them as abstained from evil-doing, and
grievously afflicted* the wicked, because of their disobedience; when they
gloried in their sin, we said to them, Be ye contemned, and abhorred as Apes;
thy Lord shall send to them at the Day of Judgment, persons to torment them; he
is exact in punishing the wicked, and merciful to the righteous. We sent upon
them good and evil, to prove them, peradventure they will be converted. Their
posterity left a progeny, heirs of their Doctrine; nevertheless, they returned
to their sins, and say, the Lord shall pardon them; they beg pardon of him, and
See Gelaldin.
return daily to their sin: Shall not account be required from them, of what is
ordained in the Scripture? To wit, not to speak of God, but with truth: They
have read the Truth, but have not comprehended it. Paradise is only for the
righteous; I will not deprive them of recompense, who make their prayers at the
time appointed, and observe what is contained in the Scriptures. Remember thou,
how we raised a Mountain over them, to shelter them, and how they believed it
would fall upon their heads; we said to them, Learn with affection what we
teach you, and remember; perhaps you will fear disobedience. Thy Lord caused to
come out of Adams Reins, all his Posterity; and asked them, saying, Am not I
your Lord? they answered, yes, thou art our Lord, we know it well: They cannot
therefore say at the Day of Judgment, That they knew not his unity; they shall
say for excuse, Our Fathers adored many gods before us, we are their Posterity;
will thou destroy us, because of their iniquity? Thus do I discover my
mysteries to Men; it may be they will be converted. Relate to them the History
of him that saw our miracles; he was dispoiled of his understanding, the Devil
followed it, and he was in the number of the wretched. Had we so pleased, we
had exalted him through the knowledge of our wonders, among the Doctors; but he
crouched to the ground, and followed his own appetite, like to a chafed Dog; if
thou chase him with Choler he puts forth his Tongue; if thou leave him at
rest, he will still put forth his Tongue, like to the Infidels, that contemn
our instructions; if thou recount to them our miracles, or do not recount,
perhaps they will be converted, perhaps they will not be converted, and shall
be like such as have abjured our Commandments, and injured their own Souls. He
whom God guides, is well guided; and he whom God mis-leadeth, is in the number
of the miserable. We have created Hell to punish Devils and Men; they have
hearts, and comprehend not the truth; they have eyes, and see it not; ears have
they, and hear it not; they are like to Beasts, and worse than Beasts; they are
altogether ignorant. The most beautiful names of the World appertain to God:
Beseech him by the beauty of his name, and depart from them that depart from
the truth, through the names that they impose on their Idols; they shall be
chastised after their demerits. Some there be that follow the truth, and judge
with equity. I will by degrees punish them that shall reject our Commandments,
when they shall think thereon. I will defer their punishment some time, because
my wrath is violent: Remember they not, that they said, Mahomet is possessed of
the Devil? On the contrary, he declares the joys of Paradise, and preaches
the torments of Hell. Consider they not the Kingdom of Heaven and of Earth,
which God has created of nothing? The fear of Death shall arrive before they
have acknowledged their sins; in what will they believe, if they have no Faith
in the* Alcoran? He whom God shall mis-lead, shall find none to guide him; he
shall leave Infidels confounded in their disobedience. They shall enquire of
thee concerning the Hour and Day of Judgment. Say unto them, No Man knows it
but God; but the greatest part of the World believe it not. I have not power to
do either good or evil of my self, if God do not permit it; if I knew the
future, I should provide wealth to preserve me from poverty: I am sent only to
declare the joys of Paradise, and preach the torments of Hell to them that
believe in God; he it is that created you of one sole person, and created his
spouse of his Rib, to dwell with her: When she doubted of being with Child, she
ceased not to travel as she was wont; but when her conception rendered her
heavy, they both besought God, their Lord, and said, Lord give an happy
progeny, to the end we may be in the number of them that return thee thanks for
thy favors. When God gave them a Son, a righteous Man, they associated him in
what he had given them; and all of them exalted the glory of his Divine
Majesty, above the Idols of the Infidels, that adored things which could create
nothing, that are things created, and can do neither good nor harm. If you call
Idolaters to the right way, they will not follow you; if ye invoke Idols,
misery shall be upon you; will you be mute, to profess the unity of God? Will
you worship the Creatures, instead of the Creator? Go, adore your Idols, and
may they hear your prayers, if you believe them to be Gods? Have they Feet to
walk, Hands to touch, Eyes to see, and Ears to hear? Say unto them, If ye
invoke your Idols, and conspire against me, you shall find none to protect you,
God is my protector, he has caused the Alcoran to descend from Heaven, he is
the defendor of the righteous; what ye adore, can neither benefit nor hurt you;
If thou invokest Idols, they shall not hear thee, they shall look upon thee,
and shall not see thee; do what is lawful to be done, command things honest,
and depart from the ignorant; if the Devil would seduce thee, trust in God* he
hears and knows all things; such as fear him, remember his mercies and
chastisements when they are tempted of the Devil. Although Infidels know the
Truth, the Devil cease not to continue them in their sin, they always follow
their impiety; If thou go to them to instruct them, they say, thou singest
an old Song, say unto them, I do what my Lord inspired into me, what I teach
you, is the light of Faith, the right way, and the grace of God for them that
believe in his Divine Majesty; for such as hear the Alcoran, and study it,
perhaps God will give you his mercy. Remember thou God in thy Soul, worship in
public and private, pray unto him evening, and morning, and be not in the
number of the ignorant. The Angels that are near to thy Lord, neglect not to
worship him, they praise and adore him with humility.

CHAP. VIII. The Chapter of the Spoil, containing seventy and five Verses,
written at Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Mahomet's Men differed concerning
division of the spoil, which they took at the Battle of B^der; Mahomet divided
it among them. See G^aldin.
They will demand of thee, to whom appertains the spoil? Say unto them, the
spoil appertains to God, and his Prophet; Fear God, live with mutual amity,
and obey his Divine Majesty, and his Prophet, if you believe in his Law; Such
as fear when they hear mention of God, who augment their faith, when they have
heard relation of his miracles, who trust in him, who persevere in their
prayers, and dispend in pious works some part of their wealth, believe in the
unity of his Divine Majesty; they have the degree of their habitation in
Paradise, shall receive from their Lord pardon of their sins, and exceeding
great treasure. When thy Lord caused thee to go out of thine House to go
against the Infidels, a party of the true believers had a great aversion to
sighting, they disputed with thee the necessity of Combats, having seen and
known that their Enemies led them to a certain Death; Call to mind, that God
promised you that a party of the Army of the Enemies should obey you. Desire
you other thing the the glory and honor of Victory? God confirms the Truth
by his words, and destroys the wicked, he ratifieth the Truth, and destroys
falsehood, although it be contrary to the will of the impious. Remember, that
your Lord heard you, when you of him implored succors, and that he assisted
you with a thousand of his Angels sent from Heaven; God sent you this aid, only
to let you know his grace, and to confirm your hearts; Victory proceeds from
God, he is Omnipotent, and most prudent: Remember that God covered you with a
secure sleep, and caused Water to descend from Heaven, to wash, purify, and
deliver you from the malice of the Devil. Plant in your heart generosity, and
patience, and go on with assurance. God has said to his Angels, I will be with
you, confirm the steps of the true believers; I will cast fear into the heart
of the wicked, strike them on the head, smite them on the fingers, and feet,
because they have contradicted my will, and that of the Prophet. God severely
chastises such as disobey his Commandments, and oppose the will of his
Prophet; the unbelievers have heretofore tasted of his punishments in this
World, and shall in the end feel the pains of the fire of Hell. O ye who
believe in God! turn not the back to the wicked, as vanquished, when they
approach to fight you, he that shall turn the back, shall return in the wrath
of God, and be thrown headlong into the fire of Hell. You slew not the Infidels
at See Gelaldin.
the sight of Beder, God himself slew them. O Mahomet.
Thou did not cast Stones against them, God did cast them to advantage the
true believers; he understands whatsoever they say, and knows all their
actions: certainly, he will augment the affliction of the wicked. When ye
required victory, it was given you; if you relinquish your impiety, you shall
do well; if you return to fight against the Prophet, know that he will protect
him against you; your Men of War shall advantage you in nothing,
notwithstanding they be numerous; for that God is with the true believers. O ye
that believe, obey God and his Prophet, depart not from him, since ye have
heard the Commandments of his Divine Majesty, be not as those that say, We have
heard, and were deaf and dumb. The ignominy and misery that God lays on
beasts, is to be deaf and dumb, and to want the use of reason: Had God seen any
good inclinations in the Infidels, he had not left them in their deafness; but
although they had heard clearly, they should have always departed from his Law,
and have been obstinate. O ye that believe in God! obey God and the Prophet,
demand life eternal in your prayers, and know that God will separate the Gall
from the Liver; he will separate the Infidel from the True believer, and you
all shall appear before him, to be recompensed and chastised for your works;
fear the punishment that shall be inflicted, especially on the seditious, and
ungrateful, God is severe in his chastisements; Remember that in the territory
of Mecca ye were but an handful of weak Men, and with fear of being taken, and
destroyed by the unbelievers; God saved, protected, and enriched you with all
manner of good things, peradventure ye will give him thanks. O ye that believe!
betray not God, nor the Prophet, neither such as confide in you, and have
entrusted their wealth in your hands, otherwise your riches, and Children shall
torment you in the other World. There is with God great reward for the
righteous. O ye that believe! if ye fear God, he shall remove your enemies far
from you, and pardon your sins, his goodness is infinite. The wicked have
conspired against thee, to punish and slay thee, or drive thee from Mecca; but
God has rendered their conspiracy ineffectual, he knows all the designs of
conspirators. When his miracles were related to them, and his Commandments
taught them, they said, we have heard them, we had said the like things, had we
so inclined; it is but a Song, and a Fable of old Men: Remember thou, how they
said, my God, if what Mahomet declares be true, cause a shower of Flint-Stones
to fall upon us, and rigorously chastise us; He shall not chastise them, when
thou art with them, neither when they beg pardon of him; Who is he that is able
to hinder God to punish them? They are not in his grace, when they hinder True
believers to enter the Temple of Mecca; he protecteth only such as have his
fear before his eyes, but most of them understand it not. Their prayers are
very light, they go hand in hand in the Temple, but shall one day feel the
punishment of God, because of their impiety. The unbelievers that expend their
wealth to turn the People from the Law of God, shall have sorrow for their
expense, they shall be infamous, and precipitated into the fire of Hell. God
shall separate the good from the wicked, he shall cast the wicked headlong into
Hell fire, and they shall be in the number of the damned: if they repent, he
will remit what is past, and if they return to fight against the Prophet, they
shall be entreated as the first: kill them, to avoid sedition, that there may
be no Law in the World, but the Law of God; If they forsake their impiety, God
shall behold their actions, if they depart from the faith, know, that God alone
is your Lord, and Protector. The fifth part of the spoil that you shall gain
from your Enemies, appertains to God, the Prophet, his Parents, Orphans, the
Poor, and to Pilgrims that are in want; observe what is above ordained, if ye
believe in God, in what we have inspired into our Mahomet.
Servant, and in the day, wherein the distinction of the good and the bad was
known at the encounter of the The day of the battle of Beder.
two Camps: God is Omnipotent, ye were in an high place, the nearest to Medina,
your enemies were afar off, by the Valley, and the enemies Cavalry below you;
had ye promised to give Battle, ye had See Gelaldin.
transgressed your promise, by reason of the great number of Infidels; but what
God will, is speedily executed, he shall destroy such as are wicked, having
seen that Battle, an evident sign of the true mission of the Prophet, and shall
give life to True believers; he understands and knows all things, he caused
you to see in a Dream your enemies in a small number, had he made them to
appear numerous, ye had feared to fight, but he delivered you from fear, he
knows what is in the hearts of Men: When he caused you to appear in their
view, he made you seem few in number, to accomplish his will, all things depend
on God. O ye that believe! make an Halt, when you are in view of your enemies
Troops, and pray to God with affection, perhaps you shall be happy, obey God,
and the Prophet, his Apostle; if disorder and terror surprise you, you shall
lose your reputation; persevere, God is with them that continue to do well. Be
not like them that went out of their Houses with dissembled joy, and
hypocrisy, and turn the people from the right way, God knows all their
actions; The Devil caused them to find pleasure in their doings, saying to
them, none shall this day obtain victory over you, I will be with you; and when
they beheld the two Camps in Battalia, he returned on his steps, fled, and
said, I am innocent of the evil that you commit, I The Turks believe, that the
Devil saw the Angels fight for Mahomet*
see what you see not, I fear the Omnipotent God, he is severe in his
punishments. The wicked, and such as were weak in their faith, speaking of the
True believers, said, These Men glory in their Law: It was replied to them, he
that relyeth on God, shall find him to be more powerful than his enemies, and
that he is most prudent in whatsoever he does. Thou saw the Angels that slew
the Infidels, they did beat them behind and before, and said to them, taste the
torments of the fire which you have merited, God is not unjust to his
Creatures. The people of Pharaoh were Infidels, and those that preceded them,
contemned the miracles and Commandments of God, but he rigorously chastised
them, he is Omnipotent, and most severe in his punishments, he shall destroy
them that alter the graces he has given to the People, until they have altered
the grace he has conferred on themselves. Pharoahs people were Infidels, their
Predecessors See Kit ab ^l tenoir.
disobeyed the Commandments of thy Lord; but we destroyed them because of their
sin, we drowned them for that they were unjust; The wicked are like to beasts,
they shall never believe in God. Such as promised not to assist the
unbelievers, and violated their promise, had not the fear of God before their
eyes; if thou meet them in a journey, separate thy self from them, their
punishment pursues them, peradventure they will consider it. If you fear that
any one will betray you, and be wanting to their word, receive no promise from
him, neither promise him any thing, God abhors Traitors: Believe not that
Infidels escape the punishment of God, return with your whole strength to fight
against them; the halters of your horses shall terrify the enemies of God, and
of you, and of other persons who ye know not, but God knows them all. Your
expense for his service, shall be paid you, and no injustice shall be done to
you; If thine enemies incline to peace, thou shall do ill to incline, as they,
trust in God, he understands what they say, and knows whatsoever they do;
if they desire to betray thee, God shall protect thee; and all true believers
endeavor to unite their hearts; but although thou should expend all the
riches of the World, thou shall not be able to unite them, God shall one day
unite them, he is Omnipotent, and prudent in all his works. O Prophet! the
protection of God suffices thee, and the righteous that follow thee. Exhort
the true believers to fight against Infidels; If ye be twenty assembled with
resolution and perseverance, ye shall vanquish two hundred Infidels; if ye be
an hundred, ye shall overthrow a thousand, the unbelievers are ignorant; but
God will lighten your burden, he knows your weakness; if ye be an hundred
true believers, ye shall defeat two hundred Infidels; if ye be a thousand, you
shall subdue two thousand by the permission of God, he aideth such as expect
his succors with perseverance. The Prophet cannot be a prisoner, he shall
establish himself on Earth with advantage, over unbelievers; Ye desire the
wealth of the Earth, and God will give you the treasures of Heaven, he is
Omnipotent and wise. If God had not taught you his Commandments, ye should have
suffered great torments; eat of clean beasts that he has permitted you to eat,
and fear God, he is gracious and merciful to them that have his fear before
their eyes. O Prophet! say to them that shall be prisoners in thy hands; God
knows what is in your hearts, he shall reward you for what ye shall have
lost, and shall pardon your sins; if you be converted, he is gracious and
merciful. If they betray thee, they betrayed God before thee, separate them
from the True believers, God knows all things, and is most prudent in what he
ordains. Such as have believed in God, as have departed from the wicked, as
have employed their wealth, and persons to fight for the Law of God; Such as
have protected the Prophet, and defended him, are all protectors, and friends
to each other; you shall have no consideration of the alliance of the True
believers, that desert not the company of Infidels, until they be separated
from them. If they require of you succors touching Religion, you are obliged to
protect them, except against such as have confederacy with you, God sees all
your actions. The Infidels protect each other, if you obey them, great
disorders shall ensue, and many seditions in the Earth. Such as have believed
in God, as have deserted the wicked, as have fought for the Law of God, as have
established the Prophet, and defended him against his Enemies, are indeed
faithful and true believers, they shall receive from God pardon of their sins,
and exceeding great treasures. Such as having believed in God, have departed
from the wicked, and have fought with you, are yours, they shall be the Heirs
of their Parents, God has so appointed it, he knows all things.

CHAP. IX. The Chapter of Conversion, containing an hundred twenty and seven
Verses, written at Medina.
Reader, this Chapter begins not as the rest, with these words, In the name
of God, gracious and merciful; because these are words of Peace and Salvation,
and for that in this Chapter, Mahomet commands to break Truce with his
Enemies, and to assault them. Many Mohammedan Doctors have entitled this the
Chapter of Punishment, or Pain. See the Exposition of Gelaldin, and that of
Bedaoi, and Kitab el tenoir.

A Letter Patent from God, and his Prophet, to the unbelievers, with whom ye
have made Truce. Travel in safety the space of four Months, know, ye shall not
render God impotent, and that he will lay shame upon your forehead. Advice for
the People, at the Day of great Pilgrimage, from God, and his Prophet: God
approves not the action of them that adore Idols, his Prophet is innocent from
that sin; If ye repent, ye shall do well, if ye abandon the Law of God, know,
ye shall not escape the punishment of your crime; preach to the unbelievers,
that they shall suffer grievous torments, except those with whom ye have made
Truce, who fall not from what they have promised, and that protect none against
you. Observe exactly until the prefixed time, what you have promised them, God
loves them that fear him: When the Month of Heram shall be past, kill them
where you shall meet them, take them Slaves, detain them Prisoners, and observe
where they pass to lay ambush for them; if they be converted, if they pray at
the time appointed, and pay Tithes, leave them in quiet, God is merciful to
them that repent. If the Infidels demand Quarter of you, give them Quarter, to
the end they may learn the word of God; teach them his Commandments, for they
are ignorant. How should they have Truce with God and his Prophet? If they
believe neither in the one, nor the other, except them with whom you entered
Truce in the Temple of Mecca? If they observe their promise to you, observe
what ye promised to them, God loves such as have his fear before their eyes:
How shall they have Truce with you? If they have advantage over you, they will
respect neither your alliance nor confederacy; They will speak well of you, and
contemn you in their heart, the greatest part of them are impious, they have
preferred the riches of this World to the Commandments of God, and have hindered
the People to follow his Law, as if they knew not what they did; they bear no
respect to the True believers, wherein they are exceedingly to blame. If they
turn, and make their prayers at the time appointed, if they pay Tithes, they
shall be your Brethren in God. I teach the mysteries of faith to such as have
understanding to comprehend them, if they break their promise, and disturb them
of your Religion, kill their Captains, as persons without faith, they will
perhaps put an end to their impiety. Slay such especially that renounce their
faith, who have endeavored to drive the Prophet from Mecca, and have begun to
slay you, will you fear them? Will ye be terrified by them? It is reasonable
that ye fear God; if ye believe in his Law, fight them, God shall chastise them
by your hands, he shall render them dishonorable, and protect you against
them, he shall fortify the hearts of True believers, and expel melancholy, he
pardons whom he sees good, knows all things, and is most prudent in what
he ordains. Think ye to be forsaken of God, and that he discerns not them
that have fought gallantly for his Law, from such as have adored Idols, and
disobeyed his Prophet? The True believers abandon not their Religion another
time to profess it: God knows all your actions, Infidels must not enter into
the Temple of Mecca, knowing that they are Infidels, the good works which they
shall do in this World shall be unprofitable, and they shall dwell eternally in
the fire of Hell. They that believe in God, and the Day of Judgment, that make
their prayers at the time appointed, pay Tithes, and worship one God alone,
shall visit the Temples of his Divine Majesty, and such as fear the Creatures
more than the Creator err from the right way; We have ordained that such as
shall bear fresh Water to Pilgrims, and them that shall visit the Temple of
Mecca, shall be in the number of them that believe in God, and the Day of
Judgment. Such as fight for the faith are not all equal in graces, and merits
before God, he guides not the unjust. Such as have believed in God, as have
departed from the wicked, and employed their wealth and persons to fight for
his Law, shall have a particular degree, and a particular place near to his
Divine Majesty, they shall be the more happy. God through his goodness
declares to them, that they shall enter into delicious Gardens, where they
shall remain eternally, there is with God a very great reward. O ye that
believe! obey not your Fathers, nor your Brothers, that love rather to follow
impiety, than the faith. Such as shall obey them, shall offend exceedingly; if
your Father, your Children, your Brothers, your Wives, your Parents, your
friends, the wealth that you have gained, the fear of losing your riches, and
apprehension of poverty, have more of power over you than God and his Prophet,
and hinder you to fight for the faith, the Commandment of God shall be executed
against you, he guides not the wicked, and has protected you in many
occasions. Remember the day of Battle of Hanin, when ye rejoiced in the
multitude of your Men, it did not advantage you, fear made you find the place
too narrow for flight, and ye turned the Back as vanquished: Remember, that
God, at that time, put his Prophet, and the true Believers in a place of
safety, and sent invisible Troops to chastise the Infidels, he pardons sins
as seems good to him, he is gracious and merciful. O ye that believe in God!
Unbelievers are unclean, permit not that they enter into the Temple of Mecca
after this year, if ye have apprehension of want, God shall enrich you with his
Grace, if it please him, he is Omniscient and most prudent. Fight against them
that believe not in God, nor the Day of Judgment, that forbid not to act what
God has prohibited, and his Prophet has forbidden, and that judge not
according to the Law of truth, wherein they were instructed, who heretofore
received the written Law: they choose rather to pay Tribute, than to be
converted, therefore are they contemptible. The Jews have said, that the Son of
God is most powerful; the Christians, that the Messiah is the Son of God; their
words are like to the words of the Infidels that preceded them, but God shall
lay upon them his Curse. Consider how they blaspheme; they adore their Doctors,
and Priests, and the Messiah also, the Son of Mary; who commanded them to
worship one God alone, there is but one (...) God: praised be God, there is
nothing equal to him; they would extinguish the light of God with their mouth,
but he shall not suffer them; he shall cause it to appear, notwithstanding it
be (...) to the Infidels. He has sent his (...) Men into the right way, to
(...) Law of Truth, and to make it (...) all other Laws of the World, (...)
Will of Idolaters. O ye that truly (...) many of the Doctors and Priests ea^
(...) the substance of the people, (...) them from the Law of God: (...) as
^reasure up, and expend nothing (...) ^s works, they shall suffer great
torments at the day when the fire of Hell shall be kindled upon them, it shall
burn their Forehead, sides, and back, it shall be said to them, behold the
wealth which ye have treasured up for your Souls, taste the Fruits of your
Treasures, which ye have amassed. When God created the Heaven and the Earth, he
ordained the year of twelve Months, amongst which four are privileged. Offend
not God, especially in those Months; fight at all times against Unbelievers, as
they will fight against you, and know that God is with them that have his fear
before their eyes. Sloth and forgetfulness abound in impiety; God mis^eadeth
through negligence the Unbelievers, that prefer one Month to another, in
imitation of what is commanded: they permit to do what God has forbidden, and
delight in the Malice of their Actions, but God is not the guide of the wicked.
O ye that believe! wherefore have ye inclined to the Earth? Why did ye prefer
the wealth of this World to that of Paradise; when you were commanded to go
forth of your Houses to fight for the Law of God? The Riches of this World are
contemptible, if you consider those of Heaven; if you leave not your Houses to
fight with the Prophet, God shall severely punish you, and put other Persons in
your places; you shall not protect the Prophet, God alone is his Protector; he
protected him when he went out of Mecca; he, with his Companion, they being
both in a Cave, he said to his Companion, afflict not thy self, God is with us;
He has defended, and succored us by invisible Troops; he has debased the
word of Unbelievers, and exalted that of true Believers; he is Omnipotent and
wise. Fight according to your power for the Law of God, you shall do well if
you have knowledge to understand it; if you require the wealth of this World,
Honor, and Reputation, they are not far from you, they follow you at hand, but
the punishment of Crimes and Misery are as yet far remote of Infidels; they
swear by the Name of God, that they were unable to go out of Mecca with the
Prophet, in which they destroy their Souls, for God knows them to be Liars:
excuse them not, that thou know not them that spoke truth, and those that
were Liars. True Believers will not excuse themselves from fighting, or
employing their wealth and Persons for the Law of God; he knows such as fear
him. They that believe not in God, neither the Day of Judgment, refuse to go
with thee, they doubt the Mysteries of Faith, but shall continue in their
doubt, to their confusion; had they inclined to go out against the Enemy, they
had Arms to perform it; God contemned their going out, rendered them negligent,
and caused them to remain with the sick, the Women, and Children; had they gone
forth with you, they had brought with them more of disorder than affection to
the Service of his Divine Majesty; they hate you, nevertheless you hearken to
them: God knows them that are to blame, they hated thee heretofore, accused
thee of all their mischief, until, through the permission of God, the truth
appeared against their Will: many of them said, excuse us, and scandalize us
not, and they fell themselves into scandal, and impiety: but Hell is the
Habitation of those wicked Persons; if good happen to you, they are
discontented; if evil befall you, they say, they took heed to themselves, and
foresaw i^, and depart from you with joy; say unto them, nothing befell us, but
what God had ordained, he is our Lord; all true Believers are resigned to the
Will of his Divine Majesty; say unto them, will ye expect, that one of the two
Graces (either Victory, or Martyrdom) befall See Gelaldin.
us? we will expect with you, until God has chastised you by our hands;
expect, we will expect with you: say unto them, expend through force or
affection for the glory of God; your works shall not be accepted of him,
because you are Infidels, your Alms shall be unprofitable, for that you believe
not in God, nor in his Prophet; ye praise not God, but with negligence, and
with regret for what you spend for his Service. Be not then amazed at the
quantity of their Treasures, neither the number of their Children; God shall
make use of them to punish them in this World, and shall destroy them with
their wickedness. They swear by the name of God, that they are yours, and are
not, and fear to be discovered; if they meet with any Den, Cave, or House,
wherein to hide them, they speedily repair thither. There be of them that say,
it is ignominious to give Alms; if they give Alms it is with Choler; if they
gave them for the love of God and his Prophet, they would say, God is our
Benefactor; he will give us through his Grace, and to the Prophet, whatsoever
shall be necessary, our hope is in him. Alms are appointed for the poor, for
them that recommend themselves to God, to redeem Slaves, for such as are in
Debt, and necessitous, God knows all things, and is most prudent in what he
ordains. There be among them, who deprave the Prophet, and say, he shall
understand what we say; say unto them, should it be to you a great advantage to
hear well? The Prophet believes in God, and teaches true Believers the Truth;
the mercy of God is for them that believe in his Divine Majesty; Such as
detract from the Prophet, shall feel grievous torments; they swear by the Name
of God, that they desire to content God, and his Prophet; it is reasonable that
they content them, if they be good Men; know they not, that such as transgress
the Will of God, and that of his Prophet, shall be eternally damned? The wicked
fear lest God should discover to the righteous the Malice that they conceal in
their Souls, and that they contemn them; Say unto them, ye shall be contemned,
for God brings to light what you fear. If you question them concerning what
they say, they will answer for excuse, that they had no evil intent, and that
they but jest; say unto them, will you jest with God, with his Commandments,
and his Prophets? There is none excuse for you, ye are truly impious; if God
pardon any one of you, he shall rigorously punish such as persist to offend
him. The wicked teach among them impiety to their Posterity, they depart from
the truth; they go hand in hand, and agree to disobey God; they forget God, and
God forgets them; he has prepared Hell for them, where they shall remain
eternally; he has Cursed them, and they shall feel the torment of infinite
pains. The wicked that were before you, shall undergo them like you, they were
more powerful than you, they possessed store of wealth, and had many Children,
they possessed part of their substance, and ye possess yours, as did your
Predecessors; ye were plunged in impiety, as they were plunged; but the good
works that they have done in this World, shall be to them unprofitable, and at
the Day of Judgment, they shall be in the number of the miserable. Have they
not known the History of their Predecessors; the History of the people of
Noah, of Aad, of Temod, of Abraham, and the Cities that were subverted? The
Prophets preached to them the Commandments of God, who did to them no
injustice; they drew affliction on themselves, through the Enormity of their
Crimes. The true Believers mutually obey each other; they command to do what
things are honest, prohibit to act what is not approved; they make their
Prayers at the time appointed, distribute Tithes, obey God and his Prophet; God
shall remit to them their sins, he is Omnipotent, and has promised to them
Gardens, wherein flow many Rivers, and an Habitation full of content in Eden;
he has promised them his Grace, which is the perfection of felicity. O
Prophet! fight against the Infidels, fortify thy self against them, Hell shall
be their Habitation; they shall swear by the Name of God, that they have not
traduced thee; nevertheless they have detracted and uttered words full of
impiety: they have denied to have been enriched through the grace of God, and
of his Prophet; if they turn, they shall do well; if they abandon the Faith,
God shall punish them in this World, and in the other, with grievous torments,
and on Earth they shall find no Protector; there be of them, who have inclined
to capitulate with God, and have said, if God does good to us, we will believe
in him; when he did good to them, they were Niggards, and avaritious; they have
erred, and disobeyed his Commandments, but he chastised them, because of their
impiety; he has imprinted it in their hearts until the Day of Judgment, for
that they have disobeyed him, because they violated their Promises, and by
reason of their Lies; know they not that God understands what they conceal in
their hearts? and that he knows what is present, past, and future? There be
of them, who deride the true Believers, that give Alms according to their
power; God shall deride them, and they shall feel the rigor of eternal pains;
implore pardon for them, or implore it not, when thou shall beg sixty and ten
times pardon for them, God shall not pardon them, because they are ungrateful
toward him, and his Prophet, God does not guide them that disobey him; they
rejoiced to be left behind the Prophet, when he went to fight for the Service
of God, they had an aversion to sight, and employ their Persons and Goods for
the Service of his Divine Majesty; they said, we will not go out of our Houses
with this heat; say to them, Hell is much more hot, could you comprehend; they
shall laugh a little in this World, and shall weep much in the other, for a
punishment of their sins. If thou meet them, and they demand permission to go
out with thee, to fight for the Faith; say unto them, you shall not go out,
neither shall ye ever fight against the Enemy with me, ye were slothful and
Cowards the first time, remain with the Unbelievers; pray not for them after
their Death, and stay not at their Tombs, because they believed neither in God,
nor his Prophet, and died in their wickedness. Be thou not astonished, neither
at the abundance of their wealth, nor the number of their Children, God will
make use of them, to chastise them in this World, and will destroy them in
their impiety. When command was sent to them to believe in God, and fight with
his Prophet, the most powerful among them desired thee to excuse them, and
said, leave us with them that continue in their Houses, and desire to remain
with the sick, the Women and little Children: God hardened their hearts, and
they shall never learn the truth. The Prophet and true Believers that were with
them, and fought, and employed their Persons, and goods for the Service of God,
shall be blessed; he has prepared for them Gardens, wherein flow many Rivers,
with perfection of felicity. Some of the Arabians came to excuse themselves of
going to the War, and such as renounced God and the Prophet, remained in their
Houses, but they shall resent grievous torments, because of their wickedness;
the sick, the impotent, and those that want means to be present at the War,
offend not God in abiding in their Houses, provided they be faithful to his
Divine Majesty, and his Prophet. The righteous are not obliged to do but what
is in their power, God shall be to them gracious and merciful. Such Beuou,
Mocren.
as repaired to thee to fight, and whom thou did dismiss for want of
occasion, did not offend God; they returned to their Houses with tears in their
eyes, with discontent to have wanted means to employ in the Service of his
Divine Majesty, the War is appointed to such as entreat thee to exempt them
that are rich, and have wealth to subsist, they require leave to remain with
their Wives and Children, God has hardened their hearts, and they know it not;
they shall come to excuse themselves, when thou shall meet them; Say unto them,
excuse not your selves, I do not believe you, God has given us to understand
your News, he and his Prophet likewise has rendered your good works vain and
unprofitable; ye shall one day appear before him that knows what is past,
present, and future, he shall cause you to remember whatsoever you have done,
and shall punish you according to your demerits. They shall conjure you by the
Name of God, when you approach them, to depart from them; depart from them,
they are full of uncleanness, Hell shall be their Habitation, where they shall
be tormented for their Crimes. They shall beseech you to love them; if you love
them, know, that God abhors them that disobey him: The Arabians, who observe
not the Precepts which God has sent to his Prophet; are ye more impious and
ungrateful? God knows all things, and is most prudent. There be Persons among
the Arabians, who account it lost Money that they expend for the Service of
God, and protract their departure, to retard yours, and make you to attend; the
Wheel of misery is upon them, God understands whatever they say, and knows
all their Actions; there be among them who believe in God, and the Day of
Judgment; they esteem that their expense for the Service of God draws them
nigh to his Divine Majesty, and they invite the Prophet to pray for them, God
shall give them his mercy, he is gracious and merciful to them that obey him.
They that first arrived at Medina, the first of them that went out of Mecca, to
depart from the wicked, such as were at the Battle of Beder, and such as
imitated them in well doing, shall enjoy the Grace of God, he has prepared for
them Gardens, wherein flow many Rivers, with supreme felicity. There be
Arabians about you, and in Medina, they affect impiety; you know them not, but
I know them all, I will chastise them twice on Earth, (to wit, through Ignominy
and death) and they shall feel in the other World exceeding great torments.
Others there be, that confess their sins, and who do good and evil works;
peradventure God will pardon them, he is altogether gracious and merciful; take
of their substance for Alms, thou shall render them righteous, and shall
purify them, pray for them, thy Prayers shall procure them the mercy of God,
he understands and knows all things. Know they not, that God accepts the
conversion of his Creatures, that their Alms are pleasing to him, and that he
is gracious and merciful? Say unto them, do what shall please you; God, his
Prophet, and the true Believers shall see what you do, you shall one day appear
before him, who knows the present, past, and future; he shall make you to
know whatsoever ye have done, and shall chastise you after your demerits. There
be others that attend the pleasure of God, either his grace, or his wrath, his
punishment, or his mercy, God understands what is in their Souls, and is most
wise. They that esteemed, that the Temple built by Unbelievers, to seduce the
righteous, to distinguish the wicked from the good, and to observe such as had
before fought against God, and against his Prophet, is the Temple of his Divine
Majesty, swear that they desire to do well, and that their intention is most
honest, but they are Liars, and God shall be witness of their falsehood; make
not thy Prayers in that Temple, make thy Prayers in the Temple founded on the
fear of God, that is reasonable; there be Persons in that Temple who desire to
be purified, God loves such as have a clean Soul; Who is he that builds
best, he that foundeth his building upon the fear of God, or he who lays the
Foundation of his building upon the brink of a Ditch of Sand, which falls,
and ruineth it self? They who esteem the Temple built by Unbelievers, to seduce
the people, to be the Temple of God, shall be with that Temple, and with the
Infidels, that built it, burnt in the fire of Hell; God guides not the unjust,
their building shall serve only to torment them, God knows their design; and
is most wise; he purchases of true Believers their Souls and Goods, and gives
them Paradise; if they be slain, or if they slay when they shall fight for the
Faith, they shall have what he has promised to them in the Old Testament, the
Gospel, and in the Alcoran: Who better satisfies what he has promised, than
God? Declare to them that they have made a good purchase, they have gained the
height of Felicity. Such as are firm in their Faith, who pray, honor, and
worship God, who observe his Commandments, and all true Believers, shall enjoy
the delights of Paradise, with all manner of content. The Prophet, and true
Believers ought not to ask pardon of God for Infidels, notwithstanding they be
their Parents, having had knowledge that they are damned, because of their
infidelity. Abraham prayed not for his Father, until he had promised him to
adore one God alone; when he knew his Father to be an Enemy to God, he declared
himself an Enemy to his sin, he ceased praying for him, although he was
exceeding charitable, and patient in his afflictions. God mis-leadeth not them
that he has put into the right way, he gives them to understand what they
ought to do, he knows them that deserve to be seduced, and such as merit to
be guided through the right way. The Kingdom of Heaven and Earth is Gods, he
gives life and death to whom he sees good: Who except God shall protect you?
he has given his Grace to the Prophet, and to such as followed him in his
affliction, although it wanted but a little, that the hearts of many of them
inclined not to the party of the Unbelievers, but he pardons them; he has
been gracious and merciful to three Persons who deserted the Prophet, and were
sorry for their Error, they knew there was no sure refuge, but in God, he
pardoned them, when they were converted, Kiab bin Malik belal bin Amihe,
Mesrarhe bin Rabia.
he is gracious and merciful to such as repent. O ye that believe! Fear God, be
righteous; the Inhabitants of Medina, and the Arabians, that dwell about that
City, ought not to contradict the Will of the Prophet of God, neither dislike
what he approves, because they have endured neither thirst, nor pain, nor
anguish for the Service of his Divine Majesty; they have not been trampled
under foot by their Enemies, they shall irritate the Infidels, and shall
receive no displeasure; on the contrary, they shall acquire merit, and perform
a good work. God does not deprive them of recompense that do well, he shall
write down their expense for his Service, and the number of the Idols that they
shall destroy, for reward of their good works. It is not necessary that all the
faithful go to the War, it is sufficient, that of every Lineage, and of every
Nation there go a party, while the rest shall learn the Laws and Mysteries of
Faith, to instruct their Companions, when they shall return from their Voyage,
perhaps they will fear the chastisement of God. O ye that believe in God! fight
against them that would cause you to be defiled in impiety, be valiant, and
know that God is with them that have his fear before their eyes. When God
caused to descend from Heaven, any Chapter of the Alcoran, some of them said,
through disdain, that will increase the Faith of this people. Certainly it
augmenteth the Faith of true Believers, it rejoices them, and enflameth the
wrath of his Divine Majesty upon Infidels, who persist in their pollutions, and
dye in their wickedness. They know not that God tries the good, once, or twice
a year, they will not be converted, it is lost time to preach to them. When God
sent from Heaven any Chapter of the Alcoran, they beheld each others, and said,
does any one see us? They returned in their impiety, and God turned their heart
from the right way, for that they would not learn the Truth. God has sent you
a Prophet of your own Nation, who, with Passion, desires to deliver you from
your obstinacy, and is extremely affected to instruct you in the way of
Salvation, God is mild, and pitiful toward true Believers. If they abandon the
Faith, say unto them, God is my Protector, there is but one sole God, I
recommend my self to the Will of his Divine Majesty, he is the Lord of the
Majestic Throne.

CHAP. X. The Chapter of Jonas, containing an hundred and nine Verses, written
at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful; I am God the merciful. The Precepts
contained in this Book proceed from the Omnipotent: Does the people wonder that
we have inspired a Man to preach to the wicked the torments of Hell, and to
declare to true Believers, that they shall find true what their Lord to them
has promised? The wicked say, that it is but Sorcery and enchantment.
Certainly God is your Lord, who created Heaven and Earth in six days, and
sits on his The One, disposing all things; no Man interceedeth for his
Neighbor without his permission, he is your God and your Lord, worship him
alone, will ye not consider it? you all shall be one day assembled before him;
he promised with truth, that he will cause Men to dye, and raise them again, to
recompense such as have believed in his Law, and done good works: The
Unbelievers shall drink a boiling drink, and shall endure great torments,
because of their impiety. He it is that gave light to the Sun, and brightness
to the Moon, that created the signs to know the number of years, the account of
Months, and of whatsoever he has created, these things teach with truth, the
Miracles of his Divine Majesty, to such as have knowledge to understand them;
the difference of Day and of Night, and what God has created in Heaven and in
Earth, are marks of his Unity to them that have his fear before their eyes.
They who believe there is no Resurrection, such as place their content in the
wealth of this World, they that trust in their Riches, and that are ignorant of
the Commandments of God shall be precipitated into the fire of Hell, because of
their sins, and the true Believers shall be conducted by his Divine Majesty
into delicious Gardens, wherein flow many Rivers, they shall there find
whatsoever they shall desire, and shall say at the beginning of their Prayers,
praised be God; afterward they shall say, Salvation be to God; and at the end
of their Prayers, praise be to God, Lord of the Universe. Although God does
sometimes suddenly chastise Men, he always attends the time of their Destiny.
I will leave them that shall not believe in the Resurrection, in their Errors,
to their confusion; When Man is afflicted, he invoketh us standing, sitting,
lying, and in all postures, and when we have delivered him from his affliction,
he persisteth in his wickedness. It seems good to the wicked to do in this
manner, we destroyed their Predecessors when they believed not in the
Prophets, neither obeyed the Precepts that we sent them, and have established
you on the Earth in their place after them, to see your Deportments. When thou
teach our Commandments to them that believe not in the Resurrection; they
say, that the Precepts of the Alcoran are altogether contrary to what thou
preachest, and that thou have altered them; Say unto them, I have no Will to
alter them of my self, I do but what is inspired into me of God, I fear to be
punished at the Day of Judgment, should I disobey his Divine Majesty; Say unto
them, Had it pleased God, I had neither read, nor taught you his Commandments,
I sojourned a long time with you, before I taught you, will you not learn them?
Who is more unjust than he that blasphemeth? God does not aid the Infidels that
worship what can neither benefit nor hurt them, and say, their Idols shall
intercede for them; will you instruct God in any thing that he knows not, of
what is in Heaven or in Earth? Praised be God, he has no Companion. Men were
all of one Religion before Infidelity took place, and if God had not said that
he would defer the punishment of the wicked until the Day of Judgment, he had
already destroyed them in this World, because of their impiety; They say, we
will not believe in the Prophet, if God make not some Miracles to appear in
him; Say unto them, God knows what shall be; expect, I will expect with you:
When we gave them to taste of content after their affliction, they had subtilty
upon our Commandments: Say unto them, God is more subtle than you, his
Messengers shall write your subtilties; he it is that made Men to travel upon
the Earth and Sea; It is he that sends them a favorable wind to rejoice them
in their Ships; when Tempest surprizeth them, they believe that the Waves will
overwhelm them, then they invoke God, with desire to embrace his Law, and say,
if God does deliver us from this danger, we will believe in his Unity, and
return him thanks for this mercy; and being delivered from peril, persist in
their wickedness. O People! you draw mischief on your selves, you require
nothing but the wealth of this World, you all shall appear before us to be
judged according to your works; the life of the World is like to the Rain,
which we cause to descend from Heaven, it causes with mixture all sorts of
herbage to spring forth, for the nourishment of Men, and Beasts. When the Earth
is adorned with Flowers, and enriched with its Fruits, the Inhabitants
oftentimes believe they have the power to cause their production; then send we
our chastiiements Day and Night upon the Earth, and render it as mown, and as
if the Day before it had brought no Fruit. Thus do I discover Mysteries to such
as have knowledge to comprehend them. They beg their Salvation of God; he
saves and puts in the way of Salvation whom it pleases him. He shall not
cover the Visage of them that have done good works, they shall appear without
shame, and dwell in Paradise, where they shall remain eternally; and such as
shall have done evil shall be punished after their demerits, they shall be
covered with shame, and none shall be able to protect them, they shall be as if
a great part of the obscurity of the Night had covered their countenance, they
shall be condemned to the fire of Hell, where they shall dwell eternally. Think
on the Day, wherein we will ^ssemble all the World, and will say to the
Infidels, H^ll shall be your habitation; where be the ^dols you adored? we have
separated you from each other. Their Idols shall say to them, You have not
worshipped us, God is witness; was there any thing between us and you, that
rendered us ignorant of your adorations? That Day shall every one see what he
has done, and know that God is Truth it self; their Idols shall be separated
far from them, and they shall understand their blasphemies. Say unto them, who
enricheth you with the wealth of Heaven and Earth? Who causes life to come out
of death, and death out of life? Who disposes all things in the World? They
shall answer, it is God: Say unto them, why have you not therefore his fear
before your eyes? God is indeed your Lord; what is there after the Truth, but
falsehood? How will you depart from his Law? his Word shall be accomplished
against Infidels. Say unto them, Have your Idols the power to cause Men to die,
and to make them rise again? God causes them to die, and to rise again; how
shall they be able to blaspheme after these reasons? Say unto them, Are your
Idols able to conduct you into the right way? God guides the People into the
way of Salvation; who ought rather to be followed, he that guides the People
into the right way, or he that misleadeth them? What reason have ye to follow
the evil way? The greatest part of them follow but their own opinion, but their
opinion is not conformable to the Truth; God knows all their actions, there
is no falsehood in the Alcoran, it confirms the ancient Scriptures, and
perspicuously explaineth them; there is no doubt, but it proceeds from the
Lord of the Universe. They say Mahomet has invented this Book; say unto them,
Come and bring any thing that resembles it in Doctrine and Eloquence, and call
the Idols which ye adore, we shall see if you are sincere; on the contrary,
they have blasphemed, and have talked of what they understood not, when they
heard the exposition of the Alcoran: Thus did their Predecessors; but consider
what is the end of the unjust; There be among them, who will believe in this
Book, and others that will not believe; Thy Lord knows them that defile the
Earth; if they slander thee, say unto them, I will answer with my actions, and
ye shall answer with yours, ye are innocent of what I act, and I am innocent of
what ye do. There be persons among them that have inclination to hear thee, but
art thou able to cause the deaf to hear? Should they not be deaf, they would
learn nothing; Others there be, who look toward thee, but art thou able to
guide the blind? should they see clearly, they would not follow the right way;
God does no injustice to Men, they do injury to themselves, through the
enormity of their offenses. I will cause them to rise again at the Day of
Judgment, as if they had remained but one hour of a day in the Grave; they
shall know each other, and the wicked who have not believed in the
Resurrection, shall be damned: I will show thee many of them whom I will
chastise; I will cause thee to die before they be chastised, and they all shall
appear before me to be judged; God is witness of their actions, he shall punish
them according to their demerits; every Nation of the World has had a Prophet
sent from God, who has judged with reason, and without injustice, the
differences that were among them touching Religion: They have said, at what
time shall the wrath of God appear? Say unto them, I, of my self, can neither
procure good nor evil, if God does not permit it; every one has his destiny,
when the time of their destiny arriveth, they can neither retard, or advance it
one hour. Have ye considered the punishment which God heretofore sent, by day,
and by night against the wicked? When ye felt it, ye believed it, and fell into
it headlong. It shall be said to the wicked at the Day of Judgment, taste
eternal torments; shall you not be punished according to your demerits? They
will ask of thee, if the pains denounced against the wicked, and if the
Resurrection be matters of Truth? Say unto them, yes, my Lord is most exact in
his words, and all the Treasures of the World shall not be able to redeem one
Soul. They shall repent of their sins, when they shall feel the punishment of
their offenses, but shall be condemned without injustice; whatsoever is in
Heaven and in Earth appertains to God, he is exact in his Promise, yet the
greatest part of the World do not know him. He it is who causes to die, and
gives life, and shall assemble Men at the Day of Judgment. O People! God has
sent you instructions, and remedies for your infirmities; he has sent a guide
to conduct true believers into the way of his mercy; it shall be to them of
more advantage, than the treasures that they accumulate: Have ye considered the
good things which he has created for you? Ye have appointed one part to be
eaten, and have prohibited to eat of another: Has God permitted you to
blaspheme against him? The opinion of such as blaspheme against God, shall be
but misery at the Day of Judgment; God is full of goodness for the people, but
most of them are ungrateful. In whatsoever place thou art, whether thou teach
what is contained in the Alcoran, or whether thou labor, I am always present,
nothing is concealed from thy Lord, of whatsoever is in Heaven and Earth; be it
great or little, all is written in the intelligible Book, that explaineth all
things. There needs no fear for such as recommend themselves to God, they
shall be exempt from the pains of Hell. The true believers who have his fear
before their eyes, shall suffer no torments in the other World; it is declared
to them on Earth, that they shall have all content, the word of God admits of
no alteration; they shall enjoy perfection of felicity in Paradise. Afflict not
thy self for the words of the impious, virtue proceeds from God, he
understands, and knows all things; whatsoever is in Heaven and in Earth
appertains to him: They who worship Idols, follow but their opinion, and are
liars; God has created the night for repose, and the day for labor; such as
hear his Word, find therein marks of his Omnipotency. They have said, Do ye
believe that God has a Son? Praised be God, he is most rich, and has no need
of any person, he possesses whatsoeever is in Heaven, and Earth; you have no
reason in what ye allege; will you speak of God what ye know not? God does not
aid in this World them that blaspheme against him, he shall cause them to feel
after their death great torments, because of their impiety: Instruct them in
the History of Noah, how he sp^ke to his People, and said, O People! if my
abode with you, and the preaching of the Commandments of God be irksom to you,
know, that all my support is in God; assemble your Doctors, with your Idols,
and conceal not what ye do; go whither you will, ye shall find none to protect
you; if ye contemn my instructions, I require not of you a reward for my pains;
I desire to receive of none other than God the Omnipotent, and recommend my
self to the will of his Divine Majesty. They slandered Noah, then did we save
him in the Ark, and them that were with him; we prolonged their posterity on
Earth, and drowned the wicked; consider the end of such as heard the Word of
God, and contemned it. We sent to them other Prophets after Noah, they made
them to see Miracles, and gave them most salutary instructions; but they did
not believe in what they had no will before to believe. Thus I harden the heart
of the wicked. We after them, sent Moses to Pharaoh, and his Subjects, with our
miracles, they arose against our Commandments, when the truth was preached to
them, and said, it was but Magic and Enchantment. Moses said to them, Will you
say that the Truth is Sorcery? God does not assist Magicians and Sorcerers;
they said, Art thou, with thy Brother, come to divert us from the Religion of
our Fathers, and to be esteemed on Earth? We will believe in thy words. Then
Pharaoh commanded to summon the most skilful of his Magicians; they being
assembled, Moses said to them, cast down what ye have a will to cast down on
the ground; having cast down their Cords and Staves, Moses said to them, know
ye none other thing but Magic? God shall render it vain, and unprofitable; he
abhoreth such as defile the Earth, he confirms the Truth through his Word,
although it be against the will of the wicked. Few Men believed in Moses,
because of their fear to displease Pharaoh, and his Ministers. Pharaoh was
powerful on Earth, and in the number of the wicked. Moses said, O People! if ye
believe in God, resign your selves to his will; they answered, All our
confidence is in God; Lord, do not thou abandon us to the malice of the unjust;
deliver us through thy mercy from the hands of Infidels. We inspired Moses and
his Brother to dwell some time in Egypt with their people, and to make
Oratories in their Houses, therein to make their prayers, and preach to true
believers. Lord, said Moses, thou have enriched Pharaoh and his people in this
World; they go astray from the way of thy Law; confound their riches, and
harden your hearts, they will not believe until they see thy judgments, and
feel the effect of thy wrath; he said, I have heard the prayers of you both; be
faithful in your Embassy, and follow not the way of the ignorant. We gave
passage through the Sea to the Children of Israel; Pharaoh pursued them with
hatred and envy, until his people were drowned. Then said Pharaoh, believe
there is none other God, but the God of the Children of Israel, and I wholly
recommend my self to his Will. Thou do now believe in God, O Pharaoh! and
were before disobedient to his Commandments, filling the Earth with they
enormities, I have delivered thee from this peril, that thou may be an
example to posterity; for many among the people are ignorant of my Omnipotency.
We gave the Children of Israel to dwell in places full of delights; and
enriched them with the good things of the Earth; they knew the differences that
arose among them touching Religion, thy Lord shall judge them at the Day of
Judgment. If thou doubtest what we have taught thee, repair to them that have
read the Scripture before thee; what thy Lord has taught thee is most true; be
not thou of them that doubt, neither of such as derogate from the Commandments
of God, thou shall be in the number of the wretched. Those whom God will
chastise, shall not believe in his Divine Majesty, should they behold all the
miracles of the World, until they see the torments of Hell. The faith is
exceeding profitable to the Cities that have received it; when the Inhabitants
of the City of Jonas embraced it, we delivered them from our punishment, we
delivered them from ignominy, and enriched them until the time appointed; if it
pleased thy Lord, all the World should believe in him; will thou abhor the
People until they believe in God? No Man can embrace the faith without his
permission, he sends his indignation against them that disobey his
Commandments: Say unto them, Consider all that is in Heaven and Earth, miracles
and preaching are of no use to such as will not believe; shall they expect what
their Predecessors expected? Say unto them, expect, I will expect with you. I
will deliver my Prophets, and the true believers, from the torments of Hell, it
is reasonable that I deliver them that obey my Commandments. O People! who
causes you to doubt of the Law which I teach you? I will not worship the Idols
that you adore, I worship one God alone, who shall cause you all to dye; I will
embrace his Law, it commands to profess his Unity, I am not of them that say,
he has a Companion equal to him. Adore not what can neither benefit nor hurt
thee, if thou do it, thou shall be in the number of the unjust. If God will
afflict thee, none can deliver thee from affliction; if God will do good to
thee, none can deprive thee of his grace, he has given it to whom seems good
to himself, he is gracious and merciful. O people! God teaches you the truth;
whosoever shall follow the right way, shall save his Soul, and whosoever shall
go astray, shall destroy it. I am not your Tutor, I do but what is inspired
into me; I have patience in my perseverance, I will expect the judgment of God,
there is no better Judge than he.

CHAP. XI. The Chapter of Hod, containing an hundred twenty and three Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful: I am the merciful God. The signs
contained in this Book, are most true, they proceed from the most wise, who
knows all things. Worship ye but one God alone, I preach to you from him the
torments of Hell, and declare the Joys of Paradise, that ye may implore pardon
of his Divine Majesty, and be converted; he shall give you an happy Life in the
World, until the time appointed, and shall reward every one according to his
works. I fear, lest you should be chastised at the Day of Judgment; if you
forsake the right way, you all shall be assembled before God to be judged. The
heart of the impious inclined to hatred of the Prophet, and they would have
concealed themselves for some time from God; they are covered with their
garments, that they may not be known, but God knows what is in their Souls,
he understands whatsoever they conceal, and whatsoever they make manifest.
All the Creatures of the World live of his grace, he knows the place of their
repair, and the place where they must die, all is written in an intelligible
Book, that explaineth all things. He it is that created Heaven and Earth in six
days, his Throne was before upon the Waters See Kitab el tenoir.
(the Alcoran) exhorts you to well-doing. If thou say to the wicked, that
they shall rise again after their Death, they will say, it is but Witchcraft
and Sorcery; if we retard some time to chastise them, they say, there is no
punishment for their crimes; but they shall not avoid it, in the day when it
shall appear, and they shall feel the rigor of the pains which they contemn.
If we confer riches, and health on the impious, and deprive them of them, they
despair in their impiety; if we give them good after their evil, they say,
misery has forsaken them, they rejoice, and become arrogant. Such as are
humble and patient in their afflictions, and do good works, shall obtain pardon
of their sins, and a very great reward. Perhaps thou will forget to teach
something of what I have inspired into thee, and be afflicted, because they
say, that what thou speak shall bring thee no profit. Certainly, thou art
sent only to reprove them of their sin, thy Lord is Omnipotent, and shall
chastise them after their demerits. Assuredly, they will say, thou have
Controv^ supra.
forged the Alcoran, and that it is of thy invention; Say unto them, Come and
bring with you ten Chapters of your invention, like to the Alcoran in
instruction and eloquence, and call to your aid the Idols that ye adore; if you
be righteous, if they hear not your prayers, neither afford you succors, know
then, that the Alcoran descended from Heaven, through Gods permission, and that
there is but one sole God, will ye not trust in him? I will bestow the riches
and honors of the Earth, on many persons that affect them, and in the end they
shall be confined in the fire of Hell, and the good works that they shall do in
this World, shall be unprofitable in the other. They who observe what God has
ordained, study the Alcoran, and believe that it proceeds from his Divine
Majesty, to teach the right way, and to obtain his mercy, as before it, was the
Book of Moses. Such as shall believe in the Alcoran, shall be happy, doubtless
the fire of Hell is prepared for the Infidels who will not believe therein, but
the greatest part of the World is incredulous: who is more impious than they
that blaspheme against God? Such Men shall not see his face; the Angels shall
say, at the Day of Judgment, behold them that have been impious, a curse is
upon them, and upon the unjust that have misled the people from the right way,
they were indeed Infidels. Such Men shall not escape the punishment of their
crimes on Earth, they shall find none that is able to protect them but God, he
shall augment their pains, because they would not abandon their wickedness,
neither receive the light of faith. Such are miserable Men, their Idols shall
not afford them succors, they doubtless shall be eternally damned: and such as
shall believe in God, do good works, and be converted, shall dwell for ever in
Paradise. The wicked are as deaf, and blind, and the True Believers are like
those who have good sight and perfect hearing; shall they be in parallel to
each other? will ye never consider it? We sent Noah to reprove Men for their
sins, he said to them, worship but one God alone, otherwise I fear ye shall be
chastised at the Day of Judgment; The Doctors of the Infidels answered him, we
see thee to be a Man, like us, and that such as follow thee are Poor People,
blind, and without counsel; we perceive not that thou have any grace, that
ought to prefer thee to us; contrariwise, we believe thee to be a liar; he
said, O people! know ye not that God has taught me what I preach to you, that
he has given me the grace of Prophecy, and deprived you of it? Shall I exhort
you to acknowledge his grace, seeing you abhor him? O People! I require no
recompense of you for my pains, God will reward me largely, I desire not to
banish True Believers from my company, they shall one day appear before their
Lord, but I perceive that ye are ignorant. O People! who shall hinder God to
punish me, if I abuse True Believers? Will ye not consider it? I say not that I
possess the treasures of God, I know not what shall be; I say not that I am an
Angel, I say not to them whom you contemn, that God shall enrich them, God
knows what is in their Souls; should I maintain such discourse, I should have
great blame. They said, O Noah! we have a long time disputed together; if thou
art sincere, let us see the pains which thou preachest to us; God, said he,
when it shall please him, shall cause you to see them, you shall not escape
them, my instructions shall be to you unprofitable; if God will prove you, he
is your Lord, and you shall one day be assembled before him to be judged. Will
the unbelievers say, that thou have forged the Alcoran, and that it is of thine
invention? Say unto them, if I have invented it, sin will be upon me, and I am
innocent of your blasphemies. God inspired into Noah, that none should believe
in his words, but such as had already believed in him: He said unto him, Build
an Ark conformable to the inspiration that we have sent thee, but speak no more
to me of the unjust, they shall be drowned; the passengers derided him and his
Ark; he said to them, ye scoff at me, I will laugh at you, and we shall see
them that shall best understand; he whom God shall chastise, shall be covered
with shame, and perpetually tormented. When our will was to destroy that
People, and the light of the morning appeared, and the Water boiled in Noah's
Pot, we commanded him to charge his Ark with two Beasts of every kind and
Species; all creatures were destroyed, except those, of which we before made
mention, as well such as believed, as them that did not believe, and that but a
few: Noah said unto them, ascend the Ark in the name of God, who shall cause it
to swim, and to Anchor; the Lord is gracious and merciful toward us. When the
Ark began to float, like to a Mountain, Noah called to one of his Sons who
stayed on the Earth, and said, my Gelaldin says, that he was called Kinan.
Son, come up into the Ark with us, and remain not with the Infidels; he
answered, I will ascend an high Mountain, that shall save me from the Waters;
Noah said to him, none is able this day to deliver thee from the punishment of
God, if it be not through his mercy; The Waters being risen, he was in the
number of them that were drowned: God commanded the Earth to drink its Water,
and the Heavens to pour down no more Rain; the Water diminished upon the Earth,
after the People were drowned, and the Ark rested upon the Mountain called
Gioudy; thus were the unjust extirpated; Noah prayed to his Lord, and said,
Lord, my Son that remained in the Waters was of my Lineage, thou did promise
me to save my Family, thou do exactly perform thy promise, thou art true in
thy words, and most just in thine actions: O Noah! answered God, that Son is
not of thy Lineage, he has offended me, and disobeyed my Commandments, do not
enquire of me concerning that which thou ought not to know, otherwise thou
shall be in the number of the ignorant: Lord, said Noah, I will take heed,
through thine assistance, to enquire of thee what I ought not to know, if thou
have not pity on me. I shall be in the number of the miserable. God said, O
Noah! descend from the Ark with Salvation, and blessing upon thee, and upon a
part of them that are with thee; I will enrich the other part with the wealth
of this World, to punish them most severely at the day of Judgment. I teach
what shall be, what neither thou, nor thy people have not yet known; be patient
in thine afflictions, Paradise is for them that have my fear before their eyes.
We sent Hod to the People of Aad, his Brother; ye said unto them, O People!
adore but one God alone, otherwise ye shall be in the number of Infidels, I
require of you no recompense for the pains I take in preaching to you, he that
created me, shall reward me; will ye never be wise? implore pardon of God, be
converted, and obey his Divine will, he shall send you Rain from Heaven, and
shall increase your strength, and riches, be not in the number of the wicked;
they answered, O Hod! thou show us no reasons to prove thy sayings, thy
words shall not make us to quit our Gods, we give no credit to thy discourse,
and tell thee, that some one of our Gods shall severely chastise thee; He said,
take God and your selves to witness that I am innocent of the sin that you
commit, in adoring Idols; if you conspire against me, none shall be able to
protect you at the Day of Judgment, I recommend my self to the will of God,
mine and your Lord, he conserveth all the creatures of the Earth, and loves
them that follow the right way. I have discharged my duty and commission, I
have taught you what God commanded me, if you go astray, he shall establish
another people in your place, you do him no harm through your impiety, he
exactly observes whatsoever is done in the World. When we destroyed that
people, we by our especial grace delivered Hod from their malice, and all the
True Believers, that were with him, we delivered them from great affliction.
The people of Aad contemned the Commandments of God, and disobeyed his
Prophets, they followed the will of the obstinate, were cursed in this World,
and shall be acccursed at the Day of Judgment, because they disobeyed his
Divine Majesty, with design to extirpate the people of Hod, his Brother. We
sent Salhe to Temod, his Brother, and his people; he said to them, O people!
worship one God alone, he it is who has created you of the dust of the Earth,
and filled it with many sorts of Fruits, that you might inhabit it; beg pardon
of him, and be converted, he hearkeneth to his creatures, and hears their
prayers: they answered, O Salhe! it was hoped thou would have been our
Captain, before the prohibition was made, to adore the Gods of our Fathers, we
exceedingly doubt of what thou preachest; O People! said Salhe, know ye not
that God taught me what to you I preach, and that he has given me his grace?
who shall protect me if I disobey him? You can but augment my pain, should I
believe you. O People! this Camel, which God for you has created, shall be to
you a miracle, and instruction, suffer it to feed, and do it no harm, lest you
be suddenly chastised. They through contempt, wounded the The Turks believe
that Salhe changed a Rock into a Camel.
Camel. Then said he unto them, ye shall live in your Houses for the space of
three Days before ye be destroyed; what is foretold to you, is no Fiction: when
we destroyed them, we, through our especial grace saved Salhe, and the true
believers that were with him; thunder surprised those Infidels, and in the
Morning they were found in their Houses dead, extended as Carcasses: Thus did
Temod and his people contemn the Commandments of God, to their disadvantage.
Our Messengers that came to Abraham's House, declared to him the Birth of
Isaac, Jacob, and their Posterity; they mutually saluted, when they entered into
his House, he caused roasted flesh to be brought to them to eat, and perceiving
that they did not eat, contemned them in himself, and was terrified with their
coming; they said unto him, fear not, we are sent to Lot, to extirpate the
Inhabitants of his City; Abraham's Wife being present, began to laugh, when
they foretold the Birth of Isaac, Jacob, and their Posterity; she said, ah God!
shall I bear a Son, I, who am old, and have an Husband extremely aged? this
would be a Miracle; they answered, are ye astonished at the power of God? O ye
of the Family of Abraham! God has given you his Blessing, praise and glory are
due to him in all places. When Abraham was freed from his fear, and they having
announced the Birth of his Children, he disputed with them a long time,
touching the Inhabitants of the City of Lot; he was of a middle disposition,
and frequently repeated the Praises of God. The Messengers said unto him, O
Abraham! put an end to thy Questions, the hour is come, wherein God has
commanded to destroy them, they shall undergo inevitable torments. When they
arrived in Lot's House, he was grieved, in that he was not able to secure them
from the insolence of the people; he said, behold here a day extremely
difficult to pass; The Inhabitants of the City having knowledge of their
arrival, repaired to Lot's house to continue their filthiness: Lo^ said unto
them, O people! I have two Daughters, whom I will give you, fear God, trouble
me not, abuse not my Guests; is there none among you to show you your Error?
They answered, thou well know that we have nothing to do with thy Daughters,
thou know what we require; he said, were I of sufficient power, I would
dwell in a fortified place to avoid the assaults of your Malice: Then said the
Messengers of God unto him, O Lot! we are Angels sent from God, those Villains
shall not approach thee, go this Nigh^ out of the City with thy Family, none
shall look back but thy Wife; she shall feel the punishment prepared for the
wicked, they shall be punished early in the Morning; be gone speedily, the day
approaches; when we destroyed them, we turned the City upside down, and caused
it to rain upon them stones marked with fire, to confound them. Such
chastisement is not far from the Infidels (that are in Mecca.) We sent Chaib
into the Country See Kitab el tenoir, and Gelaldin.
of Madian, he said, O people! worship one God alone; weigh with good Weights,
and measure with good measure; detain nothing from your Neighbor, and defile
not the Earth, if ye believe in God, otherwise I fear you may be punished at
the Day of Judgment; the little that shall remain, shall bring you more of
content, than all that ye can purloin, in weighing with false Weights, and
measuring with false measure. I am not sent to be your Tutor, but only to
declare the word of God: they said, O Chiab, does thy Law enjoin us to abandon
the Gods of our Fathers, and hinder us to make of our Goods what shall seem
good to us? thou art not of an Humor good enough to be our Director. He said,
O people! see ye not that God has taught me what I preach? He has given me
wealth for subsistence; I contradict you in nothing but what is forbidden you,
I will do nothing but what is reasonable, and conform the most I shall be able
to Justice; my whole support is in God, I recommend my self to the Will of his
Divine Majesty, before which I must one day appear. O people! take heed lest ye
become Criminal, if ye forsake the Company of the righteous, and lest that
befall you, that happened to them who would not believe Noah, Hod, Salhe, and Lot;
the punishment of God is not far from you; beg pardon of him, and be converted,
he is merciful and amiable. They said, O Chaib! we understand not all that thou
say; we see thee amongst us without force and power; were thou not
accompanied, we would stone thee; thou shall have no Dominion over us. He said,
O people! esteem ye my Company, and fear ye it more than God? Have ye turned
the back toward him? He knows all your actions, live after your own manner,
I will live after mine, you shall hereafter know your Error; he whom God will
chastise, shall remain in perpetual misery, you shall soon understand who shall
be the Liar, you or I; expect the issue, I will expect with you: when we
commanded to destroy them, we (through our especial Grace) preserved Chaib, and
the true Believers that were with him; Thunder surprised those wicked ones, and
they in the Morning remained dead, extended as Carcasses in their Houses. Thus
were the Inhabitants of Madian chastised like the people of Temod. We sent
Moses to Pharaoh and his Doctors, with Miracles with Arguments and Reasons most
clear and intelligible; but those Doctors followed his Will, and obeyed his
Commandments, notwithstanding they were contrary to Reason; they shall follow
him at the Day of Judgment, as they followed him upon Earth; that day shall
they be accursed, and shall find none that shall be able to protect them: the
punishment of Mecca shall be like to that I relate to thee; there be of its
Inhabitants who subsist, and that do not subsist, and are no more; we have done
them no injustice, they have drawn mischief on themselves, and their Idols have
been of no use to them, but to augment their misery, when God has commanded to
destroy them: Thus has God surprised the Inhabitants of Mecca, he has
chastised them, because they were unjust; this shall serve for example to them
that fear the Day of Judgment; all Men shall there be gathered together, all
the World shall see it; I will retard it until the time appointed, that day
shall no Man speak without my permission; there be that shall be miserable, and
others who shall be happy; the miserable shall dwell in the fire of Hell, they
shall cry and complain so long as the Earth and the Heavens shall endure, and
so long as it shall please God, who does as seems good to himself. The happy
shall enjoy Paradise, where they shall abide eternally, so long as Earth and
Heaven shall endure, and so long as it shall please God. Dount not what the
Unbelievers worship, they adore but the Idols which their Fa^ worshipped;
assuredly I will chastise them as their Fathers were chastised. Moses preached
the Old Testament, yet did the wicked contradict his Precepts; had not God said
that he will not punish them, until the Day of Judgment, he had already
destroyed them, because they are in an exceeding great Error; thy Lord shall
reward every one according to his works, he knows all their Actions. Observe
exactly what has been commanded you, with them that are converted; transgress
not the Law of God, he beholds whatsoever you do. Incline not to the
affections of the unjust, lest the fire of Hell surprise you, and you be
deprived of protection. Pray to God Evening and Morning, and a part of the
Night; prayers blot out sins; it is the Doctrine of Preachers; be patient, and
persevere, God will not deprive the righteous of their reward: He prohibited
your Predecessors and their Posterity to defile the Earth; nevertheless there
were few among them that abstained; the unjust acted whatsoever pleased them,
and were guilty before God: He shall not destroy Mecca, if the Inhabitants
thereof obey his Commandments; and if it pleased him, the whole World should be
of one Religion; they to whom he gives his Grace, transgress not his Will, his
Word shall be accomplished, and Hell shall be filled with Devils, and the
wicked of all Nations. They have recounted to thee, and thou understandest,
whatsoever things are necessary for them, and what the Prophets have heretofore
taught; thi^e heart has been strengthened, they contain the truth, and they
shall be for a Lesson to true Believers. Say unto Infidels, do on your part as
ye shall understand, we will do on our part as we understand, and attend the
issue, we will attend it with you; whatsoever is in Heaven, and in Earth
appertains to God, all Men shall be assembled before him, worship him, resign
your selves to his Will, he knows whatsoever the people does.

CHAP. XII. The Chapter of Joseph, containing an hundred and thirteen Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. I am the merciful God. These signs
are the signs of the Book which distinguishes good from evil. We have caused
to descend from Heaven the Alcoran, written in the Arabic Tongue, peradventure
ye will learn it. I deliver unto thee in the Alcoran, one of the best things
that I have inspired into thee. Thou were before the coming thereof, in the
number of the ignorant. Remember thou, that Joseph said to his Father, My
Father, I saw in a Dream eleven Stars, the Sun, and the Moon, I saw them
adoring me. My Son, said his Father, discover not thy Dream to thy Brothers,
they will conspire against thee, the Devil is an open Enemy to Men, thou shall
be elected of the Lord in this World, he shall teach thee the explication of
Dreams, he shall accomplish his Grace upon thee, and upon the Lineage of Jacob,
as he did accomplish it upon thy Fathers, Abraham and Isaac; the Lord knows
all things, and is most wise. The History of Joseph shall serve for example to
Posterity; remember thou, how his Brothers said, our Father loves our Brother
Joseph more than all us together, he is in an exceeding great error, let us
kill Joseph, and cast him into some secret place remote from us, his absence
will render the Face of our Father more gentle toward us; after his death we
will be converted. One of them said, you shall not do well to kill him, but
cast him into the Well, some Passengers will take him, and carry him into an
unknown Country: They said to their Father; Father, wherefore do thou not
send Joseph into the Fields with us? we will be very careful, he shall sport
and recreate himself; I fear, said he, that ye will neglect to preserve him;
do thou fear (said they) that a Wolf should devour him in our Presence, and
that we want strength to defend him? In the Morning they led him with them, and
cast him into a Well. We inspired him to Prophecy to them what should befall
them for the mischief they acted, but they wanted knowledge to comprehend it;
they in the Evening returned to their Fathers house, with eyes full of
dissembled tears, and said unto him, Father, we sported, and ran who should run
the best, Joseph remained with our Baggage, a Wolf came that devoured him; thou will not believe us although we speak the truth; then they showed him his
Shirt, which they had sprinkled with Blood; it is you that has done it, said
he, you shall answer before God, he is my Protector, and was patient, without
lamenting. There past that day* The Levanti^s Well; a Caravan, a number of
Persons traveling together.
a Caravan near to that Well, who desiring to draw water to drink, let down a
Bucket, on which Joseph took hold to get out; they gave him Clothes, led him
away secretly, and sold him at a good rate for ready Money; they would not kill
him, in which they were honest Men. He that bought him in Egypt, commanded his
Wife to have care of him, that he might one day be useful for their Service,
and be to them instead of a Son. Thus did we establish Joseph in the Country
of Egypt, and taught him the exposition of Dreams, thy Lord is Omnipotent, but
few Men know him: when Joseph came to the Age of Manhood, we gave him knowledge
and prudence; thus do we reward the righteous. His Masters Wife became amorous
of his Beauty, she one day shut him into her Chamber, and solicited him with
love; God defend me (said he) to betray my Master, and be unchaste (he was in
the number of the righteous) and fled to the Door; his Mistress ran after him,
and to stay him, tore his Shirt through the back: She met her Husband behind
the Door, to whom she said, what other thing does he merit, who would dishonor
thine house, than to be imprisoned, and severely chastised? Lord, said Joseph,
she solicited me, that Infant which is in the Cradle, and of thy Parentage
shall be witness: Then the Infant in the Cradle said, if Ioseph's Shirt be torn
before, she has spoken truth, and Joseph is a Liar; if the Shirt be rent
behind, Joseph has delivered the truth, and she a liar: then her Husband
beheld Ioseph's Shirt torn behind, and knew that it was extreme malice, and
said to Joseph, take heed to thy self, and beware this act be not divulged, do
thou, speaking to his Wife, implore pardon for thy fault, thou art truly
guilty. The Women of the City said among themselves, that the rich Man's wife
was amorous of his Slave, and that she had solicited his love, and had erred
from the right way, which she understanding, made them an exceeding fair Feast,
and caused Joseph to enter the Parlour where they sat; while they carved their
meat, they were so surprised, and entangled with Joseph's beauty, that they
instead of carving their meat, cut their fingers. O God! said they, this is not
a Man, but an Angel; then said she unto them, behold him whom I loved with so
much Passion: she another time importuned him, to satisfy her desire, and
perceiving that he would not condescend to her Will, menaced him with the
Prison, and to make him miserable: O God! said Joseph, I had rather be a
Prisoner, than do what she desires, deliver me from her Malice, defend me from
inclining to her lubricity, and from being in the number of the wicked: his
Lord heard his Prayer, he understands and knows all things. This Woman
seeing Ioseph's resolution, judged it requisite to imprison him for some time;
he was put Prisoner with two Men, one of which told him that he had dreamed
that he pressed Grapes to make Wine; the other said, that he dreamed that he
carried Bread upon his head, which the Birds did eat, they demanded of him the
interpretation of their Dreams, because he seemed to them to be a good Man; he
said to them, before ye Breakfast, I will interpret your Dreams. I will first
tell you what God has taught me, and how I quit, and abandon the Law of
Infidels, and embrace the Law of our Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, we
ought not to worship many Gods; such as believe in the Unity of God, are endued
with his Grace, but few Men give him thanks. O Prisoners! who has more power,
Idols, or one sole God, who is Omnipotent? The Gods which ye adore are but
Idols, whom ye and your Fathers call by such a Name, as seems good to you, ye
have no reason to worship them; God does not enjoin you this, he commands you
to worship him alone; this is the right way, but the greatest part of the World
of this are ignorant. O Prisoners! the one of you shall give Wine to drink to
his Master, the other shall be hanged, the Birds shall feed on his head, the
interpretation that ye have required shall be accomplished. He besought him
that should be saved, to remember him when he should be near to his Master; but
the Devil caused him to lose the remembrance of Joseph, who remained Prisoner
the space of nine years: At that time the King of Egypt saw in a Dream seven
fat Kine, which seven lean Kine devoured; and seven green ears of Corn, with
seven dry ears, of which he required the interpretation of his Doctors; they
answered, that the Dream was very obscure, and that they knew not the
interpretation; the Prisoner that had been set at liberty, said, that he would
forthwith give the interpretation of the Dream, remembered Joseph, and calling
him unto him, said, O righteous Man! explain unto us what is the signification
of seven fat Kine, devoured by seven lean, and seven green ears of Corn, and as
many dry, peradventure I shall return to the King and his people, and they
shall understand the interpretation of this Dream. Joseph said to him, ye shall
sow the Earth seven years following, which shall abound in Fruits, preserve
your Harvest in the ears, and take only what shall be necessary for life; after
this, there shall come seven years barren, and unfruitful, in which the people
shall suffer much. The King of Egypt having learned the interpetation of this
Dream, commanded to call Joseph; the Messenger said unto him, O Joseph! return
to thy Master, and require of him the meaning of the Women who did cut their
fingers, he has knowledge of their Malice, has caused them to assemble, and
demanded of them what was their design, when they solicited thee with love;
they answered, they knew no sin in thee, and his Wife confessed the truth,
saying, she had importuned thee, but that thou art a very just Man. Joseph
answered, by this it appears that I am no Traitor to my Master in his absence,
God guides not Traitors; I will not say, I am a Man without sin, the Spirit of
Man inclines to evil, except such to whom God had given his particular Grace,
he is gracious and merciful to whom seems good to him. The King having talked
with Joseph, entered him into the number of his Domestics, and made him
super-intendent of his All the Revenues of the Crown.
revenues, because he knew him to be a Man of Spirit, faithful, and thrifty.
We, by our especial Grace, established Joseph in the Country of Egypt, where
he did what seemed good to him. I deprive not the righteous of their reward on
Earth, the recompense of the other World is yet greater for them that believe
in my Law, and have my fear before their eyes. The Brethren of Joseph returned
to buy Corn; he said to them, when ye shall come again, bring with you your
young Brother by the Father, you shall find I will make you good measure, and
lodge well my Guests; if you bring him not, there shall be no Corn for you,
approach not this Kingdom without him: They answered, Lord, his Father loves
him exceedingly, nevertheless we shall endeavor to perform what thou enjoynest
us; he commanded his Servants to put their money for Corn in the bottoms of his
Brethrens Sacks, perhaps, said he, they will return, or acknowledge this favor
when they shall come into their Country. When they arrived at their Father,
they said, Father, there is no more Corn for us, if our young Brother go not
with us, if he go thither, we shall have good measure, and we will be careful
of him. You will be careful, said he, as you were heretofore of your Brother
Joseph; God will defend him better than you, he is the merciful of the
merciful. When they poured forth their Corn, they found their Money at the
bottoms of their Sacks, and said, our Father, what shall we desire more, our
money is restored to us, and we have Bread for our Family, permit that our
Brother go with us, we shall have better measure, that is a small thing to the
King of Egypt; I will not send him with you unless ye all swear before God to
bring him back again, if there be no great impediment. They swore to fulfill his
Will; then said he, I take God to be witness of your Oath: O my Sons! enter not
all together into the City, but go in at several Gates, to the end the people
may not be jealous of you; God commands what to him seems good, I rely on
him, all true Believers ought to resign themselves to his Divine Will; they
entered the City as their Father enjoined them, to content him; being arrived
before Joseph, he took his little Brother by the hand, and said to him, trouble
not thy self for what shall become of thy Brethren; having filled their Sacks,
he caused a Cup adorned with precious stones to be put into the Sack of his
little Brother; caused it to be given out, that they of the Caravan had stolen
the Kings Cup; and sent Men after them to search; those strangers protested
they saw it not, and that they came not into Egypt to steal, that they were
Sureties for each other, and that he who had stolen it, deserved punishment. The
Cup was found in the Sack of his young Brother; he caused him to be
apprehended, and accused them all of Theft; Lord, said they, his Father is old,
he will be extremely afflicted for his absence, take one of us in his place,
thou shall in the end find us to be honest Men: God forbid, said he, that I
should detain other than him who was found guilty of Theft, that would be
injustice; finding themselves out of hope to free their Brother, they saved
themselves in a secret place remote from the City; where the eldest said to his
Brethren, you know the Oath we took at our departure, and how heretofore we
entreated Joseph, I will not go out of Egypt without my Fathers permission, God
is most just, he shall dispose of me and my Brother as shall please him, return
to your Father, and say unto him, thy Son was taken in Theft, we saw him, and
endeavored to our power to deliver him, they of the Caravan shall be
Witnesses. Jacob said at their return, they were the cause of that accident
that did not displease you; and he took patience, saying, God perhaps will
favor my Sons to return in health; he knows in what condition I am, he is
most prudent in what he ordains. He retired from among his Sons extremely
afflicted, and bewailed the loss of his Son Joseph; had his eyes continually
covered with tears, and he bore in his heart great sorrow. His Sons said unto
him, Do thou yet remember Joseph, to add to thy grief, and hasten thine end?
I am (said he) extremely desolate, I leave all to the Will of God; he has
taught me what ye know not. My Sons return into Egypt, and enquire tidings of
your two Brethren, despair not of the Spirit of God, none despair of Gods
Spirit, but the wicked. When they came unto Joseph, they said unto him, The
Famine that is in our Country, has extremely afflicted us, it has often
constrained us to come to buy Corn; thou, of thy favor, have made us good
measure; thou have caused our Money to be restored for Alms, God will reward
thee, he recompenceth such as are Almsgivers. He said unto them, Ye remember
what ye did unto your Brother Joseph: They replied, Certainly thou art not
Joseph. I am Joseph, said he, and behold my Brother Benjamin. God has given us
his Grace; he rewards him that has his fear before his eyes, and is patient
in his afflictions; he depriveth not the righteous of recompense. God, said
they, has poured his favors upon us in saving thee, whom we have exceedingly
offended. Be not (said he) ashamed, God this day pardons you that sin, he is
gracious and merciful; return to your Father, and bear to him this Shirt, cast
it upon his face, he shall recover sight, and return hither with him, and with
your whole Family. The Caravan was then half way upon return, when Jacob said
to them that attended him, I smell the odor of my Son Joseph; you deride me,
but what I speak is most true: They told him, that he was still in his old
Error; some days following, one of his Sons arrived with tidings of Joseph,
and cast the Shirt that he had given him, upon him; and incontinently he
recovered his sight, and said, Did I not always tell you, that I knew what ye
knew not; they said, Our Father pardon us, and ask the forgiveness of God for
us, who have exceedingly offended him: He answered, I will beg pardon of God
for you, he is gracious and merciful. When they arrived before Joseph, he took
his Father by the hand, saying, Enter without fear into Egypt, caused him to
sit down, and his Brethren fell prostrate before him. My Father, said he,
behold there the interpretation of mine old Dream, God has rendered it true, he
has favored me, in delivering me from Prison, and conducting you hither; he
has put an end to the jealousy which the Devil had procured between me and my
Brethren. The Lord is liberal to whom seems good to him; he knows what is
necessary for his people, and is most prudent in what he ordains. Lord, thou
have given me wealth, and knowledge to interpret Dreams. Creator of Heaven and
Earth, thou art my Protector, give me the Grace to die in thy Law, and place me
in the number of the righteous. This History He speaks to (...).
of Joseph, is an ancient History which I relate to thee. Thou were not with
his Brethren when they conspired against him; nevertheless, the greatest part
of the people are incredulous. Demand no reward of them for having preached the
Alcoran, it instructs only the wise. How many signs be there in Heaven and
Earth, of the Unity of God? yet the people believe not therein, and most of
them adore Idols; assuredly God shall punish them at an unexpected hour, and in
a time which they know not. Say unto them, Behold the right way, I call to the
way of Salvation and Light, such as follow me. I return thanks to God, for that
I am not in the number of Unbelievers. We sent aforetime none but Men to
instruct the people; will not Men consider what has been the end of the wicked
that were before them? Paradise is for them that are righteous; will ye not be
converted? They caused the Prophets to lose all hopes of their Conversion, and
believed them to be Liars; but we protected them, and delivered from their
Malice such as seemed good to us. Nothing shall exempt the wicked from the
punishment of their pains; they shall serve for example to Men of Spirit. The
Alcoran contains no blasphemies, it confirms the ancient Scriptures, and
teaches True believers the way of Salvation.

CHAP. XIII. The Chapter of Thunder, containing forty three Verses, See
G^laldin and Bedaoi.
written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful; I am the most wise and merciful
God. These Precepts are the Precepts of the Book sent to thee from thy Lord; it
is a thing most true, but few Men incline to believe it. It is sent from God,
who raised Heaven without a Prop, and with a Column, that appears, and
sits on his Throne, disposing all things. He causes the Sun and Moon to
move, until the day appointed; he disposes all things at his will, and
manifests to Men the signs of his Omnipotency. Peradventure you will believe
in the Resurrection of the flesh. He it is that has extended the Earth, raised
the Mountains, caused the Rivers to flow, who created of all sorts of Fruits,
the Male and Female, and covers the Day with the obscurity of the Night.
These things are signs of his unity to such as consider them. He has created
many Fields of diverse sorts, and Gardens filled with Grapes, and many different
Fruits; he created Date Trees, thick as Groves, and Forests, and others that
are scattered through the Fields; some are moistened with Waters, and others
have a more pleasing taste. These things are signs of his unity to such as
consider them. Thou art amazed at the lies of Infidels, be astonished at their
discourses; when they deny the Resurrection, and say, What, shall God yet once
again create us of the dust of the Earth? When we shall be Earth, shall we be a
new people? They are impious, they shall have Oaks upon their Necks, and shall
remain eternally in the fire of Hell; they precipitate themselves into eternal
pains, and contemn the mercy of God, so did their predecessors; but God is
gracious to such as convert. Chastise severely the obstinate Infidels. They
have said, We will not believe in the Prophet, unless we see some miracle to
appear. Say unto them, I am not sent but to preach the word of God. He has
sent persons to every Nation, to teach them the right way; nothing is hid from
him in the World; he knows what Women bear in their Womb; he knows the time
and period of every thing, the present, past, and future; he is great and
Omnipotent. He understands what you keep secret, and what ye make manifest;
he knows where they be who cover themselves with the obscurity of Night, and
them that travel in the clearness of Day; every one has his guardian by his
commandment, who observes what he does, and depriveth none of grace, that has
not offended his Divine Majesty, and none can hinder him to punish whom it
seems good to him. He it is, who gives you to see the lightning which
terrifieth Men, and nourishes his Creatures by the Rain which he causes to
fall; he created the Clouds charged with moisture, causes Thunder to make a
noise, darteth the Thunderbolt, and strikes whom it pleases him; the Angels
tremble in his Presence, yet do the wicked dispute his Omnipotency. He it is
who ought to be implored; the prayers of them who implore another God are
ineffectual, they are like to such as are very thirsty, and stretch forth the
hand toward a Fountain, to which they cannot reach; the prayers of the wicked
are impiety: Whatsoever is in Heaven and in the Earth, the shadow of the
Morning, the obscurity of the Evening humble themselves before God, through
force or affection. Say unto them, Who is the Lord of Heaven and Earth, but
God? Who, except God shall protect you? your Idols can neither benefit, nor
hurt you: Is the blind like unto him that sees clearly? Is darkness like unto
light? Shall they adore the Creatures instead of the Creator? God has created
all things, and is Omnipotent; he causes Rain to descend from Heaven, and
Rivers covered with Foam, to flow in the Valleys. The Gold, the Silver, and
Metals which ye melt to adorn and enrich your selves, are like unto Froth. Thus
does God teach what is profitable, and what unprofitable; Froth suddenly
vanishes, and is of no utility to Men: So falsehood vanishes before Truth.
Thus does God speak through a Parable, to them that obey him, and gives them
Paradise. All the riches of the Earth, and as much again, cannot ransom the
Infidels, they shall be eternally tormented in the fire of Hell. Who knows,
that the truth contained in this Book, was not sent to thee from God? He that
doubts is blind; Men of Spirit do not doubt. They who satisfy what they
promise to God, who transgress not his Commandments, who have his fear before
their eyes, who apprehend the Day of Judgment, who are patient in their
afflictions for love of his Divine Majesty, who make their prayers at the time
appointed, who give alms privately and publicly, and blot out their offenses
with good works, shall be blessed. They shall enter into the Garden of Eden
with their Father, their Wives, and Families; the Angels shall visit them,
shall salute them, and say, Behold the recompense of your perseverance, behold
eternal grace. Such as shall swerve from their promise, and disobey the
Commandments of God, and pollute the Earth, shall be accursed of God, and
severely chastised; he gives, and depriveth of wealth, as seems good to him.
The unbelievers rejoice in the riches of the Earth; but those riches are of
little value, if they consider them of the other World. They say, If Mahomet
does not make some miracle to appear from God, we will not believe him. Say
unto them, God guides, and mis-leadeth whom it pleases him; he confirms the
hearts of them that have faith in his Law; the remembrance of God confirms
the hearts of True Believers: Such as shall do good works, shall be happy. We
have sent thee, as we did send other Prophets, to them that preceded thee.
Teach the people what we have inspired into thee: When they shall disobey thee,
say unto them, God is my Lord, there is but one God alone, I am wholly resigned
to his Divine Will; my refuge is in his goodness. If the Alcoran should make
Mountains to go, should it cause the Earth to open, and the Dead to arise, all
would proceed from God. True Believers ought not to despair of any thing, God
shall guide all the World into the right way when it shall please him; and
unbelievers shall not escape the punishment of their crimes. Thou shall dwell
with them until the word of God be fulfilled: He swerveth not from what he
promises; they derided the Prophets that came before thee, I prolonged the
time of their punishment, and in the end rigorously chastised them; and with
what afflictions? Does not God behold the actions of every Man? They have said,
God has Companions, to whom they have given names after their fancy; will you
instruct God in any thing? The wicked take delight in their wickedness, and are
gone astray from the right way. He whom God shall mis-lead, shall find none to
guide him, he shall be afflicted in this World, and yet more in the other. None
shall be able to save him, but God; Paradise is promised to them that have his
fear before their eyes; they shall enjoy eternally all manner of content, such
is the end of the righteous; and Hell is prepared for Infidels. They, to whom
we have given the knowledge of Scriptures, rejoice in the Doctrine which we
have sent thee; there be that abjure one part; say unto them, I recommend unto
you only the worship of one sole God, who is the assured refuge of the
righteous. We have sent the Alcoran in the Arabic tongue, to the end the
Arabians may comprehend it: If thou do follow the will of unbelievers, having
had the knowledge of the unity of God, who shall be able to save or protect
thee? We sent Prophets before thee, commanded them to marry, and they had
Children. Prophets cannot perform miracles without the permission of God, and
the end of every thing is written in his Book; he blotteth out, and leaves
permanent what seems good to him, he cannot alter. I perceive that some of
the wicked have a design to murder thee; thou art obliged only to preach to
them, I will keep an account of their sins to punish them. See they not that
their Countries and possessions diminish daily through thy Conquests? God
commands what pleases him, no Man can escape his judgments, he is most exact
in his account: their predecessors used subtilties as they, but God is more
subtle than they; he well knows the good and evil which every one does: they
shall one day understand who must have Paradise. They say thou art no Prophet,
say unto them, It is sufficient that God is witness of the truth between you
and me; who is he that knows what is written in the Book of his Divine
Majesty?

CHAP. XIV. The Chapter of Abraham, containing fifty Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful; I am the merciful God. That Book!
We have sent it to thee to bring the People out of darkness, to guide them to
the light, and the way of thy Lord, always victorious and glorious; Whatsoever
is in Heaven, and in Earth, is Gods; misery is upon unbelievers, they shall
undergo at the end of the World exceeding great torments. They who prefer the
wealth of this World to that of Heaven, who go astray from the way of the Law,
and would pervert it, are in a great error, far from truth; The Prophets spoke
the language of them to whom they were sent to instruct them, God guides and
mis-leadeth whom to him seems good, he is Omnipotent and prudent. We sent
Moses with prodigies, to bring the Children of Israel out of darkness, and to
conduct them to light, he taught them the Commandments of the Law, to serve for
instruction to such as shall persevere to do well, and shall not be ungrateful
for the favors they have received. Moses spoke to his people, and said,
Remember the grace of God toward you, he delivered you from the Men of
Pharaoh, who caused you to suffer great afflictions, who murdered your
Children, abused your Wives, and laid upon you great evils (sent from God,
because of your sins.) The Lord has said, if ye be not ungrateful, I will
augment my graces upon you; if ye be impious, you shall be afflicted. Moses
said to his people; if you and all Men be impious, know, that God will be
always glorious, and has no need of you. Know ye not what befell (before you)
the people of Noah, Aad, Temod, and their Posterity, that none had knowledge of
but God, because of their great number? He sent them his Commandments by his
Prophets, they bit their fingers for anger, and said unto them, we renounce,
and condemn your Doctrine: The Prophets said unto them, is there any doubt in
the belief of the unity of God, Creator of Heaven, and Earth? he calls you to
remit your sins, and deferreth your punishment until the day appointed: They
answered, Ye are Men like unto us, will you hinder us to adore the Gods of our
Fathers? Produce arguments of strength sufficient to prove what you preach; the
Prophet replied, We are Men as you are, but God gives his grace to whom
seems good to him; we are come to you through his permission, the true
believers ought to trust in him; wherefore should we not be resigned to the
will of God, who has guided us into the right way? we will continue in
well-doing, the righteous trust in his Divine Majesty. Then said the Infidels
unto them, we will banish you from our Country, if you be not of our Religion;
but God inspired into them, that the Infidels should perish, and that they
should inhabit the Land after them; that he would protect such as should have
his fear before their eyes, and fear the pains that are prepared for the
wicked. The Prophets were protected of God, and the obstinate wicked were
destroyed: they shall be precipitated into Hell, and drink of Water full of
Corruption, Urine and Blood; Death shall appear on all sides before their eyes,
before they have swallowed that Drink; they shall not dye in that misery, they
shall suffer yet greater pains. The good works which the wicked have done, are
like to Dust carried away by an impetuous Wind, they shall be unprofitable to
them, and they shall be extirpated, because they depart from the truth: See
they not that God has created Heaven and Earth? that he can destroy them, and
create in their place a new people, if it seem good to him? This is not
difficult to God, all things are known to him. The more impotent of them that
have followed the wicked, shall say at the Day of Judgment, we obeyed you, will
you this day deliver us from the punishment of God? They shall answer, had God
guided us into the right way, we had conducted you thither, we are alike
miserable with you, we cry and lament in our misery, but find neither refuge
nor protection. The Devil shall say unto them, what God has promised to you is
infallible, I foretold it to you, I caused you to transgress his Commandments
through my temptations; I had none other power over you, but to tempt you, you
did me no harm when ye hearkened to me, you drew mischief on your selves, I am
not your Tutor, neither are you mine, I was impious, when heretofore I suffered
you to adore me; Hell is prepared for you, and for all unbelievers, there shall
they endure great torments, and the righteous shall enter into Paradise,
wherein flow many Rivers, where they shall dwell eternally, with all manner of
blessedness and content; See thou not how God speaks by a Parable? A good
word is like to a good Tree that has taken Root in the Earth, and has raised
its Branches to Heaven, and produces its Fruit in due time, through the
permission of his Divine Majesty; he teaches the people his Parables, perhaps
they will be mindful: An evil word is like to a bad Tree, that has been torn
from the Earth, there is nothing to sustain it, and it is without Root, or
Fruit: God fortifieth the true believers through his word in this World, and in
the other, and causes the unjust to err, he does what to him seems good:
See thou not them that have changed his grace into impiety, and have made
such as have followed them to dwell in the House of perdition? They shall abide
eternally in the fire of Hell. They say, that God has a Companion equal to
him, and err from the way of his Law; Say unto them, ye shall have wealth in
this World, but Hell is your Rendezvous. Say to the true believers, who make
their prayers at the time appointed, and give alms in private, or public, that
the day shall come wherein they shall neither buy nor sell, and where every one
shall be recompensed for his works. Say unto them, God has created the Earth,
and the Heavens, he makes the Rain to descend from Heaven, which causes to
spring sorth all sorts of Fruits to enrich you, he created the Ship, that
through his permission saileth on the Sea, he created the Rivers, the Sun and
the Moon, which move continually, he created the Day and the Night, and
bestows on you whatsoever ye desire, his favors toward you can neither be
numbered, nor recounted, nevertheless the inhabitants of Mecca are always
impious and wicked; Abraham said, Lord protect this City, and make it to be the
refuge of the World; Keep me and my Children from the worship of Idols, they
have seduced a part of the People; he that shall follow me, and profess thy
unity, shall be mine; if any one disobey me, thou art gracious and merciful:
Lord, one part of my Lineage inhabiteth Mecca, in a place unfruitful, give them
the grace to persevere in thy service, incline the hearts of Men to affect
them, enrich them with the Fruits of the Earth, peradventure they will thank
thee; thou know whatsoever is in the World, I know it not; nothing that is
in Heaven, or in Earth is hid from thee; praised be God, who has given me
Ismael and Isaac in mine old age, he hears prayers when it pleases him;
Lord, give me and my Posterity the grace to persevere in well doing, hear my
prayers, pardon me, and pardon my Father, and all true believers at the Day of
Judgment. Think not that God is ignorant of the actions of Infidels, he
deferreth the punishment of their crimes until the day that all Men shall have
their eyes opened: that day shall they behold their sins before their eyes, and
their hearts shall be full of desolation; If thou preachest to the people the
Day of Judgment, has God (will the wicked say) preserved us to this present
time, to do what thou do appoint us? Say unto them, have ye not sworn
heretofore, that there is no Resurrection? Ye have dwelt with the unjust, ye
have seen how they have been chastised, and how we have spoken to you in
Parables. Certainly they conspire, but God knows their conspiracy, their
policy is to tempt the prophet, to see if he will make the Mountains to move.
Think not that God will violate what he has promised to the Prophets, he is
Omnipotent, and avengeful. Consider the day wherein the Earth and Heavens shall
change their face, and all people shall rise again; that Day shall one sole God
Omnipotent command Men to come out of their Monuments; Thou shall that day see
the wicked bound in their Chains, their Garments shall be full of Pitch, and
Guitran, their Faces shall be covered with Fire, that Day shall he recompense
and chastise every one according to his works, he is exact to keep account;
This Book was sent to instruct the People, and teach them that there is but one
God; the wise will remember.

CHAP. XV. The Chapter of Hegir, containing seventy and seven Verses, written
at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Hegir is a Va^ly ^ear (...) a. See
Kitab el tenoir.
I am the merciful God. The signs are the signs of the Alcoran, which
distinguish eth good from evil. How may the Infidels hope what the True
Believers hope for? depart from them, let them eat the substance of the poor,
let them become rich, and content themselves in their hopes, they shall see one
day what their end shall be; We have destroyed no City until the time destined
to its ruin was expired, there is no Nation that can advance or retard its
destiny. The wicked have said, O Man! who believe that the Alcoran was sent
to thee, we will affirm that thou art a Sorcerer, until the Angels do assure us
that thou art true: The Angels shall not descend to the Earth, unless to
chastise them, and they shall not be able to retard the time of their
punishment; we certainly have sent the Alcoran upon Earth, and will preserve it
without alteration; we heretofore sent Prophets one after another, the wicked
scorned and contemned them; thus I imprint impiety in the hearts of the wicked,
they shall not believe in the Prophet, and shall incur the punishment of their
predecessors: should we open the entrance of Heaven, and should they behold the
Angels go in, and go out at the shadow of the gate, they would yet say, their
eyes were enchanted, and that they were bewitched; we created signs in Heaven,
and adorned them with Stars, to content the minds of them that consider them;
we sheltered them from the assaults of the Devil, but the Butterfly follows
every thing that shines, and believes it to be a Star; we extended the Earth,
and raised the Mountains with proportion; we have made it to produce all sorts
of Fruits to sustain and enrich you; we have reserved in our power the Keys of
the treasures thereof, to distribute to them by measure what shall be
necessary, we caused a fresh wind to arise, and sent Rain to water them; it is
not you that caused the fruits thereof to spring forth; it is we who give life
and death, and dispose of all things in the World. We know who they were that
did precede you, and who they shall be that shall succeed you; I will assemble
all at the end of the World to be judged; we created Man of the slime of the
Earth, and before him the Devil, of fire, without smoke. Remember thou, that
God said to his Angels, I will create Man of the slime of the Earth, I will
breath upon him, to give him life; prostrate your selves before him; the Angels
adored him, except the Devil; God said unto him, Wherefore do thou not adore
Man? He replied, I will not adore him, thou have created me of fire, and him of
the mire of the Earth: He said, get thee out of Paradise, thou shall be
banished, and accursed until the Day of Judgment. Lord, said the Devil, lay,
not thy curse upon me until the Day of Judgment; he said, thou shall be
accursed until the Day nominated; Lord, said the Devil, I will tempt all the
Creatures, because thou have tempted me; I will cause them to disobey thy
Commandments, except such as shall trust in thee, and recommend themselves to
thy Divine Will. God said, this is the right way, thou have no power over the
righteous who follow my Law, but only over the Infidels, for whom Hell is
prepared. Hell has seven Gates and every Gate has its particular work; the
righteous shall dwell in Gardens, adorned with fair Fountains, we will free
them from all rancour; they shall repose upon Beds like Brethren, with respect,
and affection, and shall be in eternal felicity. Declare to them that worship
me, that I am gracious and merciful, and my chastisements are severe and
rigorous. Preach unto them the History of the Guests of Abraham, they saluted
him when they entered his House; Abraham was terrified at their coming: they
said to him, fear not us, we are the Messengers of God; we declare to thee that
thou shall have a Son, who shall be a great personage: Do you tell me (said he)
that I shall have a Son in my old age? why speak ye in that manner? We tell
thee the truth, despair not of the grace of God, none but the wicked despair: O
Messengers of God! (said Abraham) what do ye require? We are sent to destroy
the Infidels, and to preserve the whole Family of Lot, except his Wife, she
shall remain with them that shall be punished. When these Messengers came to
Lot's House, he told them, he knew them not; they said to him, we are come to
thee, to clear this people of their doubt of God's Omnipotency; what we speak
unto thee is most true; cause thy Family this night to go out of the City, and
follow their steps, that none among you look behind him, and go whither you
shall be commanded; the wicked shall in the morning be destroyed. The
Inhabitants of the City came to Lot's House to see those strangers; Lot said
unto them, I beseech you defile not your selves, with my Guests, fear God, and
dishonor not your selves, behold my Daughters, take them; They said, We do not
hinder thee to lodge thy Guests, and remained confounded in their drunkenness.
In the morning Thunder surprised them, we overthrew the City upside down, and
caused it to rain Stones with Fire, that utterly destroyed it. This shall serve
for example to Passengers that shall see those Ruins, and for a mark of the
Omnipotency of God, to them that shall believe in his Divine Majesty. They that
inhabited the Wood near to Medina were impious, but we avenged us on them, they
served for example to posterity, as did the People of the City of Lot. They
that dwell in the Valley of Hegir, have defamed the Prophets; we gave them to
see our Miracles, and taught them our Commandments, they contemned them, but
they reposed in the morning in their Houses built upon the Mountains, and in
their Fortresses; when Thunder surprised them, their treasures did not save
them, and they were all destroyed. We created the Heavens and the Earth to be
signs of the Truth, and of our Unity: The hour of Judgment approaches; That
is, the Preface of the Alcoran, containing seven Verses.
absent thy self from thy People with mildness, thy Lord who created all
things, knows all. We taught thee seven signs, and the most precious Alcoran.
Tarry not to consider the diverse sorts of riches which the wicked possess;
afflict not thy self, if they persist in their impiety; Say unto them, I preach
none other thing, but the Word of God, and the pains of Hell. We will chastise
the wicked, as we chastised them that divided the Alcoran, who approved one
part, and rejected the other. I am thy Lord, I will require of them an account
of their actions, preach what has been commanded thee, and depart from
Infidels, we will preserve thee from them that shall scorn thee, as likewise
from such as adore Idols; I know that thou will be grieved at their discourse,
but praise and adore the Lord until Death.

CHAP. XVI. The Chapter of the Be, containing an hundred and eight Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. See Gelaldin.
The chastisement of God is not far remote; desire it not before its time;
praised be God, he has no Companion, he causes the Angels to descend, and
sends his inspirations to whom it pleases him; preach his power, and the
pains of Hell to unbelievers; there is no God but he, fear him, he created the
Earth and the Heavens, he is more powerful than your Idols, and created Man of
the Mire of the Earth, nevertheless he is obstinate in his pride; he created
clean Beasts for your use, you draw (from them) great emolument, and advantage,
to cloth and nourish your selves, ye see their beauty when they feed; and when
they lead them to pasture, they bear the burden, and whatsoever ye will send
into Cities, what ye cannot carry without them, but with exceeding great
travel; God is gracious and merciful toward you; he created Horses, and Mules,
and Asses to bear you; he created many glorious things, of which you have not
knowledge. He teaches them the right way, who observe his Commandments; had it
pleased him, he had guided all into the way of his Law. He sends you water
from Heaven to take away thirst, and causes plants to bring forth, and Trees
that nourish your flocks; he makes the Olive Trees to produce, the Date Trees,
Vines, and all sorts of Fruits. These things are Arguments of his Unity, to
such as consider them; he created the Night, the Day, the Sun, the Moon and the
Stars, that move at his Pleasure, these things are signs of his Omnipotency to
them that are wise; He created whatsoever is on Earth of diverse Colors, kind,
and Species; he created the Sea, which affords you Fish, Pearls, and other
precious stones to adorn you; thou see how the Ships sail upon the Waters,
and divide the Waves for the advantage of Commerce, peradventure you will give
God thanks for his Favors. He raised the mountains to make firm the Earth, and
to hinder it to move, he created the Rivers, and established ways to guide you;
he made the Stars to conduct you by Night upon the Sea, and the mountains to
direct you in your way by Day: who but he could have created what he has made?
will you never consider it? It is not in your power to keep account of his
Mercies, he is altogether gracious and merciful, and knows the secret of your
Souls: the Idols that ye adore can create nothing, but are things dead, without
motion, and know not in what time the World shall rise again; your God is one
sole God; such as believe not the end of the World, such as deny his Unity, and
boast of their false belief, are abhorred of his Divine Majesty; when they are
interrogated concerning what God has inspired into Mahomet; they answered,
that he preaches Fables of Antiquity, but they shall bear their Burden at the
Day of Judgment, who have seduced them from the right way, and have not known
it. They that were before them were deceivers, God overthrew their Habitations,
the Ruins fell upon them, and he chastised them, when they least thought of it;
he shall make them ashamed at the Day of Judgment, and shall demand of them,
where be the Idols for which they disputed against true Believers? Such as have
knowledge of Gods Commandments, assure that shame shall be upon the Foreheads
of Infidels, and that the Angels shall cause them to die, because of the
enormity of their sins; They will say at the hour of death, that they believe
in God, and are penitent for their faults: God knows what they have done; he
shall command them to enter into Hell, where is the abode of the proud: He
shall command them who have his fear before their eyes to enter the house of
Eternity, and the Gardens of Eden, wherein flow many Rivers, there shall they
dwell eternally with the height of their desire. Shall the wicked continue in
their sin, until the Angels cause them to die, or until the Day of Judgment?
Thus did their Predecessors. God was not unjust toward them, they drew
mischief on themselves through their iniquity; they were chastised and felt the
punishment which they had despised; they have said, had it so pleased God, our
Fathers and we had adored him alone; so spoke their Predecessors. The Prophets
are not obliged, but to preach and instruct the people. We sent a Prophet to
every Nation, to instruct it, and to command the worship of one sole God, and
to quit the Adoration of Tagot, and of Idols; God guided some into the right
way, and others were seduced; consider what is the end of the wicked; if thou
endeavourest to put them into the right path, thou shall lose thy time, God
guides not them that desire to err, they shall be deprived of Protection at
the Day of Judgment: they have sworn by their Faith, that God will not make the
dead to rise again, but he shall cause them to rise again, to chastise them
according to his Promises; but the greatest part of Men do not know it, did
they know it, they would acknowledge their Errors, and the impious would
acknowledge their blasphemies. When we willed any thing, we said, be thou, and
it was: They that depart from the wicked for the love of their Lord, and shall
convert themselves, shall be rewarded in this World, and yet more in the other,
had they knowledge to understand it. Such as patiently endure the injuries of
Unbelievers, and trust in their Lord, shall be recompensed when they least
think of it. We heretofore sent but Men to preach our Law; ask of them that
have knowledge of the written Law, if it be not true? We have sent to them the
Alcoran; The Jews and Christians.
to the end thou may instruct Men in our Commandments, peradventure they will
consider it. The Earth shall produce nothing to them, that shall conspire
against the Prophet, they shall be chastised when they least think of it; God
shall afflict them in their commerce, they shall not escape his punishment, and
their substance shall diminish by little and little before their eyes; God is
gracious and merciful to them only that honor him: See they not the shadow of
that which God has created, sometimes at the right hand, sometimes at the
left, to adore his Divine Majesty, they certainly are contemptible; whatsoever
is on the Earth, and in the Heavens, Beast, and Angels, worship God with
Humility, fear their Lord, and obey his Commandments. God has commanded them
to worship and to fear one God alone, to whom obedience is due eternally; whom
will ye fear but God? who but God shall protect you? when evil befalls you,
you have recourse to his Divine goodness; being delivered, some of you give him
thanks, and yet believe not in his Law: You seek only the riches of the Earth,
but you shall see what shall be your end; they say, that their wealth
proceeds from their Idols: by God! an account of their blasphemies shall be
required of them; they affirm that God has Daughters; assuredly they deceive
themselves, and are not well satisfied, when it is said to them, that a
Daughter is born to them; they fly such as declare to them the punishment of
their sins, God shall leave them in ignominy, and they shall be contemned as
the Earth which they trample under their Feet; because they believe not in the
Day of Judgment, misery shall perpetually pursue them; God shall command for
ever, and be eternally powerful and Victorious. Should God chastise Men when
they offend, he should leave no living Creature upon the Earth, he deferreth
their punishment until the time appointed, they can neither advance nor retard
it; they affirm God to have that which themselves are not satisfied to have;
they lie, when they say that Paradise is for them, doubtless they are
erroneous, and shall be precipitated into the fire of Hell. By God! we have
sent heretofore Prophets to the people, the Devil seduced Men, and was Master
of the wicked in this World, but in the other they shall resent great torments:
We have sent thee the Alcoran, to clear to Men the doubts touching Religion,
and to guide true Believers into the right way. God sends rain from Heaven to
refresh the Earth, this is an evident sign of his Omnipotency, to them that
hear his word; ye have yet a token of his Omnipotency in the Beasts that give
you Milk, to nourish you, and another mark in the Fruits of the Earth, in the
Fruits of Date Trees, and the Vines, from which you extract Wine, and receive
profit. These things are signs of his Omnipotency, to such as comprehend them.
The Lord inspired the Be to dwell in the Fields, to lodge in Trees, in Hives,
and to eat of all sorts of Fruits, it produces Honey of diverse colors, that
serves for a remedy to the diseases of Men; these things are signs of Gods
Omnipotency to them that consider them. God has created you, and shall cause
you to dye; There be Persons among you that shall be full of ignominy in their
life, to the end they may understand that God is Omnipotent, conferreth
benefits on some more than on others: Slaves have no part in the faculties of
their Masters, neither are they associate with them, (nevertheless they
associate to God another God equal to him, and blaspheme against his Grace.)
God has created you Men, and Women, and has given you Children, and Children
to your Children, he has enriched you with the riches of the Earth; Will you
after this Grace believe in your Idols, which are things inanimate, vain, and
unprofitable? Will ye be ungrateful for the benefits of God? Will ye worship
what can neither benefit nor hurt you? Believe not that there is another God
Companion and associate with God? He knows what ye know not, he teaches you
a Parable: A Slave that is poor cannot give Alms, and he who is rich gives
Alms secretly and publicly, as he sees good; are they both alike? Ought they
to be put in Parallel? Praise be to God: Certainly, the greatest part of Men
know not his Graces, he teaches you a Parable! Behold! two Men; the one was
born deaf, and dumb, and given in charge to his Guardian, he knows not how to
employ him, he is capable neither of doing, nor speaking well, is he like to
him that speaks, that understands, teaches Men Justice, and follows the
right way? Whatsoever is in Heaven, or on Earth appertains to God, when he
commands any thing, it is performed in the twinkling of an eye, yea sooner,
he is Omnipotent: He it is that causes you to come out of the Womb of your
Mother, that gives you hearing, sight, and sense, perhaps ye will return him
thanks; See ye not the Birds that fly in the Air; who sustaineth them but God?
It is an evident sign of his Omnipotency for the true Believers, he has given
you Houses to inhabit, and the Skins and Furrs of Beasts to cover you, he has
given you their Hair, and Wool, to furnish your Houses, and enrich you; he
created Trees and Clouds to ove^shadow you, made the Mountains and Caves to
cover you from rain, created Garments to defend you from the heat of the Sun,
and the rigor of Cold, he has accomplished his Grace upon you, peradventure
you will resign your selves to the Will of his Divine Majesty, and possess his
Unity. If the Unbelievers depart from the way of the Law, thou art obliged only
to preach to them intelligibly; they know the Grace of God, and contemn it, for
that the greatest part of them are impious; preach unto them the Day, wherein I
will raise again all the Nations of the World, and the Prophets and Apostles
who have preached to them my Commandments, there shall be no excuse for
Infidels, neither shall they find protection, or relaxation of their Miseries:
When they shall behold their Idols, they shall confess that they were misled,
they shall understand the Unity of thy Lord, and that their Idols are not able
to intercede for them. God has added to the punishment of Infidels, has sent
them evil upon evil, because they hinder the World to follow his Law: Preach
unto them the Day, wherein I will cause to rise again all the Nations of the
World, with the Prophet who p^hed to them, to be Witness of their Actions; I
will be Witness against them of thy Nation; I have sent thee the Book that
unfoldeth the Mysteries of my Law, to guide the people into the right way, and
to declare the Joys of Paradise to such as profess my Unity. God commands you
to do only that which is reasonable, he commands you to give Alms, and to do
good to your Parents, he forbids Whoredom, disobedience, and injustice,
enjoyneth you to do good, perhaps you will consider it. Perform what ye have
Promised to God, break not promised Faith, ye call God to be Witness of your
Promises, he knows all your Actions. Do not like the Woman who spun a Thread,
folded it, and afterward entangled and spoiled it, believe not that there is
deceit and error in your Law; If the Unbelievers be more in number than you,
God permits it, to prove you; he shall clear to you at the Day of Judgment
the doubts that be among you; had it so pleased him, you all had observed one
and the same Law; he guides, mis-leadeth whom it pleases him, and will
exactly require of you an account of your Actions. Believe not that there is
deceit in your Law, take heed of stumbling; having once confirmed your steps,
ye shall be severely chastised, if ye seduce the people from the right way; do
not violate what ye have promised to God, for any price, his Grace is of more
advantage to you than the wealth of the Earth, had ye knowledge to understand
it; your wealth is perishable, and the riches of Heaven are eternal; he shall
recompense them that persevere in well-doing, and whosoever shall do good
works, shall be blessed in this World, and in the other. When thou shall read
the Alcoran, implore God to deliver thee from the Malice of the Devil,
abominable to all the Creatures, he has no power over them that trust in his
Divine Majesty, his power extends over such as go astray, who obey not him,
and adore many Gods. When we alter any Precepts (God well knows what he
ordains) they say thou art a Liar, but the greatest part of them are
ignorant; Say unto them, that assuredly the Holy Ghost has taught it from thy
Lord, to confirm Believers in their Faith, and to guide into the right way them
that profess his Unity, and to announce to them the Joys of Paradise. I know,
that they will say that a Man has taught him the Alcoran. He whom they presume
to have taught him, is a Persian by Nation, and speaks the Language of the
Persians, and the Alcoran is in the Arabic Tongue, full of instruction and
eloquence. They who will not believe in God, shall suffer great torments; such
as renounce his Commandments, blaspheme against his Divine Majesty; those that
reject his Law, after having professed it, shall feel the effect of his wrath,
and be punished for preferring the wealth of the Earth to the riches of Heaven;
God guides not unbelievers. They in whose hearts he has imprinted
disobedience, those whom he has deprived of hearing, and sight, are ignorant,
they doubtless shall be at the end of the World in the number of the damned; he
is merciful to them that convert, and repent to have mislead the People from
the right way, and persevere in obedience to his Commandments. Be thou mindful
of the day, wherein man shall dispute against himself, and every one shall be
rewarded according to his works without injustice. God teaches you a Parable;
behold a free and privileged City, on the which God pours his graces on all
sides with abundance, and is ungrateful for his benefits; but he sent upon it
misery, famine, and fear, because of its ingratitude. God has sent to the
Inhabitants thereof a Prophet of their Nation, they have standered him, and
were chastised, because of their sin. Eat of what God has given you, and give
him thanks for his grace; if it be he whom ye worship, he forbideth you to eat
of Carrion, of Blood, and Swinesflesh, and whatsoever is not slain in
pronouncing the Name of God; he will be gracious and merciful to them who shall
eat through necessity, without design to offend him. Lie not, in saying, Behold
that which is permitted to be eaten! blaspheme not against God; such as
blaspheme against him, shall not prosper in this World, and in the other shall
suffer grievous torments. We did heretofore prohibit the Jews to eat of what we
have recounted to thee; we did to them no injustice, they drew mischief on
themselves through their sin; thy Lord is gracious and merciful to them that
ignorantly offend him, who convert, and do good works. Abraham was obedient to
God, and professed his unity, he adored (...) Idols, and gave thanks to God for
his (...); God elected, and guided him into the right way, he gave him wealth
in this World, and placed him in the other, in the number of the blessed. We
have inspired thee to follow the Law of Abraham, he professed the Unity of God,
and adored not Idols, he established the Sabbath among the Jews, of which they
dispute; God shall judge their difference at the Day of Judgment. Call the
People to the Law of God with prudence, and preachings, and dispute against
them with good arguments, God knows them that depart from the right way; if
they evilly entreat you, entreat them as they shall inteat you; if ye be
patient, patience is advantageous to them that take it willingly, have patience
for the love of God, and afflict not your selves with the deportments and
malice of the wicked. God is with the Righteous, who have his fear before their
eyes.

CAAP. XVII. The Chapter of the Voyage by Night, containing an Hundred and
eleven Verses, written at Mecca.
Reader, The Turks believe that this Night of the Voyage Mahomet ascended into
Heaven with the Angel Gabriel: He was mounted on a white Burac, which is a
beast partly Mule, partly Ass, and partly Horse. He saw all the Prophets that
preceded him, all the wonders of Paradise, and saw God, who sat on his Throne.
See Kitab el tenoir, Tefslir anf Giauhoir, and the Exposition of Gelaldin. The
Bedaoi entitled this Chapter, The Chapter of the Children of Israel.

IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Praise be to him, that caused his
servant to go in one night from the Temple of Mecca, to the Temple of
Jerusalem; we have blessed that Temple, and whatsoever is about it, in token of
our Omnipotency. We gave to Moses the Old Testament, to instruct the Children
of Israel, and to deter them from the worship of any other God, but of me; to
forbid them to adore the Lineage of Noah, or the Lineage of them that we
preserved in his Ark. Noah is my creature, and my To quit their faith, and
return to it often. See K^tab el tenoir.
servant, acknowledging my benefits; we prohibited in Scripture the Children of
Israel, to defile twice the Earth, lest they kindled too great a fire; when
that befell you, we stirred up our servants against you, and they entered by
force into the midst of your houses; this was as soon executed as promised. In
the end, we gave you advantage over your Enemies; we gave you Wealth, and
Children to succor you, and ye were more numerons than the Infidels; the good
and the evil that you shall do, shall be for your souls. We stirred up the
wicked against you, because of your sins, to afflict you through the Murder,
and Bondage of your persons; and they destroyed the Temple of Jerusalem, as
they had ruined it the first time. Your Lord shall pardon you, if you convert;
we have established Hell for a perpetual Prison of Infidels. The Alcoran
guides the Righteous into the right way, it declares to them a great reward,
preaches to the wicked the torments of Hell; and exhorts men to welldoing,
although they are inclining to evil, and prompt to sin. We created the Day and
the Night, they are two signs of our Omnipotency: We caused the Night to pass
away, and the Day to appear for labor; and to the end ye might know the number
of Ages, of Months, and of Years: we explained our Mysteries without obscurity,
and have enjoined every one to bear the burden of his iniquities at the Day of
Judgment; that day will make men to see the account of their sins, they shall
be recompensed and chastised according to the good and the evil that they shall
have committed, and none shall bear the burden of his Neighbor: We sent to the
People Prophets and Apostles to preach to them our Commandments, before they
were chastised, before the destruction of a City: we advertised the Principal
Inhabitants thereof; when they disobeyed us, we chastised them according to our
word, and destroyed them. How many Cities have we ruined since Noah's (...)?
The sins of the People are known to their Lord; he gives the riches of this
world to them that desire them, to cause them to fall headlong into Hell, where
they shall repent of their iniquites, and be deprived of mercy. He who shall
labor to acquire the riches of Heaven, shall be protected of thy Lord in this
world, and enriched with the Treasures of Heaven in the other. Consider, how we
prefer our Creatures one to another; the reward of Heaven is much greater than
that of the Earth. Believe not that there be two Gods, otherwise you shall
repent of it, and be deprived of protection at the day of judgment. Thy Lord
has ordained to worship him alone, and to honor your father and mother,
especially in their old age, and say nothing to them that may afflict them,
neither vex them; speak to them with respect, do not contemn them, pray to God
to compassionate them, as they have pitied you, when they brought you up in
your infancy. God knows whatsoever is in your souls; he will be merciful to
you, if ye obey him. Give to your parents what appertains to them, do good to
the poor, and to pilgrims, be not prodigal, the prodigal are brethren of the
Devil, ungrateful for the favors of their Lord. Contemn not the poor, if ye
desire to obtain the mercy of God, speak to them with mildness, and endeavor
to content them; do not entirely shut your hands, neither altogether extend
them; if ye do otherwise, ye shall offend. Thy Lord gives, and takes away his
graces, as ^meth good to him; he knows his people, and understands all
their actions. Slay not your children for fear of necessity, I will give
whatsoever shall be necessary for them; the murder of children is an exceeding
great sin, fly whoredom, it is a thing unclean, kill no man without reason; we
have commanded to pursue him that shall have slain his neighbor, but let not
the heir sin maliciously, prosecuting the innocent for the guilty. The innocent
is in Gods protection: take not the goods of Orphans, and be careful of them,
until they be in years of discretion; satisfy your promises, an account shall
be required of you; measure with good measure, and weigh with just weights.
Busy your selves not with that which you ought not to know. There shall be
required of you an account of the sins ye have committed, in seeing, hearing,
and thinking. Be not proud, ye shall never be so long as the Earth, neither so
high as the Mountains; such sins are exceeding great before thy Lord: It is one
part of what he has inspired into thee, to preach to his people: Say not,
there be two Gods, lest thou be confined to the fire of Hell. Your Lord has
elected you, with all those men and women that obey his Commandments, for his
sons and daughters, as the Angels; yet say not that God has children. We made
mention in the Alcoran of whatsoever is necessary to be preached to the people;
say unto them, If there be a God with God, as ye affirm, invoke him that has
his Throne in Heaven; praised be God, he has no Companion, he is most high and
great. The seven Heavens praise him, and all that is on Earth glorify him, but
ye comprehend it not, he is gracious and merciful. We will separate thee from
the wicked; we will harden their hearts, and stop their ears: When thou shall
read the Alcoran, and say, There is but one God, they will turn the back, ^d
deride thee, I know what they desire to hear, they would have the people to
hearken to the words of the unjust, who say, That thou art a Sorcerer, and a
Magician; consider to whom they compare thee; they certainly are in error, and
are not able to find the right way. What! we are (say they) bones and flesh,
shall we rise again, and become new Creatures? who shall cause us to rise
again? Say unto them, Although ye be stone, iron, bones, and flesh, he who
first created you, shall raise you again. They shall shake the head at thee,
and ask of thee, In what time they shall rise again? say unto them,
Peradventure it shall be suddenly. When ye shall be called out of the graves by
the Commandment of God, ye will believe that ye have remained but very little
time in the world; then shall the Infidels confess, that the Devil has
deceived them, and that he is their open enemy. Your Lord knows you all, he
will pardon, or chastise you, as seems good to him: We have not sent thee to
be their guardian; thy Lord knows whatsoever is in Heaven and in Earth.
Certainly, we gave graces to some Prophets, which we gave not to others; and we
gave the Psalter to David; Say unto the Infidels, invoke the Idols which ye
adore, and see if they are of power to deliver you from affliction. They that
implore God, desire to be nigh unto him: who are they that shall nearest
approach his divine Majesty, they who hope in his mercy, or such as fear his
punishment? Certainly his punishment ought most to be feared. We will destroy
all the Cities of the world before the day of Judgment, and chastise the wicked
with rigorous torments; this is written upon the Tables kept in heaven; nothing
has hindered us to manifest the miracles which the inhabitants of Mecca desire
to see, but the contempt showed by their predecessors. Temod saw the miracles
of the Camel, and contemned it; I will no more show miracles, but to make the
people to apprehend the torments of hell. Remember thou, that we have said to
thee, that thy Lord knows all that the world does; that which See Gelaldin.
we gave thee to see (in the voyage by night) is to prove the people as the
cursed tree, which is spoken of in the Alcoran; there be persons that will
believe it, others that will not believe; but I will try them, to augment their
confusion: Remember thou, that we commanded the Angels to humble themselves
before Adam, and that they did humble themselves, except the devil; who said,
Shall I adore him whom thou have created of the earth? who is he whom thou have
preferred to me? Certainly, if thou tarry until the day of Judgment, I will
destroy his race, except that small number that shall be under thy protection.
Thy Lord said unto him, Get thee hence, hell shall be thy punishment, and the
punishment of them that shall follow thee; deceive by thy speeches them whom
thou shall be able to deceive, seduce whom thou can seduce with the wealth of
the earth, cause them to exercise Usury, and commit the sin of whoredom; tell
them, there is neither Resurrection nor Judgment; whatsoever thou shall promise
them shall be but vanity and falsehood; thou shall have no power over them that
shall worship me, I will protect them against thee. It is your Lord, who
causes the ship to travel upon the waters, for the advantage of traffic;
when the tempest charge you, your Idols forsake you, he alone is able to
protect you, nevertheless when he has caused you to arrive at the Port, you
deny his Unity, and follow your impiety; believe ye that he will another time
make the sea calm to you? and he will send you a favorable wind, if ye do not
acknowledge him your protector? Believe you to return again to the sea? He shall
send you an impetuous wind, that shall overwhelm you, with your impiety, and ye
shall find none to protect you against him. We have conferred on men many
favors, we have conducted them on the earth, and sea, enriched with all sorts
of riches, and gratified them above all creatures of the earth; preach to them
the day wherein I will assemble before me all the Nations of the World, with
the Prophet that shall have preached to them. He to whom shall be given the
Book of the Account of his works in his right hand, shall read his account
entirely, no injustice shall be done to him, and he shall be happy. He that
shall be blind in this world, shall be so in the other, and shall not see the
right way. They would divert thee from performing what we have inspired into
thee, to induce thee to blaspheme against me. If thou do it, thou shall be of
their friends; were it not for the strength that we have given thee, they would
make thee to incline to their impiety; had thou done it, we had given thee to
taste of great afflictions in this world, and in the other; thou had found
none to protect thee against us; it wanted not much, but they had affrighted
thee at Medina, to cause thee to go out of it; had they driven thee thence,
they had not continued there long after thee. We heretofore sent our Prophets
to instruct the people in our Law, thou shall find therein nothing to change;
make thy prayers when the Sun shall set, at the beginning, and at the end of
the night, and at the dawning of day, the Angels shall be witnesses of thine
orisons; spend one part of the night in prayer, this shall be an augmentation
of merit, thy Lord shall establish thee in the place of his glory: Say, Lord,
into whatsoever place I go, make me to enter, and go forth with truth, give me
thy protection; Say, that truth is come, and that vanity is vanished; this Book
shall heal the people of their error, it shall bring them into the way of
mercy, and encrea^e the misery of unbelievers. We have exhorted men to abandon
their impiety, they have not done it, and despaired when they were touched with
affliction; Say unto them, Each of us does after his will, and God knows him
that follows the right way; they shall demand of thee concerning the Soul:
Say unto them, the soul is an effect of God, he has given you very little
knowledge; assuredly, had it so pleased him, he could have deprived you of the
knowledge he has given you, you shall find nothing that is able to protect you
but his mercy: Say unto them, If the devils and men were all assembled against
me, they should not be able to compose a Book like the Alcoran. We have taught
in the Alcoran whatsoever is necessary for the salvation of men, nevertheless
the greatest part of the people depart from the Truth, and say, We will not
believe thee, unless thou cause fountains to spring out of the Earth, and make
in this place a garden, beautified with Date Trees, and Vines, with rivers
flowing in the midst, or unless we see descend from Heaven a part of the pains
which thou preachest; we will not believe thee, unless God and the Angels come
to thy assistance, unless thy house be of fine gold, and that we see the Book
of Truth sent from heaven; we will not believe in thy Parchment, unless we see
descend from heaven a Book which we may be able to read: Say unto them, Praised
be my Lord, am I any thing but a man sent from him? what hinders men to
believe, since there has been sent to them a Pilot to conduct them into the
way of salvation? They say, that thou art a man, and not an Angel: Say unto
them, should the Angels have inhabited the earth, God would have sent an Angel
to instruct them; it suffices, that he is the witness of mine actions between
you and me, he knows and sees all things; he whom God guides, is well
guided, and such as God shall cause to err, shall find none to put them into
the right way; he will assemble all of them at the day of Judgment, they shall
be infamous, deaf, mute, and blind, and condemned to the flames of hell,
because they are wicked, and have said through derision, that they are bones,
and flesh, and that they shall rise again as new creatures; see they not that
God has created heaven, and earth? that he can create yet more, and has
established a destiny indubitabe, and infallible? The unbelievers are
exceedingly too blame: Say unto them, should you possess all the treasures of
the world, yet would ye fear to make expense for the service of God; man is too
avaricious; We gave to Moses nine marks of our Omnipotency, known to the
children of Israel; Pharaoh told him that he His hand, his staff, the deluge,
grasshoppers, lice, frogs, blood, fear, and famine. See Bedaoi.
was a Magician; Assuredly, said Moses, the signs and miracles that thou see,
proceed from God, Lord of heaven and earth; I believe, O Pharaoh! that thou
forsakest the truth: Then would Pharaoh have driven him out of Egypt, but we
drowned all those that were with him, and commanded the children of Israel to
inhabit the land; we will assemble them at the end of the world, to reward them
after their works: We have indeed sent thee the Alcoran from heaven, to
proclaim the joys of Paradise, and to preach the torments of hell; we have sent
it, to the end thou may teach it to the people; we have sent it clear, and
intelligible, that it may be understood, according to occurrences. Say unto
them; Believe, or believe it not; when those that have knowledge in the written
Law heard it read, they prostrated themselves on the ground with humility, and
said, Praised be God, what be promises, is infallible, and incontinently is
his command executed; they wept, prostrating the face toward the earth, and
the reading of the Alcoran augmented their devotion: Say unto them, Implore
God, call God merciful, all his Attributes are most glorious. Make it not
appear to the world how often thou shall pray, neither how often thou shall
read the Alcoran; and fear not to pray to God, and to read (the Alcoran),
follow in this the middle path, and say, Praised be God, he has no Son, he
has no companion, neither protector to preserve him from contempt; his
greatness is perfect and complete.

CHAP. XVIII. The Chapter of the Cave, containing an hundred and ten Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Praise be to God, who has sent the
Alcoran to his servant. There is no contradiction in this Book; it teaches the
right way; it preaches to the wicked, that they shall suffer great torments,
and proclaims to the righteous, that they shall enjoy an eternal felicity; he
preaches the torments of Hell, principally to such as affirm, That God has a
Son; they are ignorant, like to their predecessors; they are ignorant in their
discourse, and utter nothing but blasphemies, Will thou destroy thy self in
following their footsteps? If they believe not in the Alcoran, they shall one
day have sorrow, and shall repent it. We adorned the Earth, with whatsoever is
upon it, for the advantage of men. One part thereof is happy and plentiful, and
the other unfruitful, and desert. Do ye not believe that the sleepers that
entered the Cave, and the Paper wherein their names were written, be our
miracles? When those men entered the Cave, they said, Lord, give us thy mercy,
and guide us into the right way: Then did we cause them to sleep for the space
of some years, and awaked them, having continued some time in that Cave, to
make it appear which of the two Religions was the most just. I will relate to
thee their History with truth; they were young men, who had the fear of their
Lord before their eyes; we strengthened them, and increased their faith; when
they were with the Infidels, they said, Our God is Lord of heaven and Earth, we
will never worship but one God, otherwise we shall separate our selves from the
truth: This people have adored Idols without reason: who is more unjust than
he, who blasphemeth against God? When they deserted the Infidels, they
worshipped one God alone. Enter into the Cave, God shall make his mercy toward
you to appear, and shall guide you through a path, smooth and pleasant. When
the Sun arose, he cast his rays on the right side of their Cave, and on the
left, at his going down; they in the mean time were in the most spacious place
of this Cave. This is one of Gods miracles; he whom he guides, is well guided;
and whom he misleadeth, shall find none to give him succor, or to guide him.
Believe ye that they should be awake? Assuredly they slept and turned
themselves, sometimes to one side, sometimes to another: Consider how their Dog
extended his feet before that old habitation of stone; if any one had entered
toward them, he would have caused them to fly, and had affrighted them. In the
end we awaked them, and they mutually enquired of each other in what place they
were, and how long they had there continued; one of them replied, That they had
been there a day or two; then they all said, God knows the time that we have
abode here, send one of us to the City with money to buy bread and meat; let
him not be fearful, neither make himself known to any; if we be known, they
will murder or constrain us to follow their Religion in which we shall be
eternally miserable. Thus did we stir up the people against them, to the end
they might know that thy Lord is true; when he said, He will cause the dead to
arise again, the Resurrection is indubitable; nevertheless unbelievers dispute
among them, concerning the History of the Sleepers, and say, That they built a
secret place to retire themselves. God knows the Truth. The True believers
believe that they made no building; the Infidels say they were five, and that
their dog was the sixth, they speak by opinion; but the True believers affirm
them to be seven, and their dog to be the eighth. Say unto them, My Lord
knows how many they were: few persons, except God, know their number: Doubt
no more the History of the Sleepers, the matter is averred and known: dispute
no more with the Jews, and say not, I will do this to morrow, without saying,
If it plea^e God. Call God to mind, after thou have forgot him, and say, The
Lord shall guide me, and teach See Galaldin.
me the History of the Sleepers, who remained in Cave three hundred years:
there be who affirm they continued there nine hundred years. Say unto them, God
knows the time of their abode there, he knows whatsoever is in Heaven, and
Earth, he understands and sees all things, he alone disposes every thing,
and has no companion: Preach what thy Lord has inspired into thee, his word
admits of no alteration, there is no safer refuge than in him: dwell with
those that invoke him morning and evening, and desire to see his face: depart
not from their company, if thou desire to have content of life in this world:
obey not those whose heart we have hardened, and are unmindful of us; follow not
their impiety; whatsoever they do, is but offense and sin. Say unto them, the
truth proceeds from your Lord; who shall desire [it] shall be True believers,
and who shall not desire [it] shall be an Infidel, we have prepared Hell to
chastise the impious, and prisons wherein to detain them. They shall implore
succors against the melting pit, into which they shall be plunged, as into
waters, it shall roast their faces, and shall be their drink: I will not
frustrate of reward them that shall have done well; they shall enjoy the
delights of the gardens of Eden, wherein flow many rivers; they shall have
bracelets of fine Gold; they shall be clothed with green, with Scarlet, with
shining colors, and shall sit on thrones, with an eternal felicity. Declare to
them this parable: there were two men, I gave to the one of them gardens
wherein are store of fruits, he in contempt told his companion, that he was
more wealthy and powerful than he, and entered into his gardens, being an
Infidel, and an Idolater, and said, I do not think these shall ever have an
end, they shall endure a long time without withering: His companion said to
him: If thou do not ackowledge this to proceed from God, and if thou be
ungrateful toward him that created thee of dust, and made thee a man, thou
shall soon find thy gardens ruined: this comes from God my Lord, who has no
companion: all strength and truth proceeds from his divine Majesty: If I have
less of substance than thou, God can give me fruits more fair than those of thy
gardens, or send thunder that shall destroy them, he shall fill them with water
of rain, that shall encompass them, and hinder thee to approach [them.] In the
morning this Infidel found his gardens destroyed to the very roots; he was
extremely perplexed, by reason of the expense he had made to plant them evenly;
and he said, Would to God I had not adored Idols: He shall find none that is
able to protect him at the day of Judgment, but God, all protection and grace
issues from his divine bounty, and the end of the righteous shall be happy.
Speak unto them this parable, The life of the world is like unto rain fallen
from Heaven, that refreshed and revived the herbs of the Earth, and in the
morning were dry as chaff, carried away by the wind; God is omnipotent: Riches
and Children are the ornaments of this life, but good works are eternal, they
are acceptable to God, and give us hope of his grace. Be thou mindful of the
day when the mountains shall walk, and thou shall see the Earth to be plain;
that day we assemble the good and the wicked, and will not fail of my word to
any person; that day shall the Infidels beseech the Lord to save them, he shall
say unto them, You came unto us naked; as when we at first created you, and ye
believed on Earth, that there was no resurrection; Then shall he give to every
one the Book, wherein shall be written the account of their sins; Thou shall
see the wicked trembling with fear, saying, behold here our destruction! What
is there in this Book? It contains their venial and mortal sins, and
detecteth their offenses, they shall find the number of their crimes before
their eyes: Thy Lord is unjust to none; Remember thou that we commanded the
Angels to prostrate themselves before Adam, and that they humbled themselves,
except the Devil, who was in the number of Angels, he disobeyed his Lord;
nevertheless Adam and his posterity have obeyed him, although he is their open
enemy, and particularly of the Infidels. Consider ye not that God created
Heaven and Earth, and he made you, and has no need to be aided of you? Be thou
mindful of the day, when it shall be said to Idolaters, Call upon your Idols
that ye have worshipped, for remission of your sins; they shall implore them,
but none shall hear their prayers, we have ruined them; the wicked shall behold
the fire, into which they shall fall, and find none to save them. We taught men
in the Alcoran, many parables, yet do the wicked abound in question, and
dispute too much; What hinders men to believe, since there is come to them a
guide, to conduct them into the right way? If they beg not pardon of God, what
happened to their predecessors, and at Beder, shall befall them, they shall be
visibly punished; I send Prophets only to anounce the joys of Paradise, and to
preach the torments of Hell; the unbelievers dispute vainly, to obscure the
truth, they deride my Commandments, and the fire of Hell; who is more unjust
than he who knows the Commandments of his Lord, and disobeyeth him, and
forgets his past sins? We have hardened their hearts, they shall not
understand the Scripture; we have stopped their ears, they shall hear nothing;
if thou call them to the right way, they shall not follow thee, thy Lord is
gracious and merciful; should he chastise them after their demerits, he should
forthwith destroy them, he tarrieth until the time that he has promised to
punish them, and they shall find none of power to protect them. We have
destroyed Cities, when their inhabitants have offended, and we prefixed the day
of their ruin. Remember thou that Moses said to his servant, I will travel
incessantly, until I see a place where two seas meet, although I travel an Age.
When he came to that place, he and his servant forgot their fish, he had taken
his way through the Sea: Having continued their voyage some time, Moses was an
hungry, and demanded somewhat to eat of his servant, who said to him, Saw
thou what happened at the Rock? I have forgotten our fish, the Devil made me to
forget it, he (...) ^ook his way through the Sea; that Rock is the place which
we seek: they both returned on then steps, discoursing together, until they
came to that Rock, where they found one of our servants, on whom we had
conferred our graces, and inspired knowledge; Moses said unto him, Permit me to
follow thee, that thou may teach me knowledge* and instruct me; He replied,
Thou will not be able to abide patiently with me; How will thou patiently
endure to hear a thing which none in the world ever knew? Moses said, Thou
shall find me exceeding patient, and I will not disobey thee; He answered, If
thou follow me, enquire nothing of me, and hear only what I shall say to thee.
They went together, and they being in a boat, he brake a plank; Moses said to
him, Thou have broken this vessel, to drown us, it is a strange thing; He
answered, Did not I tell thee, that thou will not be able patiently to abide
with me? Moses replied, Excuse me, and afflict me not, I had forgotten what
thou did enjoin me? They went on together until they met with a child, whom
he slew; Moses said to him, Thou have slain an innocent, that has not slain
any one; thou have done a thing without reason, and that ought not to be
approved: He answered, Did I not say, thou will not be able patiently to abide
with me? Moses said to him, Excuse me this time also, if I demand ought else of
thee, abandon me. They continued their way unto a Village, where the
inhabitants refused them bread; at that time they found a wall ruined, which he
raised again; Moses said to him, Thou should have been paid for repairing
this wall, if thou would: He answered, Now behold the place of our
separation, nevertheless I will explain to thee what thou were impatient to
learn. That boat belongs to two poor men, who labor on the sea to gain their
subsistence, I would have pierced it, to preserve it to those poor men, because
there was an Infidel Prince, who by force seized on the good vessels for his
service. That Infant which I slew was an Idolater, the son of a true believer,
a righteous man; we feared he might cause his father to sin, and seduce him
into his error, and infidelity; the Lord through his goodness would have him to
be destroyed, to deliver his father from his malice. The wall appertains to
two infant Orphans of this City, there is under it a treasure that belongs to
them, their father was a righteous man, God through his goodness wills that
the treasure be preserved for them, until they attain to years of Discretioni;
he likewise willed me to do what I have done: behold the exposition of what
thou were impatient to learn. If any one enquire of thee concerning Alexander
the great, relate to them his History: we gave him on earth what he desired, he
went as far as the West, where he found a fountain guarded by a man, who said
to him, O Alexander! chastise men through the murder of their persons,
Bondage, and Ransom; he answered, I will put to death unbelievers in this
world, and the Lord shall punish them in Hell, and (...) righteous shall enjoy
the glory of ^aradise; I will tell the wicked, that God has given us what we
have desired. After this, he continued his way until he came to a place, where
the Sun rises; he found that it rises in a Country, where they have nothing
to shelter them from its heat, the thing is so: we taught Alexander how to
shelter himself; he followed his way, until he arrived between two Mountains,
inhabited of a Nation that spoke a Language which he could hardly understand;
they said to him, O Alexander! Iagog, and Magog defile the Earth, can thou
put between them and us an obstacle, to hinder that they may not come to us?
God, said Alexander, has not given me means to do it; but assist me with your
power, I will put between them and you a strong separation; give me Iron that
can cut Stones, that I may build betwixt the two Mountains, and that I may
fortify the way that divides them; blow when the Iron strikes the Stones, to
kindle fire, and pour on molten Brass to join the Stones and Iron together; if
they come, they cannot pierce through the Mountains, neither find a way to come
to you, this is a favor which God conferreth on you, his promises are
infallible; when the hour arriveth, he is true in what he promises; we will
permit them to mix each with others; we will assemble all of them when the
Trumpet shall sound; then we will open Hell to the wicked, and to such as would
neither see, nor hear the Alcoran; Do they imagine them that worship me to be
their gods? We have prepared Hell to punish them. Say unto them, shall I relate
unto thee what shall befall the damned? Their works shall be unprofitable in
this World, although they think to do well, good works are unprofitable to them
that contemn the Commandments of their Lord, and believe not in the
Resurrection; they shall not want balance at the Day of Judgment; Hell shall
be their habitation, because they deride our Commandments, and our Apostles,
and Prophets: The Righteous shall enjoy eternally the delight of Paradise
without discontinuation. If the Sea were Ink, to write the wondrous works of my
Lord, it will sooner have an end than his Miracles: Say unto the Infidels, I am
a man like you, God has taught me that there is but one God; he that believes
in the Resurrection, studieth to do good works; worship but one God, who is
without a companion.

CHAP. XIX. The Chapter of Mary, containing Fourscore and Eighteen Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful: God is the rewarder, conductor, (of
the Righteous) liberal, wise, true: Zachary, the Servant of thy Lord, remembered
his Grace, when he in secret prayed to his Lord, and said, Lord, my bones are
become feeble, and mine Head is White with Old age; Lord, I was never rejected
in my prayers, hear my Petition, give me a Son to succeed me, that may be mine
Heir, Heir of the Lineage of Jacob, and be pleasing to thee. O Zachary! I
declare unto thee, that thou shall have a Son, named John, no man has yet been
called by that name; he said, Lord, how shall I have a Son, my Wife is barren,
and I am too old? It was answered him, the thing shall be as I have said unto
thee, it is easy to thy Lord, who created thee; he said, Lord give me some
sign of the Conception of my Wife; he said to him, Thou shall not speak for
Three nights. Then went he out of his Oratory, and made signs to the People, to
make their prayers Evening and Morning. Oh John! learn the Scripture with
affection; we See Kitab el tenoir.
from his Infancy gave him knowledge, clemency, charity, piety, affection
toward his Father and Mother, and not violence and disobedience. We blessed
the day of his Nativity, the day that he shall die, and the day that he shall
rise again. Remember thou what is written of Mary, she retired toward the
East, into a place far remote from her Kind^ed, and took a Vail to cover her,
we sent her our Spirit in form of a man; she was afraid, and said, God will
preserve me from thee, if thou have his fear before thine eyes; he said, Oh
Mary! I am the Messenger of God thy Lord, who shall give thee a Son, active,
and prudent: She answered, How shall I have a Son without the touch of man? I
desire not to be unchaste; he said, The thing shall be as I have told thee, it
is facile to thy Lord; thy Son shall be a token of the Omnipotency of God, and
of his special grace toward such as shall believe in his Divine Majesty; she
became with Child, and retired some time into a place remote from People, where
she sustained the dolours of Childbirth, at the foot of a Date-tree, and said,
Why am I not dead? Wherefore am I not in the number of persons forgotten? The
Angel said to her, Afflict not thy self; God has placed a brook under thee,
shake the foot of this Palm, and the Dates shall fall, gather them up, eat and
drink, and wash thine eyes; say unto them that thou shall meet, that thou
fastest, and have made a Vow not to speak to any one, until the fast be
accomplished. Her Parents met her while she bare her Infant, and said unto her.
Oh Mary! behold a strange thing; Oh Sister of Aaron! thy Father did not command
thee to do evil, neither was thy Mother unchaste; she made signs to her Infant
to answer them; they said, How shall the Infant in the Cradle speak? Then her
infant spoke, and said, I am the Servant of God, he has taught me the
Scripture, has made me a Prophet, blessed me in all places, and commanded me
to pray unto him; he has recommended to me purity through the whole course of
my life, and to honor my Father and Mother; he has not made me either violent
or malicious, praised shall be the day of my birth, the day that I shall die,
and the day of my resurrection. Thus spoke Jesus, the Son of Mary, with truth,
of which ye doubt: God approves not the discourse of them that say he has a
Son; praised be God, when he wills any thing, he says, Be thou, and it is;
he is mine and your Lord, worship him, this is the right way; there be persons,
who in this regard have been of different opinion, but misery is upon the
incredulous. They shall be miserable at the Day of Judgment. The Infidels are
manifestly erroneous from the right way; if thou preach to them the ^orments of
Hell and their ignorance, they will not hear thee. We are Lords of whatsoever
is on Earth, and dispose of every thing at our pleasure, they shall be one day
assembled before us to be judged. Remember thou what is written of Abraham, he
was a Righteous man, and a Prophet, he said to his Father, Adore not what
neither sees, nor understands any thing, and that cannot be profitable; I
know what ye know not, follow me, and I will conduct you into the right way;
worship not the Devil, he is disobedient unto God; otherwise I fear that God
may chastise you, and you may be in the number of the damned. He answered, Oh
Abraham! do thou abhor my Gods? Unless thou change thy discourse, I will
stone thee, depart from me for a long time; he said, May God inspire you, I
will pray for yo^, he is exceeding good, and will hear my prayers; Whom will ye
adore, when I shall be gone from you? Worship God my Lord, and your prayers
shall be heard; he departed from them, and worshipped one God: We gave him two
Sons, Isaac and Jacob, both Prophets, we conferred our grace upon him, with an
eloquent and true Tongue. Remember thou what is written of Moses, he was a
Righteous man, our Prophet and Messenger; we called him on the right side of
the Mount Sinai, drew him near unto us, and taught him our secrets; we through
special grace gave him a Brother, named Aaron. Remember thou what is written of
Ismael, he exactly observed what he promised, was a Prophet, and an Apostle of
the Lord, preached Purity, and recommended to men to make their prayers often,
and was pleasing to his Lord. Remember thou what is written of Enoch, he was a
just man, and a Prophet, and we took him up to an exceeding high place. God
gave his grace to these men, among the Prophets of the Lineage of Adam, among
them whom we caused to embark with Noah, among those of the Lineage of Abraham,
and Israel, and among those that we assembled and guided into the right way.
When the miracles of the merciful were related to them, they fell prostrate,
and adored him with tears in their eyes; their Posterity forsook their
footsteps, abandoned the Law, and followed their own Appetites; but they shall
be precipitated into Hell, except such as shall be converted, and do good
works, they shall enter into Paradise, and no injustice shall be done to them,
they shall enter into the Garden of Eden; what the merciful [God] does promise,
is infallible; they shall hear nothing spoken in Paradise that shall displease
them; they shall hear the salutation of Angels, and Morning and Evening shall
have what they desire; such is Paradise, which God gives to his Creatures that
have his fear before their eyes. I Gelaldin says, that Mahomet complains to
the Angel Gabriel for having been so long absent from him.
descend not from Heaven, but by the permission of thy Lord, he is master of
our actions in Heaven and Earth, and of whatsoever is between them; he has not
forgot thee, worship him, and p^rsevere in thy ado^ation, know thou any
person that is named, like him? Man says, What, shall I dye and rise again? He
considers not that God has created him of nothing; I will one day assemble
the Infidels, and Devils, I will cause them to appear at the Gate of Hell upon
their Knees, and will cast upon them all manner of misery, because they have
increased their impiety toward their Lord. I know such as deserve to burn in
Hell, they shall be thrown thither headlong, this is a most just Sentence
pronounced by the Lord. I will save the Righteous, and forbid Infidels to fall
on their Knees before Idols: when the unbelievers, and many of the Faithful
heard my Commandments preached, they said among themselves, that they were in a
better way than their Neighbor; how many have we destroyed before them, in
past Ages, more Rich than they, and Hypocrites like unto them? Say unto them,
God prolongeth the life of the erroneous, that they may know their errors, and
learn the knowledge of the pains prepared for them, they shall understand who
shall be the most miserable: And who shall have been most weak in their Faith,
and least affectionate to the Service of his Divine Majesty; God shall increase
their Faith, who shall follow the right way; and such as be obedient to him,
shall enjoy his grace. Have thou considered the action of the wicked? They
demand, if they shall have Riches and Children after their Resurrection? Would
you know what shall be? would you capitulate with the merciful? I will not do
it; I will write all that they say, and will add to their miseries; I will give
to them in this World, what they require, and they shall rise again naked
(without Treasure, See Gelaldin.
and Children.) They adored Idols, to have their protection. Certainly they
erred in that adoration; they shall renounce them, and be their enemies at the
Day of Judgment. See thou not, how we have sent the Devils against
unbelievers, to seduce them? Be not impatient to see them punished, they shall
be judged at the day appointed. ^e thou mindful of the day, when I shall
assemble all the Righteous in the presence of God, and precipitate all the
wicked into Hell; their prayer shall not be heard, except such as have
accomplished their promises made to the merciful. They have said, Do ye believe
that God has a Son? You utter a strange thing; it wants not much, but that
Heaven and Earth open themselves, and that the Mountains fall with their utter
destruction. They call God; God the Son; God has not to do with a Son;
whatsoever is in Heaven and Earth adore him; he knows the account and number
of all things of the World: Men shall appear before him at the Day of Judgment,
and the True believers that shall do good works, shall be beloved of his Divine
Majesty. We have sent thee the Alcoran, written in thine own Language, that
thou may proclaim the delights of Paradise to them that fear me, and preach
the Torments of Hell to such as dispute with obstinacy against the Faith. How
many of the wicked have we destroyed in past Ages? Have thou heard speak of
them? Have thou heard mention of their Memory?

CHAP. XX. The Chapter of Beatitude, and of Hell, containing an hundred and
thirty Verses, written at Mecca.
Reader, the Mahometans have entitled this Chapter Tthe, which is two letters
of the Arabique Alphabet, to wit, Tt and He; where in this place, Tt signifies
Thouba, that is to say, Beatitude; and He Haoihe, that is to say, Hell. See the
gloss, and interpretation of Gelaldin, and Bedaoi; they have entitled this,
The Chapter of Beatitude and of Hell.

IN the name of God gracious and merciful. We have not given thee the Alcoran
to torment thee, but to instruct therein the righteous. It was sent thee by him
that created the Heavens and the Earth; the merciful sits on his Throne;
whatsoever is in Heaven and Earth, whatsoever is between them and beneath the
Earth, appertains to him. He knows thy thoughts, he understands what thou
keep secret, and what thou make manifest. God! there is but one God, all
the glorious names of the world are due unto him. Know thou the History of
Moses? When he beheld the fire, he said to his family, Stay ye here, I see a
great fire, I will bring to you a spark, and you shall find in it the right
way. When he approached, it was said unto him, O Moses! I am thy Lord, put off
thy shoes, thou art in the holy Valley of Toi, I have elected thee among my
people, hear my word, and receive mine inspirations; I am God, there is none
other God but I; worship me alone, and make thy prayers as it is ordained; The
hour unknown to the world approaches, wherein I will recompense and chastise
every one after his works: Take heed lest the wicked seduce thee from the right
way; if thou follow their appetite, thou shall be destroyed; Is it not what
thou have sworn to me? he answered, Lord, I will apply my self unto thee, and
will lean upon my staff; I will beat the fruits of the Trees to make them fall
upon my flocks; I have yet another manner to nourish my sheep with this staff;
I will make use of it to defend, and preserve them from mischief? God said unto
him, O Moses! cast that staff to the ground, behold a Serpent, it creeps,
take it, and be not afraid, I will cause it to return to its former condition;
draw back thine hand, and put it under thy arm, it shall become white and
shining, without harm, and pain, it shall be a most certain sign of my Unity, I
will give thee to see the miracles of my Omnipotency; Go to Pharoab, he is in
an exceeding great error, and seduced from the right way: Moses said, Lord,
rejoice my heart, and facilitate my commission, unloose the knot of my tongue,
that they may understand my speech: give me Aaron to assist me in this
business, that I may praise thee, and highly exalt thy glory, thou only art our
protector. God said, Thy prayer is heard, we were favorable to thee another
time, when we inspired thy mother to put thee into a coffer, and expose thee to
the river of Nile; the water drove thee to the shore, whence Pharaoh took thee;
I caused thee to be beloved of him, to have care of my people; when thy sister
sought tidings of what was become of thee, she said, Who will guide us where he
is? who will conduct us to him that keeps him? we sent thee back to thy
mother, to stop her tears, and put an end to her affliction. Thou slewest a
man, we have delivered thee from the hands of thine enemies, and have approved
thy perseverance; thou have continued some time with the inhabitants of Madian;
after this we sent thee to preach our Commandments; I have made choice of thee,
go with thy brother to Pharaoh, and lie not in speaking of me, he is gone
astray from the right way; speak to him both of you, with mildness,
peradventure he will hearken to you, and will fear the fire of hell; they
answered, Lord, We fear that he may torment, and rise up against us: he said,
Fear nothing, I will be with you, hear what he will say, consider his actions;
address your selves to him, and say, We are the Messengers of the Omnipotent
God; dismiss with us the children of Israel, and no more torment them, we are
come hither by the Commandment of God, thy Lord. Salvation is for such as
follow the right way, damnation for them that blaspheme against his Law, and
depart from his Commandments; Pharaoh said unto them, Who is your God? Moses
said, My God is he that created the world, and guides men into the right way.
Pharaoh said, what law did your predecessors observe? what is become of them?
Moses answered, God knows in what condition they are; nothing is concealed
from God, he extended the earth, and established the ways; he causes rain to
descend from heaven, and makes to spring forth the plants, herbs, and fruits
which ye eat, and that nourish your flocks. These things are signs of his
Omnipotency to them that understand them. We created you of earth, and to earth
will we make you to return, and will cause you to come out of it once again; we
showed miracles to Pharaoh, but he was incredulous, contemned them, and said, O
Moses! Art thou come to drive us out of our Dominions with thy Magic? I will
show thee [Magick] like to thine; let us meet at a place and day prefixed
between thee and me, to come together; Moses said unto him, Let us make choice
of the day of your feast; if it seem good to you the people may assemble at the
Sun rising: After this discourse, Pharoab withdrew, recollected all his
subtilties, and at the day and hour prefixed, came with his people to the place
appointed, where Moses was, who said unto them, Misery is upon you, blaspeme
not against God, he will punish you, and destroy them that blaspheme against
him; The people of Pharaoh differed in opinion what they should do, kept their
design secret, and said to Pharaoh, These two men are Magicians, they would
chase you from your Country, through their Magic, and seduce your subjects
from your Religion; recollect your subtilties and power, and choose persons
capable to dispute against them, this day shall be happy to him that shall be
victorious. They said to Moses, Will thou first cast thy staff on the ground,
or shall we ours? Their cords and staves arose against Moses through their
Magic, and crawled: Moses spoke low, between his teeth; we said unto him, Fear
nothing, thou shall be victorious, cast thy staff in thy right hand on the
ground, it shall devour what they have done, it is but witchcraft and magic,
that produces neither Profit nor Content. Then fell the Magicians of Pharaoh
prostrate on the ground, and said, We believe in the God of Aaron and Moses;
Pharaoh said unto them, believe ye in him without my permission? Moses is your
master, I will cut off your right feet, and your left hands; or your left feet,
and your right hands, and cause you to be hanged on Palm Trees, that ye may
know who is the more severe in his chastisements, I, or the God of Moses; they
said, the miracles that thou have seen, have they not touched thee? He that
created us, does things which are not in thy power to perform; thy power
extends only in this World, we believe in God our Lord, who will pardon our
sins; thou art the cause that he abhors us with our magic, he is more
powerful than thou, and Eternal; Hell is prepared for Infidels, they shall find
repose neither in their life nor death; and the righteous that shall do good
works, shall eternally enjoy the pleasures of the gardens of Eden, wherein flow
many delicious Rivers, such is the reward of them that are purged from their
sins. We said unto Moses, Go out by Night with my People, and make them a dry
Path through the Sea, fear not that thine Enemies may overtake thee, neither be
afraid of being drowned, Pharaoh shall follow them with his Troops; I will
overwhelm in the Sea, and will mislead him with his People, he shall not follow
the right way. O Children of Israel! We delivered you from your Enemies, and
conducted you toward the mountains of Sinai: We caused Manna and Quails to
descend upon you, and said, Eat ye of the good things that we have given you,
and be not ungrateful, otherwise my wrath shall fall upon you; he upon whom
mine indignation shall fall, shall be thrown headlong into the Fire of Hell; I
will be merciful to such as shall convert, do good works, and follow the right
way. O Moses! who pressed thee to absent thy self from thy People? He answered,
behold he that follows my steps, I am come up to receive thy Commandments. We
after thy departure estranged thy People from thee, and Samery seduced them
from the right way; he returned upon his steps to his People, in great
displeasure, and said, O ye People! did not God promise to you all manner of
content? He protracted the effect of his promises, because of your sins, will
you that his wrath fall upon you? Wherefore have ye trangressed what ye
promised to me? They said, we have not transgressed our promises of our own
accord; we took the most weighty ornaments of the People, and cast them into
the Fire, Samery himself did cast them in; he made the body of a bellowing
Calf, and said, with his followers, Behold there your God, the God of Moses
whom he has forgotten; Saw they not that this Calf spoke not to them, and that
it had not power to do good or evil? Aaron had said unto them, before the
coming of Moses; O ye People! you have been seduced by this Calf; the merciful
is your God, and your Lord, Follow and obey me: They said, Shall we abide here
until Moses return? Moses at his return said unto Aaron, What hindered thee to
follow me, when thou saw them to turn aside from the Law of God? Wherefore
have thou disobeyed me? O Son of my Mother! (said Aaron) drag me not by the
Beard and Hair, I feared to displease thee, if I forsook the Children of
Israel, and disobey thy Commandments; Moses said unto Samery, what was thy
design? He answered, I saw what this People sees not, I took an handful of the
Earth of the footsteps of the Messenger of God, and made the Figure of a Calf,
the fairest that I could; Moses said unto him, Go, get thee from among us, thou
shall fly the presence of men all the days of thy life; thou shall say unto
them, Come not nigh me, touch me not, the time of thy punishment is appointed,
thou shall not escape it; behold thy false god, behold the Calf which thou have
adored, I will cause it to burn, and will cast the ashes thereof into the Sea;
your God is one God, and there is none other God, but the God that knows all
things: Thus do I relate to thee things past; we have sent thee the Alcoran,
such as shall abjure it, shall bear their burden at the Day of Judgment, and
be eternally tormented; I will one day require an account of their burden, and
will assemble them with all their subtilties; when the Trumpet shall sound,
they shall demand of each other, how long they have continued in the World?
They shall say, That they have remained there but Ten days and Ten nights, I
know all that they will say; the most prudent among them shall say, that they
have been but one day. They shall enquire of thee concerning the Mountains; Say
unto them, God shall tear them up, and level them with the Earth, thou shall
see them levelled and beaten down: Then shall men without retardment follow him
that shall summon them to universal Judgment, they shall humble themselves
before God, thou shall that Day hear low and humble voices, that day shall
prayers be ineffectual except of them that shall be pleasing to God, whom he
will permit to speak. He knows whatsoever men do in this World, and what must
befull them in the other, and they know it not, they shall humble themselves,
and hang down the Head before the Living and Eternal Lord; all Infidels shall
be damned, and the Righteous of Truebelievers that have done good works, shall
not fear injustice. We have sent the Alcoran in the Arabique Tongue, it
teaches men our Commandments, peradventure they will fear impiety; it teaches
them what they ought to know; Exalt the glory of God, King of the World, he is
truth it self; press not thy self to read the Alcoran, until thou have well
understood it. Say, Lord increase my knowledge; We heretofore prohibited Adam
to eat of the forbidden fruit, he was unmindful of our Commandment, I found in
him no perseverance. Remember thou that we commanded the Angels to humble
themselves before him, they humbled themselves, except the Devil, who refused
to do it. Remember that we said, Adam, the Devil is thine enemy, and the enemy
of thy Wife, he will endeavor to make you miserable, to cause you both to go
out of Paradise, where thou suffer neither hunger nor thirst, nor cold, nor
heat; the Devil tempted them, and said, oh Adam! I will conduct thee to the
Tree of Eternity, a treasure that shall never perish; they did both eat of the
fruit of that Tree, then knew they their filthiness, and took the leaves of
Trees to cover their nakedness; Adam disobeyed his Lord, and became miserable,
nevertheless he heard, and pardoned him, and showed him the right; he said,
descend from Paradise, ye Enemies of each other, I will hereafter send you a
guide, he that shall follow him, shall not err, and shall be blessed; he that
shall go astray, and will not believe in me, shall be miserable in the World,
and blind at the Day of Judgment; that Day shall he say, Lord, wherefore have
thou made me blind? I had good sight when I was in the World: I did this day
forget thee, as thou did forget my Commandments; thus do I entreat Infidels.
The torments of the other World are more grievous than those of the Earth, and
of longer continuance; do not unbelievers tremble, when they consider how many
men upon Earth we have destroyed in past Ages? Their misery shall serve for
example to them that are wise; had not thy Lord said, that he will defer the
punishment of the wicked until the time appointed, he had already destroyed
them. Be patient, and endure their Discourse, praise thy Lord before the Sun
arise, before it sets, an hour before Night, and at the end of Day thou
shall do a thing acceptable to him: The life of the World is sweet to tempt
you, but the Riches of thy Lord are better, and Eternal. Command the People to
make their prayers at the time appointed, and be not impatient toward them; I
require no Riches of thee, I will enrich thee, and in the end Paradise shall be
for the Righteous. The unbelievers have said, if Mahomet shows not some
Miracle from God, and knows not the exposition of the Books of our
Predecessors, we will not believe in him; we before his coming destroyed many
wicked persons, who said, Lord, had thou sent us a Prophet, we had observed
thy Commandments, before we became infamous, and laden with ignominy; Say unto
them, every one expects his end; expect ye, and ye shall one day know them
that follow the right way, and have not erred.

CHAP. XXI. The Chapter of the Prophets, containing an Hundred and Twelve
Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, Gracious and merciful. The Day approaches wherein the
People shall render an account of their actions, but they consider it not, and
depart from the Commandments of God; if they hear them, they laugh, they
understand them not, and keep secret their evil intentions. Is not Mahomet a
man like to you? Will ye say that he is a Magician? You see the contrary; God
hears whatsoever is spoken, both in Heaven and Earth, and knows all things.
They say, certainly Mahomet has dreamed what he speaks, he has invented it,
and is a Poet, we will not believe him, unless he show some Miracle, as did the
Prophets that were before him. We have laid waste many Cities, because their
inhabitants were incredulous; we sent before thee but men who were inspired of
us; Enquire of them, to whom heretofore was given the knowledge of the written
Law, if ye know it not; they were men that did eat and drink, and were mortal;
we effected what we promised to them, we preserved them with such as believed,
and destroyed the incredulous; we have sent you a Book to instruct you, will ye
understand it? How many Infidel Cities have we made desolate? How many new
People have we established in their place? When they felt our punishment, they
fled; fly not, and return to what has delighted you, return into your houses,
peradventure ye will yet covet the Riches of the Earth; they said, Misery is
upon us, we are too blame; thus did they talk, until they were destroyed. We
have not created Heaven and Earth, and whatsoever is between them, to sport
with; had it been our will that they should have scoffed on Earth, they should
scoff likewise in Heaven. On the contrary, I oppose the truth to falsehood, to
confound it, and in effect it does confound it. Misery shall be upon you,
because of your blasphemies; whatsoever is in Heaven and Earth, is Gods; the
Angels are not ashamed to worship him, they praise him Day and Night, and exalt
his glory without blasphemy. The Infidels worship Gods made of Earth; have they
power to create any thing? Were there in Heaven, and on Earth another God, they
would not accord; praised be God, Lord of the Universe, what the Infidels
relate, is untrue. He asks no counsel when he will do any thing, as do men;
will they worship any other God but him? Say unto them, produce your arguments,
behold what we have to speak unto you, behold our reasons, and those of our
predecessors; Certainly, the greatest part of them are ignorant of the Truth,
and go astray. We inspired into all the Prophets which we sent, that there was
but one God that ought to be worshipped. They said, believe ye that the Angels
are the Sons of God? Praised be God; on the contrary, they are his Creatures,
he loves them, they speak not but after him, and obey what he commands them,
he knows all their actions past, and future; they pray for no man but through
his permission, and fear to displease him. Who among them will say I am God,
instead of God? He shall be cast headlong into the Fire of Hell; thus do I
entreat unbelievers. Know they not that the Heavens and the Earth was shut up?
We opened them, and gave life to every thing, through the Rain which we made
to descend; will they not believe in my unity? We created the Mountains to
hinder the Earth to move, we made therein ways large and spacious for our
Creatures, we covered it with the Heaven, and have exempted it from falling,
nevertheless they depise our Commandments. It is the Lord who created Day and
Night, the Moon and the Sun, all things praise and exalt him in Heaven; we
created no Person to dwell for ever on Earth; all men shall taste of Death, I
will prove you with good and evil, and ye shall appear before me to give
account of your actions: The Infidels scoff at you, when they see you, and say,
behold them that deride our gods! They obey not the Commandments of God; he
created man of dust, and shall show you the effects of his Omnipotency; be not
impatient to see the punishment of the wicked, who say, when shall be the Day
of Judgment? Did they know it, they would remove the Fire from their backs and
visages; that Day shall surprise them, it shall astonish them when they think
least of it; they cannot retard it, and shall be deprived of protection.
Certainly, they scorned the Prophets that were sent before thee, but they were
punished after their demerits. Say unto them, who but the merciful [God]
preserves you Day and Night? Nevertheless ye reject his Commandments; Have
they any other God but me, that is able to save them? Their gods cannot defend
themselves: I will not protect them, yet will I enrich them, as I enriched
their fathers, and will prolong their life, to punish them on Earth; Know they
not that their estates diminish on all sides through thy Conquests? Is it so,
that they are victorious? Say unto them, I preach to you what God has inspired
into me, but the deaf hear not when they are exhorted; When they are a little
touched with the chastisements of God, they say, oh misery! We are too blame,
and are unjust; I will weigh their works at the Day of Judgment, that I may do
injustice to no person, of the weight of a grain of Mustardseed, and will most
exactly account. We gave to Moses and Aaron the Book that distinguishes good
from evil, and commanded them to preach our Commandments to them that had our
fear before their eyes. That Book is blessed, and was sent from us;
nevertheless, unbelievers reject and condemn it. We heretofore instructed
Abraham in the right way, and knew that he was a Righteous man. Remember thou
that he said to his Father, and his People, What Idols do ye adore? They said,
We find that our Fathers adored them; he said unto them, your Fathers and you
were exceedingly erroneous: They said, Do thou speak the truth, or do thou
jest? He said, Certainly your Lord is the Lord of Heaven and Earth, I swear to
you that he created them; Having convinced those Idolaters, he said, By God, I
will make war upon your Idols, he broke them with an Hatchet in their absence*
except the greatest Idol, on which he hung his Hatchet, and said, Peraventure
they will accuse him to have broken the other: Seeing at their return their
Idols broken, they said, who has in this manner handled our gods? He is
impious; we heard it is a young man, named Abraham, who derideth them, bring
him before the eyes of the People, perhaps they shall find witnesses of his
action. They said unto him, Oh Abraham! It is thou that have so abused our
gods; he said on the contrary, it is that great Idol; they enquired of each
other if those Idols spoke, and if they had motion; afterward they returned to
themselves, and said to the People, Ye are too blame to adore those Idols; he
threw them headlong against the ground, and they said, Oh Abraham! Thou well
knew that they spoke not at all; he answered, Why therefore do ye worship
what can neither benefit nor hurt you? You defile your selves in adoring them
instead of God, Do ye not know him? Then they said, Burn Abraham, and let us
defend our Gods, if ye are Righteous men; but we commanded the Fire to lose its
heat, to preserve Abraham; they would have tormented him, and we destroyed
them; we saved him, as we preserved Lot; we conducted him into the Land of
Blessing, gave him Isaac, and Jacob, and the Children of their Children,
Righteous men, and True believers, to instruct the People in the way of
Salvation; we inspired them to do good works, to pray at the time appointed, to
pay Tithes, and to worship us; we gave to Lot prudence and knowledge, and
delivered him from the Inhabitants of the City, who were the most vicious upon
Earth; we were gracious to him, because he was Righteous. Remember Noah, and
that he heretofore invoked us; we heard his Prayer, and delivered him from
great danger, and all that were with him in the Ark; we delivered him from the
hand of the wicked, whom we drowned. Remember David, and Solomon, who rendered
Justice in the Field, whereinto the Flocks of the Village entered by Night
without Shepherds; we are witness of their Judgments, we instructed Solomon in
Justice, we gave him Prudence and Knowledge; the Mountains adored us with David,
and with him the Birds praised us; we were with them when they praised us. We
taught you the manner of sowing [Seed] to preserve you from necessity;
peradventure ye will be thankful to me. We commanded the Winds to obey Solomon,
and know all that he did. The Devils obeyed him, they dived into the Sea, to
fish for Gems for him, and traveled also in other matters; and we hindered them
to act mischief against men. Remember Job, who prayed to his Lord, and said, I
am in exceeding great affliction; thou art the merciful of the merciful: We
heard him, and delivered him from his affliction; gave to him our grace, and to
his family, and to them that were with him, who had patience, and trusted in
me. Remember Ismael, Enoch, Delcafel is Ely. See the Book composed by Abdelbaky.
Delcafel, and Zachary, they persevered in well doing; we gave them our grace,
because they were Righteous. Remember Jonas, who forsook his People in
displeasure; he believed I could do nothing against him; but he cried in the
dark, and said, There is no God besides thee, praised be thy Name; I am to
blame for having offended thee. We heard him, and delivered him from his
disaster. Thus do I protect True believers, when they invoke me. Remember
Zachary, who made his Prayer, and said, Lord, I know there is no better Heir in
the World than thy self; yet let me not dye without issue: We heard his
request, gave him a Son, named John, and rendered his Wife fruitful. All these
Prophets went on with alacrity to do well, and invoked us with humility, with
desire to obtain our grace, and with fear of the torments of Hell. Remember
Mary, whose womb I blessed; we inspired into her our Spirit, and gave her a
Son, a Miracle in the World. Your Law is one only Law, and I am one only
God, worship me, and be not impious; ye all shall appear before me to be
judged. I will protect the True believers that shall have done good works, and
will write what they shall do for their reward. Misery is upon the Cities that
we have ruined; their inhabitants shall not return into the World, until the
passage be opened to Iagog and Magog, and they come running from the eminent
places of the Earth; then shall the Day of Judgment approach; the promised
Truth shall not be far off, it shall trouble the sight of the wicked, who shall
say, O misery! We are miserable, we did not foresee this disaster, we have been
exceeding too blame for having offended God. It shall be said unto them, Ye
worshipped instead of God, the firebrands of Hell, into which ye shall be cast
headlong: Had your Idols been Gods, as ye believed, they should not have entered
Hell; they, and those that have adored them, shall be eternally damned; they
shall groan, complain, and shall not be heard: Such as shall be in Paradise,
shall be far remote from them; they shall not hear their howlings, and shall
enjoy eternally what they shall desire; the cries of the Damned shall not
afflict them; the Angels shall meet them when they come out of their graves;
and shall say, Behold now the day that was foretold you in the World; a Day
wherein we will open the Heavens, and the Book of the account of all men, as we
promised to your predecessors. We exactly perform what we promise; we have
written in the Old Testament, and afterward in the Alcoran, That the Righteous
shall inherit the Earth: This Book shall teach the way of Paradise to them that
shall worship me: We had not sent thee, but in favor of men; say unto them,
God has always inspired into me, that your God is one God, will ye not obey
him? If they go astray, I have taught you how they must be entreated. Say unto
them, I know not whether the punishment denounced to you shall be speedy, or
tardy. God knows what is known, and unknown in the World; I know not whether
he will try you, or defer his punishment until the time appointed: He is a most
just Judge, and most merciful; he is not such as ye speak him.

CHAP. XXII. The Chapter of Pilgrimage, containing Seventy and Seven Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, Gracious and Merciful. O ye People! fear God. The
Earthquake that shall happen at the Day of Judgment shall be wonderful; ye
shall that day see Mothers forget their Children, and every one shall bear his
own burden; ye shall see men drunk, not with Wine, but amazed and astonished at
the great judgments of God. There be, who dispute of the Deity with ignorance,
and follow the will of the Devil, voluntary, and obstinate: It is written, he
shall seduce them that obey him, and shall conduct them into Hell. O ye People!
if ye doubt of the Resurrection, consider how we created you of the dust of the
Earth; with a little Water sprinkled upon the Dust of the Earth; with congealed
blood, and a little flesh entirely, and not entirely formed. I form in the
wombs of Women, what seems good to me at the time appointed; I cause you to
come forth Children, then I give you life, and make you to arrive to the Age of
Virility; some die young, and others live to extremiry of Age, to the end they
may learn to live well. Consider the Earth, dry, dead, and barren; when we
shall cause Rain to fall, it shall change the face, shall produce and nourish
its fruits of all sorts, fair, and pleasing: Because God is truth it self, he
raises again the dead, and is Omnipotent. There is no doubt but the Day of
Judgment approaches, and that God will cause the dead to rise again. There be
men that dispute of God without knowledge, without reason, without authority,
and go astray from the way of his Law; they shall be full of ignominy and shame
in this World, and shall feel in the other, the pains of Hell. God does no
injustice to his People. There be who who adore him with scruple; if good befall
them, they persevere to adore him; if evil, they return to their impiety, and
lose the riches of Earth, and the riches of Heaven: These two losses are
exceeding great; they invoke Idols instead of God; they invoke what can neither
benefit, nor hurt them: Such prayers are by-ways, far remote from the
Commandments of God; they worship that which does rather mischief, nor
advantage them. Certainly, God shall make the True-believers, that do good
works, to enter into Gardens, wherein flow many Rivers; he does what seems
good to him. He that is angry that God gives succor, and protection to Mahomet
See Kitab el tenior.
in this World, and in the other, let him tie a Cord to a Beam of his House,
and hang himself; he shall see if his choler will be allayed. God has sent
the Alcoran, as heretofore he sent the other Scriptures; it contains his
Commandments, clear and intelligible; it guides into the right way whom it
pleases him: He at the Day of Judgment shall judge the differences that are
between the Faithful, and Infidels; between the Samaritans, the Christians, and
Idolaters; he is Omniscient. See thou not that all that is in Heaven, and on
Earth, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Mountains, Trees, and Beasts, adore
him? Many worship him with zeal, but many likewise merit to be punished: None
shall esteem him, whom God shall despise; he does as seems good to him. These
two contrary parties, the Believers and the Infidels, have disputed of the
Deity; but the Infidels shall be encompassed with flames of Hell, they shall
have Shirts of Fire, boiling Water shall flow in upon their Heads; the Fire
shall burn what is in their Bellies, and shall roast their Skin, they shall be
beaten with Clubs of Iron; when they think to go out of this Fire, they shall
enter further into it, and be eternally tormented. God shall cause the
True-believers, that have done good works, to go into Gardens, wherein flow
many Rivers; they shall be adorned with Bracelets of Gold, and Pearls; they
shall be clothed with Silk, and enjoy Eternal felicity, because they have
professed his Unity; and the Infidels shall suffer great torments, for that
they have hindered the People to embrace the Faith, and visit the Temple of
Mecca, which God has established to be therein adored of all the World: He
that shall be solicited to visit it, and shall enter it, with design to return
to his impiety, shall be severely punished. Remember, that we showed to Abraham
the place to build the Temple of Mecca; that we commanded him to adore me
alone, and to purge my Temple from Idols, for the satisfaction of them that
should there make processions. Men shall come thither to visit thee from all
parts, on foot, and on Horseback; they shall receive profit, they shall there
make their prayers at the times appointed, and the days nominated; they shall
thank the Lord for his benefits toward them, and the Riches which he has
given them; and shall make likewise processions at the old Temple. He that
shall reverence it, shall do exceeding well, and shall be recompensed of his
Lord. It is lawful for you to eat of all clean Beasts, except of such as have
been heretofore prohibited: Depart from the pollution of Idols; beware of
bearing false witness, and be obedient to God. He that says, God has a
Companion, is like to him that fell headlong from Heaven, whom the Birds
devoured, and the wind cast into a remote place, full of miseries. He that
shall reverence the signs of the power of God, will not doubt of his Law, and
shall be rewarded for his good works at the time appointed, if he visit the old
Temple of Mecca. We have given to all Nations of the World a Law to offer their
Sacrifices, and to return thanks to their Lord, for having given them advantage
above all sorts of Beasts. Your God is one God, obey his Commandments, proclaim
a great reward to them that are obedient to him, to them that tremble with
fear, when they hear mention of his name; that are patient in their adversity,
that pray at the time appointed, and dispense in alms some part of the wealth
that we have given them. We have created the female Camel for a sign of our
unity, she shall be profitable to you in this World. Remember to pronounce the
The Pilgrims Sacrifice a Camel at Mecca.
Name of God, when ye shall sacrifice her, standing on her feet; when she shall
fall dead on the ground, eat of her flesh, if it like you, and give to eat to
such as shall require it. We have made her subject to you; peradventure ye will
be thankful to me for this grace. God promoteth before him, neither the flesh
of this Beast, nor the blood, but only the good works that ye perform. He has
thus subjected it, That ye may exalt it, and give him thanks for having guided
you into the right way. Proclaim to the righteous, That God will remove far
from them the malice of the wicked; he abhors Traitors, and the ungrateful:
Declare to such as fight against Infidels, to repair the injury they have done
them; that God is sufficiently powerful to protect them. When they were driven
from their houses without reason; they said, God is our Lord; Had not God
stirred up the people against each other, the Covents of the Religious, the
Churches of the Christians, the Synagogues of the Jews, and the Temples of the
Believers, had been ruined, (through the multitude of See Gelaldin.
the wicked, and their malice,) The name of God is exalted in the Temples of
believers, and therein is his Law defended and protected. God is most strong;
he has all power over his people. Those whom God has established on Earth,
with victory over their enemies, make their prayers in the manner ordained; pay
Tithes, and enjoin to do what is honest and civil; forbid to do what is
prohibited of God, who knows the end of all things. If the Infidels traduce
thee, their predecessors traduced Noah, Aad, Chaib, Abraham, and Lot, they also
slandered Moses: God for a time deferred their punishment, but in the end most
severely chastised them. How many Cities have we destroyed, because of their
impiety? We have overthrown, and made them desert, through the death of their
inhabitants. Shall those of Mecca walk for ever upon Earth, with an hard heart,
without reflecting upon what has heretofore befaln the Infidels? Their eyes
are not blind, but their hearts are blind, and hardened: They will require thee
to cause the wicked to be speedily chastised; God will not go against what he
has promised: One day before thy Lord, is as a thousand years before men. How
often has the punishments of imp^ous Cities been deferred, that in the end
were destroyed? The whole world shall one day be assembled before me, to be
recompensed after their merits. Say unto them, O people! I preach unto you
publicly the torments of Hell; such as shall believe, and do good works, shall
receive pardon of their sins, and a precious treasure; they that shall
endeavor to make void the faith, shall be damned. We sent our Prophet to read
only our Commandments to the people; the unbelievers read many things that are
not in the Alcoran; but God has made vain what the Devil had there inserted,
and confirmed the precepts of his Law: What the Devil there inserted, serves
for s^dition to them that are weak in their faith, and have an hard heart. The
Infidels are in an exceeding great error, and are far from the Truth. Such as
have the knowledge of Scripture, know that the Alcoran is truth it self, which
proceeds from thy Lord: They believe in it, and humble their heart in reading
it. God guides into the right way such as believe in the truth: The Infidels
shall be in doubt, until they be surprised of the day of Judgment. That day
shall they be rigorously chastised, that day shall God command, and judge the
good and the bad; the righteous that shall have believed, and done good works,
shall enter into delicious Gardens, and the Infidels that shall have disobeyed
his Commandments, shall suffer exceeding great torments. They that departed See
Gelaldin.
from Mecca, and went to Medina, to abandon the society of unbelievers, and
were slain, or died of sickness, shall be rewarded of his divine Majesty. God
is the greatest benefactor in the world; he shall give them to enter where they
shall desire; he is omniscient, and most merciful. The believers that shall
take revenge of the injury that the unbelievers have done them, shall be
protected of God: He is gracious and merciful toward his people; he makes day
to enter into night, and night into day; he hears the prayers of True
believers, and sees whatsoever they do; and will protect them, because he is
truth it self. Idols are but vanity; and God is most high and omnipotent. Do
thou not consider that God sends the rain from Heaven, and that the Earth
becomes green? He is benign to his people, and knows all [things] whatsoever
is in Heaven and Earth, is his; he has no need of his people, and ought to be
exalted. See thou not that God has subjected to you all the beasts that are
upon the earth? See thou not that the ship runs upon the sea, through his
command, to transport you and your substance? See thou not, that he hinders
Heaven to fall upon the Earth? certainly he is benign, and merciful; He it is
that has given you life and death, he shall make you to die, and shall raise
you again, nevertheless man is ungrateful for his favors. We have given a law
to all the Nations of the World, to guide them into the right way; if they
observe it, they will not dispute against thee. Invoke thy Lord, thou art in
the right way; if they dispute against thee, say unto them, God knows all
your actions, he shall judge your differences at the day of Judgment: know
thou not that God knows whatsoever is in heaven or in earth? All is written,
and this is most easy to his divine Majesty. Idolaters adore without reason,
Idols that understand not whether they be gods or no, that shall be without
protection at the day of Judgment; when they preach to men my Commandments,
they know by their countenance those that are impious, and ungrateful for my
graces; they would with wrath fall upon them that instruct them. Say unto them,
I declare unto you things more grievous: God has prepared the fire of hell to
chastise Infidels. O people! A parable is related to you, hear it. All the
Idols that ye adore, cannot create a fly, when they shall be assembled to do
it; if the flies corrupt any thing that is offered to them, they have not the
power to drive them away, because of their impotency, and the weakness of them
that adore them: They praise not God in that manner as is just and reasonable,
he is most strong, and most powerful; he has chosen messengers to bear and
execute his Commandments among Angels and men; he hears whatsoever they say,
beholds whatsoever they do, he knows whatsoever they have done, and all
things obey him. O ye that believe! honor and worship your Lord, and do good,
perhaps you shall be blessed: Fight for the establishment of his Law with
affection, he has chosen you to follow it; he has not given you a Law heavy
and troublesome, It is the Law of Abraham your Father, he has styled you the
Resigned to God, before the coming of the Alcoran: the Prophet shall testify
against you at the day of Judgment, and ye shall testify against the people,
that the Prophet has preached to them the right way; persevere in your
prayers, pay tithes, and trust in God* he is your Lord and your Protector.

CHAP. XXIII. The Chapter of True believers, containing an Hundred and Eighteen
Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and mericiful. Certainly the true believers shall
be blessed, that make their prayers with humility; they abstain from reviling,
they pay tithes, they commit not whoredom, they touch not other women than
their own, and their slaves; such as covet other, transgress the bounds of
reason; they that faithfully preserve what has been entrusted to them; they
that effect what they have promised, and that make their prayers at the time
appointed, shall be heirs of Paradise, where they shall dwell eternally. We
formed man of the dust of the Earth, with mire, blood congealed, with a little
flesh and bones, which we invested with skin; we another time created him, when
we breathed to him the Soul into the Body, and blessed him, as one of our
fairest Ornaments. O See Galaldin.
men! ye all shall die, and shall rise again at the Day of Judgment; we created
above you, Seven Heavens, and have care of the conservation of all People that
are beneath; we send Water from Heaven to satisfy your necessities; we make it
to fall upon the Earth, and have power to cause to pass away and deprive you
[of it.] We have created, and made gardens to bring forth Datetrees, Grapes,
and many other fruits, by which ye live; we created trees in the Mountain of
Sinai, that produce. Oil, and Or, dying Colors.
tincture; ye receive great advantage by beasts, they sustain you with Milk,
and afford you many other profits, ye mount them; and Ships also to carry you
whither ye desire to go. We sent Noah, who spoke to the People, and said,
worship one God alone, what other god will ye implore but him? Will ye not fear
to worship another? The chief among the People that were Idolaters, said to
their adherents, This man is a man like your selves, he would appear, and be
esteemed more than you; if God would be adored alone, as he says, he would
cause an Angel to descend, that should bring his Commandments; we have not
heard spoken to our Predecessors, what he says; he is a man possessed of the
Devil, tarry, and ye shall see what will become of him: Then Noah said, Lord,
protect me against them, and defend me from their Blasphemies; we commanded him
to build an Ark, when our Commandment was given to destroy the wicked, and when
the Water of his Caldron boiled, we commanded him to enter into the Ark, with
two beasts of every kind and species; all men we destroyed, except them of whom
we have before spoken, (we said unto him) speak not to me for Infidels, they
shall be drowned, when thou shall have taken order for every thing that must
enter into the Ark with thee. Say, praise be to God, who has delivered us from
the malice of the wicked; Lord, give us to descend in a blessed place, thou art
the best Pilot in the World. It was a sign of my Omnipotency to prove the
People of Noah: We created after them another People, to whom we sent an
Apostle, to instruct them to worship one God; and he said, What God will ye
adore other than God? Will ye not fear his wrath? Their Doctors that were
impious, who denied the Resurrection of the flesh, and on whom we had conferred
the Wealth of the Earth, said, he is a man, he eats and drinks like you, if
ye obey not a man like to your selves, shall ye be destroyed? Does he promise
you to return into the World, after having been bones and dust? O abuse! O
abuse! ye are abused in what he promises, he is a man like others, he is a
liar, we will not believe him: That Apostle said* Lord, preserve me from their
Blasphemies, they shall repent suddenly of their impiety; then thunder
surprised them, and destroyed them, as they deserved, we made the Land dry and
barren without fruit, and created other persons in their place. Man cannot die
before his hour, and none can retard it; we sent our Apostles and our Prophets
to instruct the People, but they were slain one after another, every Nation
traduced the Prophet that we sent them, and we made them serve for examples to
Posterity, and destroyed the wicked. We sent Moses and his Brother Aaron to
Pharaoh, and his Doctors, with our Miracles, and with most intelligible
reasons; they arose against the Faith, they tormented the Children of Israel,
and said, shall we believe in a man like to our selves, of them that obey us?
They slandred both of them, and were in number of the damned. We gave to Moses
the Book of the Law, peradventure it will guide the Children of Israel into the
right way; we created Jesus, and Mary his Mother, they are signs of our Unity;
we established them in an eminent place, where they stayed near a Fountain. O
Apostles and Prophets! eat of the Fruits of the Earth, and do good, I know
whatsoever ye do; your Law is one Law, and I alone am your Lord; take heed to
your selves, follow not the Law of the Infidels, every one likes what he does,
depart from the wicked, and leave them in their errors, an account shall be
required of them of the riches, and of the Children that we have given them,
but they know it not. Such as fear the punishment of their Lord, that obey his
Commandments, profess his Unity, give Alms of the substance that he has given
them, and fear in their Heart, that they are not acceptable to them, shall
appear in his presence; such as shall obey him, shall enjoy his grace; he
requires not of any man what he is unable to perform. We have a Book that
declares the truth, no injustice shall be done to him that shall do what he is
able; certainly the Infidels are in ignorance of the Alcoran, they act what is
quite contrary, to that which is commanded True believers; but we have punished
the chief among them in their prosperity. Be not this Day resolute, ye shall
not be protected of us. Our Commandments are taught you, nevertheless ye are
returned upon your steps, and are risen against the Faith, and in discoursing
by Night, withdrew your selves from the Righteous. Consider they not the words
[of the Alcoran?] Does it contain any thing that has not been ordained to
their Predecessors? Know they not the Prophet that God has sent to them?
Wherefore will they not acknowledge him? Will they say that he is possessed of
the Devil? On the contrary, he teaches them the truth, nevertheless the
greatest part of them detest him; if their will had place, Heaven and Earth,
and whatsoever is betwixt them, should be confounded; we have instructed them
in the Law, which they ought to observe, but they have renounced it; Do thou
require of them any recompense for thy instructions? Thy Lord shall reward
thee, there is none that is of power to recompense thee better than He. Call
them to the right way; such as shall not believe the Resurrection, shall err.
If we pardon and deliver them from affliction, they will still continue in
their errors, to their confusion; we heretofore chastised them, nevertheless
they humble not themselves, neither implored their Lord; and when we opened
upon them the gate of our Judgments, they became desperate. God has given you
sight, hearing and sense* but few among you return him thanks; he it is that
has created you of earth, ye shall one day be assembled before him to be
judged; he it is that gives life and death, and makes the difference of day
and night, will you not honor him, neither consider? On the contrary, they have
said, as did their predecessors, wherefore shall we die? our bones shall be
dust, and shall we rise again? This was heretofore promised to our fathers, and
to us, certainly it is but an old song; Say unto them, to whom appertains the
earth, and whatsoever is in the earth, if ye know [its Creator and King?] They
will say, it is God's; Say unto them, know ye not then, that he that created
you can raise you again? Who is Lord of the seven heavens? who possesses the
throne of heaven? They will say, it is God; say unto them, will ye not fear
then to worship any other God but him? Say unto them, who is King of all
things? who sustaineth them, and is sustained of none? They will say, that it
is God; Say unto them, why then do ye deceive your selves? we have taught them
the truth, but they have rejected it, and said, that God had a son; were there
another God with God, the one would undo what the other has done, and they
would rise the one against the other. Praised be God, what they affirm is not
true, God knows that is past, the present and the future, he has no
companion; Say, Lord, give me to see the effect of all that thou have promised
to them, and put me not among the unjust, deliver us from evil, and do good to
us, I know their impiety; Lord deliver me from the temptations of the devil,
deliver me from their malice; when any one among them dies, he says, Lord,
permit me to return into the world, I will do better than I have done; there is
no return, it is to speak in vain, there is an obstacle behind them, that
detaineth them until the day of Judgment; when the Trumpet shall sound, nothing
shall retard them, they shall not glory, nor discourse with each other; the
balance of the blessed shall be heavy with good works, and the balance of the
cursed shall be light of good works. Have not my Commandments been preached
unto you, wherefore did ye contemn them? They shall say, Lord, our misery
prevailed over us, we are mislead, Lord deliver us from this misery, the
contrary was promised to us, truly we are exceedingly too blame. It shall be
said unto them, depart into the fire, and never speak to come out. Many of them
that worship me, say, Lord, we believe in thee, pardon our sins, thou art
merciful. Ye have derided them, O ye wicked! and have despised my Commandments,
but I will reward them for their perseverance, and they shall be blessed. It
shall be said to those that rise again, how many years have ye remained in the
earth? they shall answer, we have been there a day, or some days; ask of the
Angels appointed to keep the account, ye have been there but a litte time, did
ye know it, do ye believe that I have created, and assembled you before me in
vain? Praise and exalt God, King of Truth, there is no God but he, he is King
of heaven; he is void of reason that invoketh another god with Him, he shall
give account of his actions, and the Infidels shall be miserable: Say, Lord,
pardon the sins of the righteous, thou art the great merciful.

CHAP. XXIV. The Chapter of Light, containing Seventy and four Verses, written
at MEDINA.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. We have sent this Chapter
containing our Commandments clear and intelligible, peradventure ye will learn
them. The Is a man or boy kept unlawfully.
Catamite and the Concubine shall be whipped with an hundred stripes; take heed
left clemency cause you to forget the precepts of the Law of God, believe in
his divine Majesty, and the day of Judgment; Some of the True believers shall
be witnesses of their punishment: The Catamite lying with a Concubine, or an
Infidel, the Concubine lying with a Catamite or Infidel, these things are
forbidden the True believers. He that shall accuse an honest woman of adultery,
shall be whipped with twenty four stripes, unless he prove his accusation by four
witnesses, and shall never be credited in testimony. They that do such things,
are without the obedience of God, except those that repent, and satisfy what
they owe, God shall be to them gracious and merciful. They that shall accuse
their wives of adultery, and have no witnesses, shall swear four times that
they speak the truth, and shall the fifth time call for the curse of God to be
upon them, if they be liars. The wife shall be exempt from punishment, if she
swear four times that her husband is a liar, and if the fifth time she pray
that the wrath and indignation of God may be upon her, if what her husband has
said be true; in this manner does God gratify you, that ye may understand the
truth, he is most gracious and most wise. That See Gelaldin.
Troup that made defection from the True believers with a lie, and false
testimony, did you no harm; on the contrary, they did advantage you; every one
shall bear the burden of his sins, the most malicious among them shall be
thrown headlong into the torments of Hell; It was an happiness This is Abdalla
bin Seloub.
that ye heard the sense of the Believers from their own mouth, when they said,
that those men lied impudently; if they had not presented those four witnesses,
they had found none other, One of Mahomets wives was accused of adultery with
Safoiian, by Mahomets enemies.
they are liars, without the grace and mercy of God, they should have already
felt great torments in this world, and in the other, because of that imposture:
When they spoke of what they were ignorant, ye deemed it to be nothing; but it
is an exceeding great sin before God, if when ye heard it, ye said, that to
speak of those things did not concern you, ye knew it to be an imposture, God
forbids you to relapse, if ye believe in his Law, he thus declares to you
his pleasure, he is Omniscient and most Prudent; such as desire to cast obloquy
among the True-believers, shall be rigorously chastised in this World, and in
the other* God knows that of which ye are ignorant: Had not God been
favorable to you, he had chastised you in burning fury, he is gracious and
merciful. Oh ye that are True-believers! follow not the footsteps of the
Devil, he will enjoin you vice and sin; had not God gratified you with his
Mercy, not any among you should have been purged from that imposture; but God
purifieth whom he sees good, he hears all, and knows all your intentions.
The most rich, and powerful among you have not sworn to do no good to their
Parents, the Poor, or to them that fight for the Law of God, nevertheless they
do it not to them, and fly them; desire they not that God should pardon them?
He is neither gentle nor pitiful but toward True-believers. They that accuse
of immodesty, Women chaste, innocent, and faithful, shall be accursed in this
World, and shall suffer great torments at the day, when their Tongues, their
Hands, and their Feet shall testify against them; at the same time shall God
pay to them what shall be due unto them without injustice, and they shall know
that God is truth it self. The wicked Women shall speak as the wicked men, and
the wicked men as the wicked Women: The good [Women] shall speak as the good
[men] and the good [men] as the good Women; the good are innocent of the
imposture of the wicked, they shall enjoy the Grace of God, and the Treasures
of Paradise. Oh ye that are True-believers! enter not into another House
without permission; if ye salute them that dwell there, ye shall do well;
peradventure ye will be mindful; it ye find none of the House, enter not
without permission; if they speak to you to return, ye shall return, it is
better (than to stay at the door) God beholds all that ye do, ye shall not
offend God to enter into houses inhabited, if ye have affairs there, God
knows all your intentions. Speak unto the True-believers, that they contain
their sight, that they be chaste, that they do good, and that God knows all
their actions. Speak unto the Truebelieving Women, that they contain their
sight, and that they be chaste, that they suffer nothing of their beauty to be
seen, but what ought to be seen; that they cover their bosom, and their visage,
that they permit them not to be be seen, but by their Husbands, their Children,
the Children of their Husbands, their Brothers, their Nephews, their Sisters,
their Women, and their Daughters, Maidservants, and Slaves, by their
Domestiques, that are not capable of Marriage, by Children that regard not the
beauty of Women; and that they move not their feet, to show they are well shod.
Implore pardon of God, peradventure ye shall be happy; many Maidens of your own
Religion, the Daughters of the Righteous, or your Slaves, if they be poor, God
shall enrich them with his Grace, he is most liberal and Omniscient. Such as
have not Means to Marry, shall live chastely, until God has given them means:
Such as have desire to marry their Slaves, shall have power to pass a Contract
of Marriage, if they know them to be wise, and shall give them part of the
wealth that God has bestowed on them. Despise not your Wives that are chaste,
to commit Whoredom, if ye desire good in this World; if ye contemn them, God
shall be to them propitious and merciful; we have sent to you these Precepts,
clear and intelligible, like to them that were taught your Predecessors, to be
preached to the Righteous* God illuminateth the Heaven and the Earth, as the
Lamp that is in the Lanthorn of Crystal, fed with Oil of the blessed Olive; it
seems to be a Star full of Light, which goes neither to the West, nor to the
East, and yeildeth brightness upon brightness; God guides by his light whom it
pleases him, he teaches his People Parables, and is Omniscient; he permits
you to praise him in your Houses, there to be mindful of his name, and to exalt
him evening and morning. Oh ye men! your affairs ought not to hinder your
remembrance of his divine Majesty, to make your prayers at the time appointed,
neither to pay Tithes. Fear the day when the hearts of men shall be perplexed,
and their sight troubled, when God shall reward and chastise every one after
his works, and shall augment his grace upon the good; he enricheth with his
innumerable benefits whom to him seems good. The good works of the wicked are
like to mists in a spacious plain, they seem to be water when afar off, and
being approached, nothing is to be there found; They shall find before God the
Book, wherein is written whatsoever they have done, he shall punish them
according to their demerits, he is exact to keep account. Their actions are
moreover like to the darkness that is in the bottom of the sea, that is covered
with wave upon wave, obscurity and darkness upon one another; he that is in
this darkness cannot see his hand; he that shall not be illuminated by God,
shall not see a jot: See thou not, that whatsoever is in Heaven and Earth
exalts the glory of God? the Birds extend their wings before him to praise
him, he hears the prayers of all his creatures, and understands the praises
that they give him, he knows all that they do, he is King of Heaven and
earth, the refuge of all the world: See thou not how he assembleth the
clouds? how he places them one upon another? Considerest thou not how the rain
falls through their pores? and that God causes fresh water to descend from
the mountains? He has given it to whom seems good to him, he causes the
brightness of lightning to approach men, which blinds their sight, and over
whelmeth the day with night? These things are signs of his omnipotency, to them
that consider them: He created of a little water, all sorts of living
Creatures; some creep upon the Earth, others walk upon two feet, and others
upon four; he created what pleased him, he is omnipotent. Certainly, he has
sen^ a Law clear and intelligible, to conduct into the right way whom it shall
seem good to him. The Infidels say, We believe in God, and his Prophet:
nevertheless a party among them abandon his Law, and believe not in his divine
Majesty: When they are called before God, and before the Prophet, to judge
their differences, many among them refuse to come; if they come, it is with
contempt. They are greatly afflicted at heart, do they fear that God and his
Prophet will do them injustice? On the contrary, they themselves are unjust.
When the True believers are called before God, and the Prophet, to be judged,
they say, We have heard and obeyed; they are not ignorant. Those that shall
obey God, and his Prophet, shall be blessed. Many swear to fight, gallantly for
the Faith, when they shall be commanded to march against the enemy; say unto
them, Swear not, your obedience to the Prophet shall be preferred to your
oaths, God knows whatsoever ye do; say unto them, Obey God, and his Prophet;
if they be disobedient, they shall bear their burden, and ye shall bear your
own; if ye obey, ye shall follow the right way. The Prophet is obliged only to
preach intelligibly; God promises to the True believers, that shall do good
works, that they shall live long upon Earth, as he promised to them that were
before them, that they might establish the Law that he gave them; he shall
change their fear into assurance; he shall deliver them from terror, that they
may adore him alone, without Companion. He that is wicked, will depart from the
obedience which he owes to God: Make your prayers at the time appointed, pay
Tithes, and obey the Prophet, God shall give you his mercy. Believe not that
the Infidels are more powerful on Earth than we; they shall be precipitated
into the fire of Hell. O ye that are True believers! your Slaves and your
Servants of free-condition shall require leave of you, to enter where ye shall
be thrice, viz. Before the Prayer at break of Day, after Noon, and after
Supper; they shall not offend in entering without leave, where ye shall be at
another time; they enter there to serve you. In this manner does God teach you
his Commandments, he knows the humor of his Creatures, and is most prudent in
all that he ordains. It is ordained to your Children, when they shall be at
age of discretion, to demand of you permission to do what they shall desire, as
did your Predecessors: Thus does God teach you his Commandments; he is gracious
and merciful. The old and decrepit Women shall not offend God, to quit their
vails, and discover their faces; provided it be without vanity, and design to
show their Ornaments: If they abstain, they shall do well, God hears
whatsoever ye say, and knows all that is in your hearts. The Blind, the Lame,
the Sick, and you also, shall not sin, to eat in the House of your Children; at
See Kitab letenoir.
the House of your Father and Mother, Brothers, Sisters, Uncles, Aunts,
Friends; and in the House of your Servants; ye shall not offend God, if ye eat
together, or apart. When ye shall enter into any House, salute each other from
God, with blessing and affection. Thus does God teach you his Commandments,
peradventure you will learn them. When those that believed in God, and his
Prophet, repaired to the Prophet, they retired not without his permission. Such
as required leave (to depart) believe in God, and his Prophet; if they require
leave of thee for any business, license whom shall seem good to thee, and pray
to God for them; he is gracious and merciful. Call not the Prophet, as ye call
one another among you: God knows See Kitab el tenoir.
such as shamefully depart out of the Temple, and the Trench. Such as disobey
his Commandments, ought to take heed, lest some mischief befall them, and that
they suffer not great torments: Whatsoever is in the Heavens, or on Earth, is
Gods; he knows if ye are zealous in your faith, See Gelaldin.
or be hypocrites; he knows the Day wherein all the World shall be assembled
before him [to be judged.] In that day shall men see what they have done; he
knows all things.

CHAP. XXV. The Chapter of the Alcoran, containing Seventy and seven Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful: Praised be he that sent the Alcoran
to his Servant to instruct the World; he is King of the Heavens and Earth; he
has no Son, nor Companion in his Reign; he created and ordained every thing.
The Infidels worship Gods that can create nothing, and are things created; they
can neither do them good nor evil, they can give neither Life nor Death,
neither cause them to rise again. They say that the Alcoran is but a fable of
thine invention, invented with the assistance of some other Person; but they
lie and blaspheme. They say that it is but an old Song, and a fable of the
Ancients that thou writest, and that thou studiest Morning and Evening. Say
unto them, It was sent by him that knows all things in Heaven and Earth,
altogether gracious and merciful. They said, Who is this Prophet? He eats
Bread and Meat, and walks through the streets; we will not believe him,
unless that an Angel descend from Heaven to preach to us with him; unless that
Angel enrich him, and that he have a Garden full of good and savory fruits; he
is but a Wizard, or one possessed of the Devil. Consider to what they compare
thee; certainly they are in error, and cannot find the right way. Praise and
bless him that is able to bestow on thee a greater good, when it shall seem
good to thee, to wit, Gardens, wherein flow many Rivers, and Houses of
pleasure. They have denied the certainty of Universal Judgment, and we have
prepared the Fire of Hell to punish them; wrath shall carry them away with
terrible cries: when they shall behold the place of the assembly of Judgment;
when they shall there appear, they shall be desperate, and shall cry, O misery!
Cry not O misery, cry O miseries! (in the Plural) Ask of them which is better,
and more advantageous, that, or Paradise, which is prepared for the recompense
of the righteous, where they shall dwell eternally with all manner of felicity;
this is it that God has promised, and that which was impetrated of his Divine
Majesty, (for them that have his fear before their eyes) I will one day
assemble Idolaters, with their Idols; God shall say unto them, you are they who
have seduced my creatures from the right way; they shall say, praised be thy
Name; we ought to have worshipped none but thy Divine Majesty; but the wealth
that thou gave to our Magistrates, and their life, which thou did prolong,
caused them to forget thy Commandments; they were pernicious men, in that they
abjured thy Law, they cannot this day be exempt from the punishment of our
crimes, neither protect us against thy wrath. The Idolaters shall be rigorously
punished; the Prophets that we sent before thee, did eat Bread and Meat, and
walked through the streets; we prove them one after another: Persevere, God
beholds them that are patient. Those that believe not in the Resurrection,
have said, The Angels are not descended from Heaven, we have not seen God; they
are become proud, and are fallen into an exceeding great error, but the wicked
shall one day be without comfort; when they see the Angels, they shall cry,
help, help! We will set before their eyes all the sins that they have
committed; the good works which they shall think to have done, shall be like to
dust, which the wind carries away; and the blessed shall enjoy a most certain
good, they shall hear of nothing but what contenteth them. When the Heaven and
the Air shall divide themselves, and the Angels shall descend, then shall the
truth appear, and the merciful shall Reign; that day shall be tedious to
Infidels, they shall bite their fingers, and say, would to God I had followed
the Prophet and his Apostle! Oh misery! would to God I had not contracted amity
with such an Infidel, he seduced me from the right way, he hindered me to
believe in the Alcoran which God sent; certainly the Devil has tempted men.
Then shall the Prophet say, Lord, such as have followed me, have obeyed what is
written in the Alcoran, and the Infidels have rejected it. We have appointed an
enemy among the wicked, to every Prophet of them that were before thee, but it
suffices thee that God guides and protecteth thee. The Infidels have
demanded, if the Alcoran was sent all at once; I have so done to confirm the
truth in thy heart, I have sent it piece by piece, they shall not show thee any
thing like unto it; I have instructed thee in the Truth, clear and
intelligible; the incredulous shall be confined in the Fire of Hell, and be
most miserable. Certainly, We gave to Moses the Book of the Law, we sent with
him his Brother Aaron to assist him, and said unto them, Go both of you, preach
unto Infidels, we will destroy them, unless they be converted. When the People
of Noah despised our Commandment, we drowned them, and made them serve for
example to Posterity, and prepared great torments for the impious. Remember
Aad, Temod, and those that dwelt nigh unto the Well, a long time after them; we
spoke to them in Parables, and destroyed them. Oh ye wicked! consider the
misery of the City, upon which fell that mischievous Rain, that destroyed them,
because the Inhabitants believed not in the Resurrection. When the Infidels saw
thee appear, they derided thee, and said, This Prophet would seduce us, and
make us to abandon our God; we had patience, and deferred our punishment: They
shall know at the Day of Judgment them that have been seduced; Have thou
considered the action of him that spoke of his God after his fantasy? Were
thou his Tutor, to hinder him to speak? Do thou believe that the greatest
part of the wicked, hear, and understand what thou speak to them? They are
like Beasts, and worse; See thou how thy Lord sheddeth the Rose? Were it his
will, it should be permanent, the Sun has caused it to melt, and attracteth it
gently to himself. He it is that created the Night for repose, and the Day for
labor. He it is that sends the Winds by his special grace, he makes Rain to
descend from Heaven, to refresh the Earth, to give it life, to water the
beasts, and for the contentment of men; we have divided it among them, that
they may be mindful of our grace, nevertheless, the greatest part of them are
ungrateful. Had we so pleased, we had sent to every City a preacher, to preach
unto the Inhabitants the Torments of Hell; obey not Infidels, preach to them
frequently what is written in the Alcoran. It is God that has sweetened the
water of Euphrates, that joined the two Seas, that made them Salt, and put
between them a separation, to hinder them to mix: He created Man and Woman of a
little water, to increase and multiply together; thy Lord can do whatsoever him
pleases, yet do the Infidels adore what can neither benefit nor hurt them, and
assist the devil their master to tempt the world; We sent thee only to preach
the torments of hell, and to proclaim the joys of Paradise: Say unto them, I
require not of you reward for my preaching, he that shall be acceptable to God,
will follow the way of his Law: Praise and exalt thy Lord, trust in him, he
knows all the sins of men; he created the heavens, and the ^arth in six days,
and sits on his Throne; learn this of him that knows it. When it was said
to the Infidels, worship the merciful [God;] they said, what merciful? shall we
worship what ye appoint us? and they added to their impiety. Blessed be he that
created the signs of heaven, that created the Sun and the Moon, full of
Brightness and light, and has made the days to succeed each other, to return
him thanks for his graces. The servants of the merciful, that walk with
humility, that salute the ignorant when they speak to them; Such as pray to,
and worship God day and night; such as say, Lord, deliver us from the torments
of hell; those that fear God, that are not prodigal, nor covetous, that follow
the middle way, betwixt prodigality and avarice, those that worship one God,
that kill no man but with reason, and following the Commandments of God, and
that are not luxurious, shall enjoy eternally the grace of God; such as do the
contrary shall be chastised, their punishment shall be augmented at the day of
Judgment, and they shall be damned for ever, except him that shall be
converted, and shall have done good works, God shall give him pardon of his
sins, he is gracious and merciful. They, who do good works and repent, who make
no false oath, who are humble, and are not (wilfully) deaf and dumb when they
hear the Alcoran read, and say, Lord, give us and our posterity children, that
may be the light of our eyes, and be obedient to thee; work in us a fear to
disobey thy Commandments; such persons shall enjoy eternally the delights of
Paradise, for reward of their perseverance; they shall there find salutations,
and benedictions, with immense graces. Say unto the wicked, God will not
enlighten you, neither hearken to your prayers, because ye have traduced his
Prophet; the time of the punishment of your crimes shall suddenly arrive.

CHAP. XXVI. The Chapter of Poets, containing an hundred and twenty seven
Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful: God is most pure, he understands
all things, he is most wise. These signs are the signs of the book that
distinguishes truth from falsehood; will thou destroy thy self, because men are
impious? If I will, I can cause my judgments to descend upon them, that shall
humble them, they despise my Commandments; they scoff, but shall be rigorously
punished; See they not how many fruits we have made to spring out of the earth?
It is a token of our Omnipotency, nevertheless the greatest part of them
believe not that thy Lord is the omnipotent, and the merciful. Instruct them
how thy Lord said unto Moses, thou shall be my messenger to the Infidels, and
the people of Pharaoh, that they may have my fear before their eyes. Moses
said, Lord, I fear they may traduce me, and that my tongue cannot be loosed;
send with me my brother Aaron, they know the fault I have committed, and will
put me to death. Moses slew an Egyptian.
The Lord said to him, they shall not put thee to death, go both whither I
command you, I will be with you* and will hear what they say; say to Pharaoh,
that ye are the Messengers of the Lord of the World, and let him dismiss with
you the Children of Israel; Pharaoh said unto Moses, have I not seen thee
within this house a little Child? Did thou not dwell with us many years? Did
thou not kill a man? Thou art impious. Moses said, I did what I did, I was in
the number of the seduced, I fled when I feared you; since that time God has
given me knowledge, and placed me in the number of his Prophets and Apostles, he
has sent me his grace, to set before thee the evil that thou do commit; in
causing thy self to be adored of the Children of Israel; Pharaoh said unto him,
who is that God of the World? He answered, it is the Lord of Heaven and Earth,
and of whatsoever is between them. Pharaoh said to them that were about him,
Hear ye not what he says? Moses continued his [speech] and said, my Lord is
your God, the God of your Fathers, and of your Predecessors. Pharaoh said, this
Prophet that is sent to you is a fool; Moses said, I am indeed the Messenger of
the Lord of the West and East, if ye had understanding to know him: Pharaoh
said, if thou worship any other God but me, I will cause thee to be put unto
the bottom of a Pit; Moses said to him, Will thou do it, seeing I am come to
thee with reasons so strong, and arguments so infallible? Pharaoh said unto
him, Bring thy reasons if thou art true: Then he cast his staff on the ground,
and it was changed into a Serpent; he drew his Hand out of his bosom, it
appeared white, and shining to the Eyes of the spectators. Then said Pharaoh to
them that were about him, Certainly, behold here a skilful Magician, he would
drive you from your Country through his Magic, what say ye? They answered, He,
with his Brother, must be terrified, and men must be sent into all thy Cities,
to assemble the most knowing Magicians of all thy Dominions; when they came
together at the day appointed, it was demanded of them, if they were called to
follow the magic of Moses, and of Aaron? They said, what shall be our reward
if we be victorious? Pharaoh said unto them, Yes, ye shall be rewarded, and be
among them that approach my Person. Moses said unto them, will you cast your
staves on the ground, or shall I first cast mine? They cast their cords and
their staves first, saying, With the assistance of Pharaoh we shall be
victorious; then Moses cast his Rod on the ground, which devoured their cords
and staves; when they beheld this miracle, they fell prostrate, and said, We
believe in the Lord of the World, God of Moses and Aaron; Pbaroah said to them,
If ye believe in Moses without my permission, ye shall see what shall (...)
you; he is your Master, he understands Magic better than you; I will cause
your right feet and left hands, or your right hands and left feet to be cut
off, and cause you all to be hanged; they said, This shall do us none harm, we
shall return before God our Lord, we hope that he will remit our sins, because
we shall be the first Converts. We said unto Moses, go with the Children of
Israel, my servants, and fear not the People of Pharaoh that shall follow thee:
Pharaoh sent his Commissioners through his Dominions to assemble the People,
and said, (speaking of the Children of Israel) those men are few in number,
they have displeased me, but I will well awake them. We moved Pharaoh and his
People to depart out of Egypt, to pursue the Children of Israel; we caused them
to quit their Gardens, Fountains, and Houses of pleasure, and made the Children
of Israel heirs of their treasure, they surpised them at the rising of the
Sun; when the Children of Israel beheld them, they said, we are overtaken:
Moses answered, No, my Lord is with me, he shall guide me; then we inspired
Moses to strike the Sea with his Rod, incontinently it divided it self on both
sides, like two Mountains; we saved him, and all that were wi^h him, and
drowned the men of Pharaoh; which shall serve for an example to the incredulous
and obstinate, thy Lord is Omnipotent and merciful. Relate to unbelievers the
History of Abraham, when he said to his Father and his People, whom do ye
adore? they answered, We adore our Idols; he said unto them, Do they hear you
when ye invoke them? Do they good unto you when ye worship them, or mischief
when ye neglect them? they answered, We find that our Fathers worshipped them
as we do; Abraham said unto them, you and your Fathers worship vain things, ye
adore only Idols, mine Enemies; I will not worship them, I will worship the
Lord of the World, who created, guides, and nourishes me, who gives me
health when I am sick, who makes me to live, and will cause me to die, and
from whom I hope for pardon of my Sins at the Day of Judgment: Lord give me the
knowledge of thy will, grant that my Tongue and Words may be credited as true,
by Posterity; put me into the number of the Heirs of Paradise; pardon my
Father, who has been in the number of the erroneous, and make me not ashamed
at the Day of the Resurrection; at the Day, when riches and Children shall be
unprofitable, except to such as shall have an heart estranged from Impiety; God
shall make the righteous to approach to Paradise, and the wicked to see Hell:
They shall say, Can the Idols that ye adore save you? Can they save themselves?
They shall be, with you, their adherents, and the devils, thrown headlong into
the fire of hell: the Idolaters shall dispute in hell, with them whom they have
worshipped, and shall say, By God, we were abused when we adored you, the
wicked seduced us, we have none this day to intercede for us, neither friend to
protect us; could we return into the world, we would believe in the Law of God;
this discourse shall be for example to the wicked that believe not that thy
Lord is the Omnipotent and merciful. The people of Noah's time slandered the
Apostles and Prophets that were sent to them; Noah their brother said unto
them, Fear God, I am his Messenger, sent to preach unto you, fear God, and obey
him, I require no recompense for my instructions, God the sole Lord of the
world shall reward my labors, fear and obey him; They said, shall we believe
in thee, and thy followers, who are infamous? He said, I know not what they do,
my Lord keeps account of their actions; if ye knew the right way, ye would
not worship Idols; I drive not true believers from my society, I am sent only
to preach the torments of Hell. They said, O Noah! if thou quit not this
discourse, thou shall be stoned; Noah said, Lord, this people is impious, judge
our difference, deliver me from their malice, and all true believers that are
with me; We preserved him, and those that were with him in the Ark, and
destroyed them that remained on the earth: This is an evidence of our
Omnipotency, yet the greatest part of Infidels believe not that God is
omnipotent and merciful. The people of Aads time traduced the Apostles and
Prophets that were sent unto them; Hod his brother said unto them, fear God, I
am his Messenger, sent to preach unto you with fidelity. Fear God and obey him;
I require of you no recompense of my preaching, the Lord of the Universe shall
abundantly reward me. Will ye Build sowers, and lofty Palaces, as if ye would
dwell eternally in the world? Will ye be cruel, without compassion on your
selves? Fear God and obey him; fear him who gives you his grace, bestows on
you wealth, children, gardens, and fountains; I fear that ye shall suffer
grievous pains at the day of Judgment: They said unto him, Art thou come to be
preached unto, or to preach to us? Thou relatest to us old men's Fables; They
slandered him, and we destroyed them: this is a token of our Omnipotency,
nevertheless the greatest part of Infidels believe not thy Lord to be
Omnipotent and merciful. The people of Temod belyed the Prophets that were sent
unto them; his brother Salhe said unto them, fear God, I am a messenger sent
from God to preach to you, fear God and obey him; I require of you no
recompense for my preaching, the Lord of the Universe shall recompense my
labors; will ye forsake eternal riches, to cleave to the wealth of this world,
to put your trust in your gardens, your fountains, your tillages, your dates,
and fruits? shall ye be esteemed prudent if ye build houses of pleasure in the
mountains? fear God, obey his Commandments, and obey not the wicked, that
defile the earth, and do no good. They said unto him, thou art a Magician, and
an Inchanter, thou art but a man like unto us, show us some miracle, if thou be
indeed a Prophet sent from God; he said, behold there a Camel, he has a place
to drink at a day appointed, The Turks believe this Camel was changed into a
Rock by Salhe.
ye likewise have it to drink as he* do him no harm, otherwise shall ye be
punished at the day of Judgment. They did hurt this Camel through contempt, but
had cause to repent it, and were severely punished. This is an example for
posterity; nevertheless the greatest part of Infidels believe not that thy Lord
is altogether gracious and merciful. The Citizens of Lot traduced* the Prophets
that were sent unto them; Lot their brother said, fear God, I am a faithful
Messenger sent from him, to preach to you, fear God, and obey him, I require of
you no reward for my pains, God will reward me; will ye cleave to the world to
reject that glory that he has created for you? ye forsake good to embrace
evil. They said, O Lot! if thou change not this discourse, we will banish thee
from our City; he said, perhaps I am one of those whom ye abhor; Lord deliver
me, with my family, from their hands. We saved him with all his family, except
his wife, who remained with the inhabitants of the City, we caused to fall upon
them a rain that destroyed them. This is an example for posterity, nevertheless
the greatest part of Infidels believe not that thy Lord is Omnipotent and
merciful. They that inhabit the A Forest near to Madian. See Gelaldin.
Forest, slandered the Prophets that were sent unto them; Chaib said to them,
fear God, I am a faithful messenger sent from him, to preach unto you the
torments of hell; fear God, and obey him, I require no reward of you for my
preaching, the Lord of the Universe shall recompense me: Measure with good
measure, and weigh with good weights, detain nothing from your neighbor,
defile not the earth, fear him that created you, and all those that were before
you: They said unto him, thou art a Sorcerer, thou art but a man like us, we
believe thee to be a liar; if thou art indeed sent from God, cause a part of
heaven to fall upon us; he answered, God knows that of which ye are ignorant;
they traduced him, but were chastised, being covered with a cloud that rained
upon them a shewer of fire, and they were burned, as if it had been the day of
Judgment: this is a token of my Power, but the greatest part of Infidels
believe not that thy Lord is Omnipotent and merciful. Certainly the Alcoran was
sent by the Lord of the world, the faithful Spirit inspired it into thine
heart, that thou may preach to the people the pains of Hell in the Arabique
tongue; the Scriptures heretofore made mention [of it;] if the Infidels of
Mecca are ignorant of it, the Doctors of the children of Israel have knowledge
to understand it, although that we have not sent it in the language of the
Persians, yet cease not to instruct them in that which they know not; we have
imprinted a lie in the hearts of the wicked, they shall not believe what is
written in the Alcoran, until they see the punishment prepared for Infidels at
the day of Judgment; that day shall come at unawares, of which they are
ignorant. They say, let us tarry, and not believe as yet, in what is contained
in that book; are they impatient until they see their punishment? Have thou
seen how they have some years deferred it, and how, in the end, that which we
promised befell them? their riches were to them unprofitatable. We have not
destroyed Cities without having forewarned them of their destruction, we are
unjust to none. The devils did not bring the Alcoran, it was to them of none
advantage, they could not compose it, they are remote [from the Angels] and
cannot hear their speech; say not there is another God with God; if thou say
it, thou shall be chastised; preach the torments of Hell to them that shall
follow thee; be humble and civil to True believers; if they disobey thee, say
unto them, I am innocent of what ye do, and am resigned to the Will of God,
(...) potent and merciful: He beholds thee when thou do pray, and worship
him; he hears and knows all things. Shall I tell ye to whom the Devils
address themselves? They apply themselves to Liars, they tell to them what they
have heard spoken, but they all lie. The erronous imitate the Sea Ekteri, and
Kitab el tenoir.
Poets; they are confuted in their Discourse, and say, they have done what they
have not, except those that believe in God, that do good works, who often think
of his Divine Majesty, and that have been protected against the injustice of
Infidels; the unjust shall know, that they shall one day rise again.

CHAP. XXVII. The Chapter of the Pismire, containing Fourscore and thirteen
Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, Gracious and Merciful. God is most pure, he understands
all. These mysteries are the mysteries of the Alcoran, which distinguishes the
Truth from a Lie; it conducteth men into the right way, and proclaims the
Joys of Paradise to such as believe in the Law of God, who make their prayers
at the time appointed, pay Tithes, and have knowledge of their end. They that
believe not in the Day of Judgment, like well of what they do, and are in
confusion, they shall in the end be in the number of the damned. The Alcoran
was conveyed to thee from the most prudent, that knows all things. Remember
thou that Moses said to his Family, I see a Fire, I go to it, I will bring you
tidings, I will bring you a spark, peradventure you shall be warmed; when he
drew near to the Fire, he heard a voice that said to him, oh Moses! that which
is in this Fire, and whatsoever is about it, is blessed; praise is due to God,
Lord of the Universe; I am God Omnipotent, and Eternal; Cast thy staff on the
ground: When Moses beheld his staff to move, as it had been alive, he went back
very sorrowful, and returned no more; Fear not that staff, my Messenger and my
Prophets have no fear in my presence; he that shall be converted, shall find me
gracious and merciful. Put thine Hand into thy Pocket, it shall come forth
white, without harm, it shall be one of the Nine marks of my Omnipotency.
Pharaoh, and his Ministers were altogether erroneous; when they saw my
Miracles, they said that they were but Sorcery; they despised them, and
increased their impiety; Consider what is the end of the wicked, and how they
have been destroyed; We gave knowledge to David and to Solomon; they said, God
has gratified us above many of his Servants that have believed in his
Omnipotency; Solomon was David's H^ir, and and said to the People, we
understand the Language of Birds, we know whatsoever can be known, it is an
exceeding great Grace. Solomon's Army being one day assembled before him,
composed of Men, Devils, and Birds, ^e lead them to the Valle^ of Pismires; a
(...) their Queen, cried out, Oh Pismires ^ enter into your Houses, le^t
Solomon and (...) trample you under foot, with knowledge (...) it. Solomon
hearing these words, (...) some time without speaking, and (...) end began to
laugh, saying, Lord assist me, that I may give thee thanks for the benefits and
graces which thou did confer upon my Father; if I do well, thou will accept
it, place me through thy Mercy in number of them that exalt thy glory; he
called for the A Bird so called.
Whoop, and said, Wherefore see I not the Whoop? Is she in the number of the
absent? I will punish and put her to death, if she have not a lawful excuse;
not long after, she humbled her self before Solomon, who asked her whence she
came? She answered, I come from seeing what thou see not, I come from the
Kingdom of Saba, whence I bring certain tidings; I have found a woman, their
Queen, who has whatsoever is necessary for a King; she has a great and
magnificent. Throne, I have found that she with her Subjects adore the Sun, the
Devil caused them to delight in this their action, he has seduced them from
the right way, and they shall be in error until they worship one God, who
sends Rain from Heaven, and makes the Earth to produce Plants and Fruits,
who knows whatsoever is in the hearts of men, and what they utter; God! There
is but one God, Lord of the Universe. Solomon said, I shall soon see if thou
speak truth, or whether thou be in the number of the Liars; Go, bear to her
this Letter, and observe what she and her People shall answer; at her arrival,
the Queen said to her Ministers, Oh ye that are raised to dignity in my
dominions; a Letter is given me from Solomon, of this tenor. In the Name of
God gracious and merciful, rise not up against me, and obey me. Give me
counsel, what I ought to do, I will do nothing without your advice, and what
you see not with your eyes: They answered, Our welfare and misery depend on
thee, command whatsoever shall seem good to thee, and we will obey thee. She
said, When Kings enter a City, they introduce many disorders; they abase, and
humble the chief of the Inhabitants, and the most eminent; if Solomon and his
People come hither, they will use [us] in the like manner. I think it requisite
to send to him an Ambassador with some presents, perhaps he will take a
resolution to return. When the Ambassador arrived in Solomon's presence, he
said unto him, Do ye bring me presents? God has bestowed on me more riches
then on you, presents rejoice you, because ye love them: Return to them that
sent you, I will go visit them with Forces so great, that they shall not be
able to resist; I will drive them out of their Dominions, and they shall be
miserable, if they obey me not: Then he said to his People, Sirs, who will
bring to me the Royal Seat of that Woman, before she and her subjects obey me?
One of the Devils said unto him, I, I will bring it Gelaldin says he knew the
Name of God.
before thou arise from thy place; I am strong enough to bear it, I will carry
it carefully. One of them that attended Solomon, who knew the Scriptures, said,
I will bring it to thee in the twinkling of an eye: When Solomon beheld this
Throne before him, he said, Behold here a favor of God, to try if I would
acknowledge his benefits. He that returns thanks to God for his graces,
performs his duty; he rejects him that is ungrateful. I will try if she
follows the right way, or whether she be in the number of the seduced. They
changed something in her Royal seat, to try if she would know it, when This
Queen was called Ba^kis See Gelaldin.
she arrived in Solomon's presence. At her arrival, they showed it her, and
asked if it resembled her own; she replied, It resembles it, as if it were the
same: She had knowledge of the right way; but that which the People, and the
(...), instead of God, had seduced them from the obedience of his divine
Majesty. They spoke to her to enter into a gallery; when she beheld the
pavement, she believed it to be Water; and in lifting up her Robe, fearing to
wet it, discovered her Leg. Solomon told her, that the pavement was of
pollished glass, and exhorted her to embrace the Law of God. Then she said,
Lord, I am too blame, in having offended thee; I am obedient with Solomon, to
the Commandments of the God of the Universe. We sent Salhe to Temod, and his
People, to exhort them to worship one God: He said unto them, O People! fly to
the Mercy of God; if ye implore pardon of him, ye shall be pardoned. They said,
Would thou draw us into thine error? And into the error of them that are with
thee? He said, God shall chastise you, ye are Seditious. They were Nine persons
in the City that defiled the Earth, and did no good; they said among them, Let
us this Night kill the Prophet, and his adherents: We will say to them that
seek him, That we saw him not, neither them that slew him; and will swear that
we speak truth: They were cunning, but we were more subtle than they, and they
knew it not. Consider what was the issue of their stratagems; we destroyed them
with their followers; and their Houses are become desert, because of their
impiety. This shall serve for example to them that have knowledge of our
Omnipotency: We served the Prophet, and all the True believers that were with
him. Remember thou the History of Lot, who said to his Citizens, Will ye always
defile your selves in uncleanness, in each others view? Will ye love men more
than women? Ye are ignorant. They replied, Let us drive Lot and his Family out
of our City; they defile not themselves like us. We preserved him, with all his
Family, except his Wife; she remained among them that were chastised. We caused
it to Rain upon them, a Rain that gave them to know the severity of our
chastisements. Say unto them, Praised be God, that destroys the wicked, and
Salvation to all those who he has chosen; are they not more happy, than such
as believe there are many Gods? Who created the Heavens and the Earth? Who
caused Rain to fall from Heaven? Who has made many delicious Gardens to bring
forth? You have not the power to cause the plants to spring forth, without the
assistance of God. Certainly unbelievers do err from the right way. Who has
established the Earth, and made the Rivers to flow? Who has made heavy the
Mountains? Who but God has put separation that is between Seas? The greatest
part of the World know it not. Who renders men miserable? Who delivers them
from affliction when they invoke him? Who has caused you to multiply, and
leave your Posterity on Earth, but God? Nevertheless few men give him thanks.
Who guides in the darkness of the Earth and Sea? Who but God sends the
Winds, the forerunners of Rain? He is most high, and most powerful, but the
wicked will not consider the effects of his Omnipotency. Who forms men? Who
makes them to live, die, and rise again? Who enricheth them with the Wealth of
Heaven, and of Earth, but God? Say unto them, produce your reasons, bring your
arguments, if what ye alledg be true; say unto them, None but God knows what
is in Heaven and Earth, no man knows the future, present and past; do men
know the day of the Resurrection? Contrariwise they doubt, and are blind. The
wicked have said, What? we shall be dust, as are our Fathers; and shall come
forth out of our Graves! This was heretofore promised to our Fathers, and to
us, this is but a Fable of old men: Tell them, that they consider not what was
heretofore the end of the wicked; afflict not thy self, for that they conspire
against thee, and that they demand at what time they shall see the punishment
that is foretold them: Say unto them, it is not far from you, ye throw your
selves headlong into it, but God is pitiful toward his People, nevertheless
the greatest part give him no thanks for his Grace, thy Lord knows what is in
their Heart, and whatsoever they speak; there is nothing in Heaven or Earth,
that is not written in a most intelligible Book; the Alcoran explaineth to the
Children of Israel the greatest part of their difficulties, it will guide them
in the right way, and deliver from Hell them that shall believe thee; thy Lord
shall judge them at the day of Judgment, he is Omnipotent and wise; trust thou
in God, thou art in the way of truth; the Dead and Deaf shall not hear thee,
and unbelievers shall depart from thee pensive and astonished; thou ought
not to guide the blind, neither to make the deaf to hear, except such as shall
believe in the Alcoran, and be obedient, when the time of the punishment that
is denounced against them shall be come; we will cause a Beast to come from
under the Earth, that shall speak unto them, and shall say, The People believe
not in the Law of God, they know not his wondrous works. Be thou mindful of the
Day, when I will assemble a Multitude of all Nations that have disobeyed my
Commandments, to give account of their actions: I will say unto them, Ye have
traduced my Prophets, ye know ^ot what ye said, What have ye done? Then shall
they be punished for their sins, and be inexcusable, they shall not speak a
word. Do not Infidels see that we have created the Night for rest, and the Day
for travel? This is a sign of my Omnipotency; be thou mindful of the Day
wherein the Angel shall sound the Trumpet, and whatsoever is in Heaven and
Earth, shall tremble with fear, except such as shall be in the favor of God;
that Day shall thou see the Mountains suspended, to move like the Clouds; this
shall be a work of God, who created all things; and knows their end; he that
shall have done good works, shall be rewarded, he shall be without fear; and
they that had done evil, shall remain in the Fire of Hell; it shall be said
unto them, Are ye not chastised according to your demerits? Say unto the
People, I command you to worship the Lord of this privileged M^cca. See
Gelaldin.
City, all things appertain to him; I command you to believe in the Unity of
his Divine Majesty, and to study the Alcoran; who so does good, shall find
good. Say unto them that shall be seduced, I am sent only to preach the
Torments of Hell: say to True believers, Praised be God that has given you to
see his Miracles, and has given you knowledge of the right way; thy Lord is not
ignorant of what they do.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Chapter of History, containing Fourscore and Eight Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful God is most Pure, he understands
all things, and is most Wise. These mysteries are the mysteries of the Book
that distinguishes the Truth from a Lie. I relate to thee the history of
Moses, and of Pharaoh with Truth, for the contentment of True believers.
Pharaoh was powerful on Earth, he entreated his Subjects as seemed good to him,
he tormented one party, and murdered their Children, he abused their Wives,
and was of them that defiled the Earth; I gave my Grace to them that were
afflicted on Earth; I made them successors of Pharoah's Kingdom, I established
them in his Dominions; I made Pharaoh, Haman, and their Army to see what they
most feared; we said to the Mother of Moses, give suck to thy Child; if thou
fear that they will mischief him, cast him upon Nile, fear not, neither
afflict thy self, I will restore him to thee between thine Arms, and place him
in the number of Prophets. The domestiques of Pharaoh found him upon the Water,
and saved him, to be one day their enemy, and to torment them, because Pharaoh,
Haman, and their People were Infidels. Pharoah's wife said unto him, I entreat
thee not to suffer this Infant to be slain, mine eyes rejoice to see him, he
shall one day be profitable for our service, as our Son; but they were ignorant
of what should befall them; the Heart of his Mother was freed from fear, when
she behold him in the hands of Pharorh's wife, and scarce could she refrain to
let them know that she was his Mother; we caused her to have patience, and she
had faith in our promises: she spoke to his sister to follow him step by step,
she followed afar off, without intimation that she was his sister, or that she
regarded him. We had before prohibited Moses to suck the milk of any other
nurse, than that of his mother; his sister said to Pharoah's servant, will ye
that I provide you a nurse, and people that shall carefully nourish him? We
caused him to be restored to his mother, to nurse him; she ceased from her
sadness, when she knew, and saw that God was sincere in what he had promised,
but the greatest part of the people know it not. When Moses was aged, about
thirty three years, we gave him knowledge and wisdom; thus do I reward the
righteous; Moses entering one day into the City, met two men that fought; the
one was of the Children of Israel, and the other was an Egyptian, and of his
enemies, whom he assaulted and slew; after this he said the Devil tempted me,
he is the open enemy of men; Lord, I have offended thee, pardon me; he pardoned
him, he is gracious and merciful; Lord, since thou have been so gracious to me,
I will never give aid or succor to Infidels. He contined in the City with
fear, and kept himself upon his guard; on the morrow he again met him, whom the
day before he had defended, who fought likewise with another Egyptian, and
required his assistance; Moses said unto him, Thou art seditious; he replied,
oh Moses! will thou slay me, as thou did slay him yesterday? Will thou be a
murderer of all men, or a just man? Not long after a man came [in hast] to him
from the utmost part of the City, who said unto him, oh Moses! the Officers of
Pharaoh have conspired against thee, they desire to put thee to death, save thy
self, and follow my counsel; He departed from the City with fear, keeping
himself upon his guard, beseeching his Lord to deliver him from the hands of
Infidels; he went toward Madian, and said, Lord suffer me not to follow an
evil way; He met a great number of persons that made their flocks to drink, he
with them found two maids that could not water their Cattle, he said unto them,
what do ye two do here? We have not strength to draw water to give our beasts
to drink, we tarry for the Shepherd, our father is too old to draw [it.] He
drew water out of the well to water their Cattle, and withdrew to a shade,
because of the heat of the Sun, saying, Lord, I am deprived of all the graces
which heretofore thou did confer on me; I am now poor and necessitous. One of
those maidens came to seek him, and bashfully said unto him, My father calls
thee, to recompense thee for the pains thou have taken in watering our cattle;
When he was in the old man's presence, he related what had befaln him. The old
man said, Fear nothing, I will deliver thee from the hands of the wicked; one
of his daughters said to her sister, Give to this man to eat, and reward his
pains, he assisted us with affection; their Father said unto him, I will marry
thee to one of my two daughters, on condition, that thou will have a care of my
flocks the space of eight years; ten years if it please thee, said Moses; I
will not forsake thee, thou shall find me an honest man, I will serve thee the
two terms, either eight or ten years, as shall seem good to thee, God is
witness of what I say. After the term expired, Moses forsook the house of his
father in law; withdrawing with his wife, he beheld afar off a great fire on
the side of the mountain, and said to his wife, tarry here, I see the fire of
the Omnipotent, I will speedily return, I will bring you a spark, peradventure
you shall be warmed: when he drew near to this fire, they cried unto him from
the right side of the valley, from an eminent place, and from a bush, Oh Moses!
I am God, Lord of the Universe, cast thy staff on the ground; when he beheld
his staff to move, as it had been alive, he fled for fear, and returned no
more: O Moses! draw near, and fear not, thou art in a place of safety, put
thine hand into thy pocket, it shall come out white and shining, without harm;
draw back thine arm into thy sleeve, it shall return to its former condition;
thy staff and thine hand shall be two signs of my Omnipotency to Pharaoh and
his Ministers, who disobey my Commandments; Moses said, Lord, I have slain an
Egyptian, I am afraid they will take away my life, command Aaron, who is
eloquent, to go with me, to aid me, and to confirm what I shall say, I fear
they will traduce me; I will give thee thy brother for thine assistant, I will
give to you both strength to defend your selves from their malice; go, do what
is commanded you, ye shall be victorious, and all those that shall follow you:
when Moses came to Pharaoh, he made him to see my miracles, and preached my
Commandments to his Ministers; they said, this is but magic and witchcraft, we
have not heard these things to have been spoken to our predecessors. Moses
said, the Lord knows him that teaches the right way, and him that ought to
have part in Paradise, Infidels shall be most miserable. Pharaoh said to his
Ministers, do ye know any other God but me? O H^min! let me offer sacrifices,
and build a Temple; shall I deceive my self with the God of M^ses? I believe
him to be in the number of liars. He became proud on earth, with his Ministers,
and they believed that they should never be assembled (...) me to be judged: we
surprised him with his people and caused him to perish in the (...); (...) of
unbelievers; we abandoned them, and they are in the number of the condemned to
the fire of hell. They shall find none to protect them at the day of Judgment;
we cursed them on earth, and at the day of the Resurrection they shall be
abominable to all the world. We taught Moses our Commandments, after the
destruction of many Infidels before his coming. We gave him the Book, to be a
light to the people, to conduct them into the right way, and acquire our grace,
peradventure they will remember. Thou were not with Moses when we spoke to him;
to him we created another age after him, thou did not at that time dwell with
the Inhabitants of Madian, neither did thou teach them our Commandments; it
is we that have instructed thee in the History of past ages; thou were not on
the mountain when we spoke to Moses; we sent thee through our special grace, to
preach to men the torments of hell; they have not yet had a preacher like unto
thee, perhaps they will consider it; when they felt any punishment for their
sins, they said, Lord, had thou sent us an Apostle to instruct us, we should
have obeyed thy Commandments, and have believed in thy Law: and when on our
part they were instructed in the Truth, they said, does Mahomet work miracles
like Moses? Do they not traduce what Moses did, when they say, that Moses and
Mahomet are two apparent Sorcerers? and when they said that they believed
neither Prophet, nor Scripture? Say unto them, bring any book from God, that
better teaches the right way than the Old Testament, and more savingly than
the Alcoran, I will follow it, if ye speak the truth: If they be not heard when
they shall require this book, know, that they follow only their own appetites
and their impiety; who is more erroneous than he that follows but his own
passion, and is not guided of God? He guides not Infidels; Certainly we have
sent them the Alcoran, peradventure they will believe in it; they, to whom we
heretofore sent this Book, believe in the contents thereof; when they hear it
read, they say, we believe in those words, it is the very Truth that proceeds
from God; we believe in the Unity of his Divine Majesty, they shall be doubly
rewarded, because they have persevered in well-doing; they have overcome evil
through their good deeds, and have expended in good works part of the Wealth
that we gave them. When they heard the Faith evil spoken of, they withdrew
themselves, took leave of the company, and said, Ye shall answer for your
selves, and we for our actions. Regard not the ignorant, thou shall not convert
all them that thou shall desire to convert; God converteth, and guides into
the right way whom he pleases, and knows such as serve him. They said, if I
follow with thee the right way, I must forsake my Country. Shall not I
establish them in a place of safety, where they shall find all sorts of fruits
to enrich them? But the greatest part of the People know it not. How many
Cities have we destroyed, that took pleasure in their evil life? No man
inhabited them any more, except very few, and we became heirs of their riches.
God shall not destroy Mecca, until he have sent an Apostle to instruct the
Inhabitants thereof in the right way: God destroys not a City, if the
Inhabitants be not unjust, and disobey not his Commandments; the Wealth of this
World which ye possess, pleases you, but the Riches of Heaven are much better,
and eternal; will ye not understand it? Have we not kept promise with them to
whom we promised Paradise? And with them to whom we promised the Riches of this
World, and in the end were in the number of the damned? Be thou mindful of the
day when thy Lord shall call them, and say unto them, where are your Idols,
which ye believed to be my Companions? The chief of them shall say, Lord,
behold those that were seduced like us, we are innocent of their Idolatry, they
adored not us; they shall speak that day to the Idolaters to invoke their
Idols, but they shall not hear them, they shall be visibly chastised on Earth:
Be thou mindful of the day when thy Lord shall call them, and say unto them,
Wherefore have ye not believed my Apostles and my Prophets? They shall be
confounded, and remain dumb. He that shall be converted, and do good works,
shall be happy. Thy Lord creates what pleases him, and makes choice of what
seems to him good. Praised be God, he has no Companion, he knows what is
in the hearts of men, and what they make manifest; he is God, there is no God
but he, praise is due to him in the beginning, and in the end, he commands
over all things, and all People shall one day be assembled before him to be
judged; say unto them, Had God given a continual Night, even until the Day of
Judgment, what other God is there that is able to give you light? Will ye not
hear me? Had God given you a continual Day until the Day of Judgment, what
other God could have given the Night to refresh you? Will ye not consider his
benefits and his grace? He has created the Night for repose, and the Day for
Labor, peradventure ye will give him thanks. Be thou mindful of the Day, when
thy Lord shall call the Infidels, and shall say unto them, where are the Idols
that ye worshipped? We will call a witness of every Nation, and will say to the
Idolaters, Bring your arguments that may prove the Plurality of Gods; Ye shall
this day know your Blasphemies, and that there is but one God. Caron was of the
People of Moses, he was proud, because of his riches; we gave so great
treasures, that many men were burdened when they conveyed away the Keys.
Remember how his People said unto him, Rejoice not above measure in thy great
wealth, God abhors them that rejoice without reason; beg of him Paradise;
with thy Riches forget not to do good in this World, give alms of the substance
which God has given thee, be not disobedient to him on Earth, he abhors
those that disobey him; these Riches were given thee, because thou did
instruct the People in the Old Testament; know thou not that God destroyed
in times past many rich and opulent persons? Who is more strong, more powerful,
more rich than God? He will not enquire of the wicked the number of their sins,
he knows all, and the account. Caron one da^ went forth into public, with
all his (...); they that affected the wealth of this World, said* Would to God
we had as much wealth as (...)* he is happy! but the more knowing among them
said, Ye are unhappy, the grace of God is more advantageous to them that
believe in his Law, and do good works, than all the Treasures of ^ron; none
shall receive his grace but such as shall obey him, and persevere in (...) to
his Commandments. We deprived Caron of all his Treasures, and none was able to
(...) him against us; then they that had (...) his (...), said, oh Miracle! God
gives to, and (...) of wealth whom to him seems good; (...) not God given us
his Grace, we had been (...) cer^ the wicked shall be miserable; I will bestow
Paradise on them that hate Vanity and disorder upon the Earth* and shall have
my fear before their eyes; whosoever shall do good, shall find good; who does
evil* shall be chastised after his demerits. He that has taught thee the
Alcoran, shall cause thee to return to the Mecca. See Gelaldin.
place that thou desire: Tell the inhabitants of that place; that God knows
them that teach the right way, and such as go astray. Thou did not expect the
Alcoran, it is a special grace of thy Lord; assist not the Infidels, and take
heed lest they seduce thee, after having learnt what has been taught thee;
preach to the People the Unity of God, be not in the number of them that
believe many Deities, adore God alone, there is no God but he; all things shall
have an end, except his Face, he commands over every thing, and all men shall
one day appear before him to be judged.

CHAP. XXIX. The Chapter of the Spider, containing Sixty nine Verses, written
at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. I am God most Wise. Men have
believed that it is sufficient to say, We believe in God, and that they be not
proved: Certainly God proved their Predecessors, and knew such as were zealous
in his Law, and them that were Infidels. Do they who have done evil, think to
escape the punishment of their Crimes, and not to be judged? Such as hope to
see God, shall behold him at the time appointed by his divine Majesty; he
understands and knows all things. He that fights for the faith, fights
for his soul: certainly God has no need of men, their sins shall be pardoned
who shall believe in his divine Majesty, and shall do good works. We enjoined
the children of Israel to honor their father and mother, and to do good to
them; if they press thee to worship many Gods, thou shall be damned, if thou
give ear to them; obey them not in this matter, ye shall be assembled before
me, I will set before you all that ye have done, I will reward you according to
your works, and place such as shall have observed my Law in the number of the
blessed. There be men who affirm, that they believe in God, and are impatient
when evil befalls them from God to prove them: If God give victory to the
True believers, they say, that they are on their side, but does not God know
what is in their heart? He knows them that believe in his Law, and those that
are impious. The Infidels said to the True believers, do like us, follow our
way, we will bear your sins; They will not bear them, they are liars, they
shall bear their own burdens; shall not an account of their sins be required of
them at the day of Judgment? We sent Noah to instruct men, he lived upon the
Earth nine hundred and fifty years. The Flood surprised, and destroyed the
people of his time, because they were unjust, and we saved Noah, and those that
were with him in the Ark; this ought to serve for example to all the world.
Remember Abraham, who said to his people, Adore one God, and fear him, ye shall
do well, if ye have knowledge to comprehend it; ye worship but Idols, and are
but liars, those whom ye worship cannot benefit you, implore succor of God,
worship him, and give him thanks for his graces, ye shall one day appear before
him, if ye traduce me; those that were before you traduced the Prophets, Gods
Messengers: Messengers are obliged only to discharge their message; are ye
ignorant that God causes men to dye, and shall raise them again? it is a thing
easy to God: Walk through the Earth, and consider how God has extirpated your
predecessors, and created after them another people, certainly he is
omnipotent. He punishes and pardons as he sees good, you all shall one day
be assembled before him to be judged; you shall not render him impotent, either
in Earth, or in the Heavens; ye shall find none of power to protect, or defend
you against his divine Majesty; such as obey not his Commandments, who believe
not the resurrection, and despair of his mercy, shall suffer great torments.
The people answered, kill Abraham, and burn him; but God delivered him from the
fire that they had kindled, which shall serve for example to True believers. He
said unto them, ye adore only Idols, because of your love to the wealth of the
world; ye shall despise and curse each other at the day of Judgment. Hell shall
be your habitation, and ye shall be deprived of protection. Lot believed in his
words, and said, I will retire to the place which my Lord shall appoint me; he
alone is omnipotent, and most wise. We gave to Abraham two sons, Isaac and
Jacob; we caused Prophets to be be born of his race, and taught his progeny the
Scripture; we rewarded him in this world, and he shall be at the day of
judgment in the number of the blessed. Remember Lot, who said to his people, Ye
defile your selves with filthiness, unknown to any before you; ye incline to
the love of men, ye rob upon the high ways, and defile one another. This people
answered, Let us see the judgments of God, if what thou speak be true. Then
he said, Lord protect me against unbelievers. When our Messengers came toward
Abraham, to declare to him that he should have children; they said unto him, We
will ruin Lots City, and destroy all the inhabitants thereof, because they are
impious. Abraham answered, Lot dwells in that City; they said, We know all
that is within it, and we will preserve him, with all his family, except his
wife, she shall be in the number of them that shall be punished. When our
Messengers arived at Lots house, he was troubled, in that he had not strength
sufficient to defend them from the malice of the people; they said unto him,
Fear nothing, neither afflict thy self. We will preserve thee and all thy
family, except thy wife; she shall abide among them that shall be destroyed; we
will cause the indignation of God to fall upon this City, because of their
impiety; it shall serve for example to posterity, We sent Chaib to his
brethren, the inhabitants of Madian; he said unto them, Worship one God, fear
the day of Judgment, and defile not the Earth. They impudently traduced him,
but were surprised by an Earthquake, and remained dead in their houses, as
carcasses. We destroyed Aad, and Temod, their ruin is yet apparent in the
places of their habitations; the Devil tempted and seduced them from the right
way, notwithstanding they knew their error. We destroyed Caron, Pbaroah, and
Haman; Moses preached to them my Commandments; they contemned them, and became
pro^d in the Earth, but escaped not the punishment of their crimes. We
chastised some by an impetuous wind, and others were surprised by thunder; we
deprived them of their riches, and they were drowned. God was not unjust
toward them, they drew mischief on themselves through their impiety. They that
worship Idols are like to the Spider; she builds her house of her ^ob-web
that cannot defend from heat or cold. They would not adore Idols, did they
understand what they do; God sees what they worship, he is omnipotent and
wise. I teach the people these parables, and none but the wise understand them.
Truly God created Heaven and Earth, it is a sign of his Omnipotency to True
believers. Instruct them in the book that is inspired into thee; make thy
prayers at the time appointed, prayers divert men from sin; to be mindful of
God is the best work thou can perform, he knows all the actions of men.
Dispute with mildness against them that have knowledge of the written Law;
except against the wicked that are among them. Say unto them, We believe in
what has been taught you, and in what has been taught us: Your God, and our
God is one God; we are resigned to his divine will. We have sent thee the
Alcoran, as we sent to them the Old Testament: Such as understand the Old
Testament, believe in the Truth of the Alcoran. Thou have not written it with
thine own hand; had thou written it, thou had caused them to doubt, who
desire to make it void: Certainly it contains, and teaches intelligibly the
Commandments of the Law; none but Infidels reject it. They have said, We will
not believe in this Book, unless God work in it some miracle. Say unto them,
Miracles proceed from God, I am sent only to preach the torments of Hell. Is it
not sufficient, that we have sent thee the Alcoran to instruct them? It
contains the effects of my mercy and precepts, necessary for their salvation.
Say unto them, it suffices that God is witness of mine actions, betwixt you
and me; he knows whatsoever is in Heaven, and in Earth: They that believe in
Idols, and have not faith in God, are damned. They urge thee to make them see
the punishment of their crimes; if the time were come, they should soon feel
it; they shall rescent it, when they least think of it, but they know it not;
they shall press thee to make them see it. Say unto them, Hell is prepared for
Infidels. When they shall be plunged in torments over their heads, and under
their feet, it shall be said unto them, Taste the punishment which ye have
deserved. O ye people that believe! The Earth is sufficiently large and
spacious for you, to separate your selves from the wicked; worship me alone,
all Creatures shall die, and be assembled before me to be judged. The True
believers that shall have done good works, shall inhabit Paradise, wherein flow
many rivers; wherein is the reward of the righteous, of them that persevere to
do good, and are patient in their affliction, and trust in their Lord. How many
beasts be there that have not wherewith to live? God nourishes them, and you
also; he understands and knows all things. If thou ask of the Infidels, who
created Heaven and Earth, the Sun, and the Moon? they will say, It is God.
Wherefore then do they deny his Unity? God enricheth and impoverisheth whom ^
leaseth him, he is omniscient. If thou demand of them, who causes the rain to
fall from Heaven, to give life to the Earth, after the death thereof? they will
say, It is God. Say unto them, Praised be God, that ye avouch it; nevertheless,
the greatest part of men understand it not. The life of this world is but sport
and vanity, life is in Paradise, had they knowledge to comprehend it. When they
enter into a ship, and see the tempest, they call upon God and protest to
profess his Law: And when he has preserved them on the Land, they are
ungrateful for his grace, and return to their Idolatry, they shall too late
understand their error. Know they not that we have established in Mecca all
safety and freedom? and that men are taken away by violence to be slain, and
made slaves? believe they in things unprofitable? shall they be ungrateful for
the graces of God? who is more impious than he that blasphemeth against God,
and impugneth the known Truth? is there no place in Hell for the wicked? I will
guide into the right way them that shall fight for the Faith; God is with them
that do good.

CHAP. XXX. The Chapter of the Grecians, containing sixty Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the Name of God gracious and merciful. I am the most wise God. The Grecians
were vanquished upon the frontier of the Persians, but shall be victorious
before the end of seven years. God disposes all things from the beginning to
the end. When they shall be victorious, the True believers shall rejoice in the
victory that God shall give them; he protecteth whom to him seems good; he is
omnipotent and merciful. He has promised them victory, and departs not from
his promises; of which the greatest part of men are ignorant; they affect the
life of this world, and consider not their end: Will they not consider that God
has created the heavens and the earth, and all that is in them? and has
appointed to every thing a limited and prefixed time? Certainly the greatest
part of the people believe not in the Resurrection: Will they not consider the
end of their predecessors; who were more powerful and wealthy than they? God
has sent to all an Apostle to teach them his Law, he has done to them no
injustice, they have drawn mischief on themselves through their iniquity; the
end of the wicked shall be like to their works, they despise the Commandments
of God, and deride them, but God shall cause them to die, and rise again, and
all shall be assembled before him at the day of Judgment; that day shall they
be desperate, their Idols shall not intercede for them, they shall forsake
them, and they shall be separated from the true believers. Such as believe in
God, and do good works, shall enjoy the delights of Paradise, and the wicked
shall be chastised according to their demerits. Praise God, pray unto him
evening and morning, praise is due to him in heaven and earth; pray unto him
before the Sun set, and at the hour of noon; he makes the dead to come out of
the living, and the living out of the dead; he causes the barren earth to
revive, and grow green after its death; in like manner will he cause you to
arise again, and come out of your sepulchers: it is a sign of his Omnipotency,
to have created you of earth, to have given you flesh and bones, and to have
created the woman (of the rib of the man) to dwell with him; he has commanded
you to love mutually, and to exercise charity among you, these things are signs
of his Omnipotency to them that consider his graces. The creation of heaven and
earth, the diversity of tongues, the differences of your visages, and of your
color, the night created for repose, and the day for travel, the lightning
that terrifieth the people, and which through ra^n causes the earth again to
flourish, are signs of his Omnipotency; It is a token of his Omnipotency to
sustain the heaven, and the earth; ye shall come out of your sepulchers when he
shall call you, whatsoever is in heaven and earth obey him; he causes men to
die, and to rise again, he alone is God in heaven and earth, he is Omnipotent,
and knows all things. He speaks to you in a parable, drawn from your
selves; your slaves, are they your companions? do they equally partake with you
in the goods which God has given you? How then will ye say that God has a
companion equal to him? Thus do I unfold his mysteries to persons that have
knowledge to (...) them; certainly the wicked have followed (...) with
ignorance; who shall guide him whom God (...) cause to err? he shall find no
protector; embrace the law of Salvation, God has established it, that men may
observe it; It admits no alteration but the greatest part of the world are
ignorant of it: Fear God, make your prayers at the time appointed; be not like
to them that say, God has a companion; neither like to them that are at
present in the number of Heretics, and were before as ye are; every Sect is
pleased in its opinions, when any evil befalls them that call upon God, and
are converted; nevertheless some of them return to their Idolatry; after the
reception of his grace, they are ungrateful. They shall awhile be tolertaed,
and in the end they shall, too late, understand their error. Have we taught
them reasons and arguments, that prove that I have a companion? The People
rejoiced when we enlarged to them our Graces; and became desperate, when evil
befell them; see they not that I give, and take away Wealth, as to me seems
good? This is a token of my Unity to such as obey my Commandments. Give to your
Neighbor what appertains to him, and particularly to the poor, and true
believers, if ye desire to see the Face of God; such as shall do it, shall be
blessed. The Money which ye put to Usury, increases in the hands of men, God
shall not suffer it to prosper; the Alms which ye give, shall make you to see
the Face of his Divine Majesty, and shall be doubly restored to you. God has
created you, he enricheth you, and causes you to die and rise again, can your
Idols do as much? Praised be God, he has no companion; disorder appeared in
the Earth, and in the Sea, because of the iniquities of men; peradventure they
will be converted, when they shall feel the punishment of their Crimes: say
unto them, Go throughout the Earth, and consider the end of your Predecessors,
the greatest part of them were Idolaters; embrace the true Law before the Day
comes, when none shall be heard; that Day shall the wicked be separated from
the good, the impious shall give an account of their impiety, and such as shall
have lived well, shall enjoy the joys of Paradise, the Grace of God shall be
their recompense, God abhors Infidels. It is a sign of his Omnipotency, to
send the Winds to bring you Rain, and make you to taste the Fruits of his
Grace; the Ship runs upon the Water through his permission, for the
advantage of your commerce; will ye not be thankful to him for his benefits? We
sent to every Nation Prophets and Apostles before thee, they came with most
intelligible Precepts, and with many Miracles; we chastised those that slandred
them, and protected the faithful. God sends the winds that elevate the
Clouds, and extends them in the Air in many pieces at his pleasure; he
causes the Rain to fall where he lists, and rejoices whom to him seems
good of them that expect it with impatience; consider the effects of his
bounty; he causes the dry and barren Earth to flourish again, and restores
the Dead to Life, he is Omnipotent. We sent the Winds to assemble the Clouds
that covered Men with their shadow, nevertheless they are returned to their
impiety; the dead shall not understand thee, neither likewise the dumb, thou
art not obliged to lead the Blind, none shall hearken to thee but such as shall
believe in my Law, and be obedient: Say unto them, God created you impotent, he
has given you strength, and after, having reduced you to the weakness of Old
age, does what to him seems good; he knows men's secrets, and does what
pleases him; the wicked shall swear at the Day of Judgment, that they have
remained but an hour in their sepulchers; they lie in like manner, when they
deny the Resurrection; the True Believers, that know the Truth, shall say unto
them, Ye have remained there the time appointed in the Book of God, to wit,
until the Day of Resurrection; behold the Day of Resurrection! ye knew not at
what time it should arrive; this day excuses shall be unprofitable to Infidels,
they shall be deprived of protection. We have taught in the Alcoran all that is
profitable for the Salvation of Men; if thou teach them my Commandments,
unbelievers will say* Thou bring nothing but disorder; thus God hardneth the
hearts of the ignorant. Be patient, and persevere; what God promises is
infallible; beware lest unbelievers shake thy perseverance.

CHAP. XXXI. The Chapter of Locman, containing Thirty Four Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the Name of God, Gracious and Merciful: The (...) say, that Locman was a
great Doctor in Davids's time.
I am the most Wise God. These Precepts are the Precepts of the Book filled
with Doctrine, it guides into the way of Salvation; the Righteous who make
their prayers at the time appointed, that pay Tithes, and believe in the Day of
Judgment, they are guided by their Lord, and shall be blessed. There be who
deride this Book, they ignorantly depart from the Law of God, and have despised
it, but shall one day be severely punished: When they are taught the
Commandments of God, they turn the back with disdain, they will not hear, and
have Ears stopped; say unto them, You shall in the end suffer infinite pains:
Such as believe in the Law of God, and do good works, shall eternally enjoy the
Delights of Paradise; what God promises, is infallible, he is Omnipotent, and
altogether wise, he created the Heaven, and sustaineth it without a Pillar,
appearing to your Eyes; he lifted up the Mountains upon the Earth, to fasten
and hinder it to move; he has thereon dispersed many Beasts, and sent Rain
from Heaven, which causes Plants to spring forth, and Herbs of diverse sorts.
Behold [here] what God has created! show me what your Idols have created;
assuredly Idolaters are manifestly seduced from the right way. We inspired
knowledge into Locman, and spoke unto him to give God thanks; he that returns
thanks to God for his Graces, does good for his Soul. God rejects the
ungrateful, and praise is due to him in all places. Remember thou that Locman
said unto his Son, O my Son! believe not thou that God has a companion, it is
an exceeding great Sin: We have commanded man to honor his Father and Mother;
his Mother bears him with grief upon grief, and weaneth him at the age of Two
years; be thou not ungrateful for God's benefits; honor Father and Mother,
thou shall be one day before God to be judged. If thy Parents press thee to
believe that God has companions, obey them not, follow the way of them that
obey him, all men shall be one day assembled before him, to be rewarded
according to their works. O my Son! if thou do evil, of the weight of a Gr^n
of Mustardseed, or of the weight of a Rock, or of the greatness of Heaven and
Earth, God will know it, and put it in account, he is exact and Omniscient. O
my Son! make thy prayers at the time appointed, do what is honest and civil,
fly what is not approved, and be patient in thy adversities; regard not the
World, disordered through pride; converse not with the proud, God detesteth the
haughty; observe thy steps, walk with modesty, speak gently, they be persons
that bray like Asses when they speak; see thou not that God has created for
men all that is in Heaven and Earth, and conferreth on them his Graces in
general, and particular? There be ignorant [persons] that dispute of the Deity
without reason; when it is said unto them, Do what God has appointed, they
answer, We will do what we saw done by our Fathers. They consider not that the
Devil calls them and their Fathers to the pains of Hell. He that obeys God,
and does good works, fastneth him to the strongest Knot, and will have a care
of him at the Hour of his end. The impiety of the wicked ought not to afflict
thee, they shall be one day assembled in our presence, to be chastised; I will
show them all that they have done, I know what is in the hearts of men, I will
prolong awhile their punishment upon Earth, and precipitate them in the other
World, into the Fire of Hell. Have thou not demanded of them who created Heaven
and Earth? They said, It is God; say unto them, therefore praised be God;
nevertheless the greatest part of them are ignorant. Whatsoever is in Heaven
and Earth is Gods, he has no want of the World, praise is due unto him in all
that he does, if all the Trees of the World were Pens, and the Sea Ink, they
could not comprehend the effect of his Omnipotency, he is Omnipotent, and
knows all things. He created, and shall make you to rise again with one word,
he understands and sees all things* Consider they not that God causes the
Night to enter into the Day, and the Day into the Night; that he created the
Sun and the Moon, that move in the Heaven, until the day appointed; he knows
whatsoever ye do, because he is truly God; they that invoke other than him,
invoke things vain and unprofitable; God alone is most high, and most mighty:
See thou not how the Ship runs upon the Water for a token of his
Omnipotency* to such as acknowledge his Graces? When the Wars arose against the
Infidels, many called upon God, with resolution to follow his Law; when he
saved them on the Land, some persevered to do well, and others returned to
their impiety; none but deceivers and ungrateful [persons] despise his
Commandments. O People! fear God, and the day when the Father shall not be able
to succor his Child, neither the Child serve his Father, God's promises are
infallible; be not proud of your Riches, neither that God tolerateth and
suffers you, he knows the time when ye shall be chastised, the hour that
the Rain shall fall upon the Earth; he knows what is in the wombs of women,
whether it be Male or Female; none but God knows what thou will do to morrow;
none but he knows the place where thou shall die; he knows all, he knows
all.

CHAP. XXXII. The Chapter of Worship, containing an Hundred and Thirty Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I am the most Wise God. Doubtless
this Book was sent by the Lord of the Universe; will the wicked say that thou
have invented it? On the contrary, it is the truth it self, which proceeds
from thy Lord, to preach to them that heretofore had none to instruct them;
peradventure they will follow the right way. God created Heaven and Earth, and
all that is between them, in Six days, and sits on his Throne; Who shall
protect you? Who shall hear your prayers but he? Will you never consider it? He
disposes all things in Heaven and Earth, all men shall one day be assembled
before him to be judged; a Thousand years are but one day before his Divine
Majesty; he knows what is past, present, and future; he is Omnipotent and
Merciful, he has created every thing for his People; he formed man of the
Dirt, and Dust of the Earth, he inspired the Soul into his Body; he gives you
hearing, sight, and sense, but few men return him thanks for his Graces: They
say, What, shall we die and return to be a new People? Certainly they believe
not in the Resurrection. Say unto them, The Angel of Death shall cause you to
die, and ye shall return before God to be judged. Thou shall then see how the
Infidel will hang down the Head before their Lord, and say, Lord, we now see
the certainty of the Resurrection; we this day know the truth of thy words,
permit us to return into the World, we will be Righteous, we now understand
what is profitable and necessary for us; we could have given a guide to every
Person, my word is most true, I will fill Hell with the wicked, and Paradise
with the Righteous; thus shall men be rewarded and chastised according to their
works. Taste (O ye wicked!) the pains that ye have deserved, in refusing to
believe in this day which ye have found; we leave you in the miseries due to
your incredulity; taste the eternal torments that ye have merited through your
impiety. Such as believe in the mysteries of my Law are humble, they worship me
alone, and praise me when they hear mention of me; they are not proud, rebel
not against my Commandments: They arise from their Bed to make their prayers
with fear and hope, and employ in pious works some part of the Wealth that we
have given them. No man has either seen or knows what God reserveth to
recompense the Righteous for their perseverance. The believers and unbelievers
shall not be alike entreated; the believers that have done good works, shall
enjoy Paradise, as the reward of their labors, and the unbelievers shall be
precipitated into the Fire of Hell, the more they shall labor to get out, the
further shall they enter into it; it shall be said to them, Taste the pains of
eternal flames, which ye would not believe. I will make the wicked to taste of
the torments of the World, and the pains of Hell, if they be not converted: Who
is more unjust, than he that knows the Commandments of his Lord, and
disobeyeth them? We will be avenged on his impiety: We gave a most true Book to
Moses, to instruct the Children of Israel; we put into the right way those
among them that persevered in their Faith, and obeyed our Commandments. Thy
Lord shall judge the difficulties of the Infidels at the Day of Judgment; see
they not how much People we destroyed in times past, that reposed [confidence]
in their Houses? It is a token of our Omnipotency, will they never understand
it? See they not how I thrust forth Water in desert and barren Lands? That I
cause Herbs to spring forth for the nourishment of men and beasts? Will they
never consider it? They demand, when will the Day of Judgment come? Say unto
them, that Day shall not bring contentment to Infidels, and they shall be
without protection. Depart thou far from them; persevere, and attend; they wait
an occasion to mischief thee, but thou shall see them chastised.

CHAP. XXXIII. The Chapter of Bands, and Troops of Soldiers, containing
fourscore and seven Verses, writttn at Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Oh Prophet! fear God, and obey not
unbelievers, God knows all things, and is most prudent in what he ordains;
observe what thy Lord has taught thee, he knows the actions of men;
recommend thy self to God, it ought to suffice thee, that he protecteth thee.
He has not given two hearts unto men; he has not enjoined us to call your
wives your mothers; those which you call your children, are not all your
Children, ye speak it only with the mouth, but God always speaks the truth,
and guides men into the way of salvation. Call your neighbor by the name of
his father, this action shall be acceptable to God, provided that ye have no
evil design in the heart; if ye know not his name, call him your brother in
God, or Sir; God is gracious and merciful. The Prophet is obeyed of them that
believe in God, and honor his wives, as their mothers. Kinsmen are heirs of
each other, it is so appointed by his divine Majesty to the Believers that went
out of Mecca to follow the Prophet: It is ordained in Scripture to do good to
your parents. Remember thou that we received the promise of the Prophets of
thee, of Noah, of Abraham, of Moses, and of Jesus the Son of Mary, (to worship
but one God) we received a strong promise: An account shall be required of
their actions, and the wicked shall feel the rigor of infinite pains. Oh ye
that believe in God! remember his favor toward you; when ye were charged by
troops of enemies, he sent against them an impetuous wind, and troops invisible
to your eyes, to fight them; he sees all that ye do; those invisible troops
came from the East, and from the West, from above, and below, when your sight
was troubled, and your hearts failed you, because of the great number of your
^nemies; ye had already conceived a very bad opinion of the Law of God; then
were the True believers tried, they trembled with ^ear; The wicked, and such as
were weak in their faith, said, that whatsoever God and his Prophet had
promised them, was but abuse and va^ity; (...) how a party of them said to the
(...) of the Territory of Medina, there is no (...) for you with Mahomet, re^
(...) your houses; Remember thou how many among them required dismission, and
said, that the^ houses were forsaken: Their houses were not forsaken, but they
had a design to ^ly; had they (...) to their houses, they had on all ^des
perswa^d them to follow im^, they sho^ not there have made long abode, because
they before had promised God not to fly; he would have required an account of
their promises: Say unto them, flight shall be to you unprofitable, if ye fly
death, for that ye ought no longer to conti^e in the world: Say unto them* who
is able to protect you against God when (...) to destroy you? take none other
(...) but him; he knows them that were di^waded to go to the battle to spare
their wealth and persons. They cast an eye upon thee, when they are surprised
with fear, they turn their eyes into the head, as a man that dies, and when
they are delivered from fear, they traduce thee because of their extreme
avarice. Such men believe not in God, he renders all their works unfruitful;
it is a thing easy to his divine Majstey. The Troops of the Infidels believed
they were invincible, and when they saw the troops of the True believers they
desired to fly. The Infidels desired to draw the Arabians to their party, and
have intelligence to know in what condition you are; had they been of your
party, few of them had been slain; the adhering to the Prophet of God serves
to you as a Citadel, it serves as a Bulwark to them that apprehend the day of
Judgment, and think often on his divine Majesty. When the believers said,
behold! what God and his Prophet promised us, they are sincere in their
promises; the sight of their enemies increased their faith and zeal toward God
and his Prophet. There be persons among the True believers who have performed
what they promised to God; many of them are dead in obedience to the
Commandments of his divine Majesty, others attend the same thing, and swerve
not from what they have promised; God shall recompense them for their zeal, and
chastise the Infidels, or pardon them if it so please him, he is gracious and
merciful. God shall destroy the unbelievers with their wrath against the
believers; he protecteth True believers in combats, he is strong and
omnipotent. The Jews descended from their Fortress, to give aid to the
Infidels, but God cast fear into their hearts; a party of them were slain, and
the rest taken slaves; they by their death made you heirs of their lands, their
houses, their riches, and fortresses which you were not able to conquer; God is
omnipotent. Oh Prophet! if thy wives be too ambitious of the wealth of the
earth, and of garments too sumptuous; Call them* Say unto them, that thou will
deal well with them, and wilt repudiate them with mildness and civility. If
they love God and his Prophet, if they are virtuous, his divine Majesty will
give them an exceeding great reward: Oh ye wives of the Prophet! such of you as
shall be unchaste, shall be punished doubly, more than other women, this is a
thing easy to God; such among you as shall obey God and his Prophet, and shall
do good works, shall be rewarded more than other women, an exceeding great
reward is prepared for you. Oh ye wives of the Prophet! ye are not like other
women of the world; fear God, and believe not in the discourse of such as have
design to seduce you, speak with civility, abide in your houses; go not forth
to make your beauty appear, and to make a show, as did the ignorant of old;
pray to God with affection, give alms, obey God and his Prophet, God will
deliver you from his wrath, and will purify you; be mindful of the Law that is
taught you in your houses, he is merciful to them that honor him, he knows
all the actions of the Prophet, he has promised his mercy, and an exceeding
great reward to those (men and women) that shall obey his Commandments. Those
men and women that believe in his unity, that resign themselves to his divine
pleasure, that are patient and humble, that speak the truth, that fast, give
alms, and are chaste; and the men and women that observe his Law, ought not to
control his actions, neither those of his Prophet, nor say, that they could do
better than they, if they would endeavor [it.] He that disobeyeth God and his
Prophet, erreth from the right way; Remember what thou did say to him whom
God favored, to receive him into his Law, and whom thou did gratify with
liberty, that said, Divorce not thy wife, Mahomet was amorous of Zeid his
slaves wife, he caused him to repudiate her, to marry her, because of her
beauty.
and fear God; thou concealest in thy mind a design which God shall discover,
thou fear the People, but it is thy duty to fear God alone. When Zeid did
repuidate his wife, we married thee to her, to the end there might remain no
error among the True believers; when they shall repudiate their wives, they
shall observe in repudiating them, what God has ordained. The Prophet sins
not in doing what God has permitted; the Law of God was in this manner
observed by our Predecessors, and the command of his Divine Majesty is executed
without delay. Such as preach the word of God, his Apostles and Prophets, fear
none but his Divine Majesty, He is not the father of Zeid, to espouse the Wife
which he put away. See Tefsir anf Ioahir.
it suffices them that they are in his protection. Mahomet is not your Father,
he is the Apostle of God, and the last of all the Prophets, God knows all
things, there shall not come another Prophet after him. Oh ye that believe in
God! think frequently on his Divine Majesty, praise him Morning and Evening, he
shall give you his Mercy; the Angels implore Pardon, that he may deliver from
darkness; he is merciful to True believers; the Angels shall salute them on his
behalf at the Day of Judgment; he has prepared for them an exceeding great
reward. Oh Prophet! we have sent thee to be witness of the deportments of the
People, and as a light to conduct them into the right way; proclaim to the True
believers that they shall receive of thy Lord an exceeding great Grace; obey
not Infidels, nor the wicked, fear not their malice, and trust in God, thou
ought to be satisfied that God protecteth thee. O ye that believe! it is not
lawful for you to abuse your wives; if you repudiate them before ye have known
them, deal well with them, and dismiss them with mildness and civility. O
Prophet! we permit thee to know the Women to whom thou have given dowry, the
Womenslaves which God has given thee, the daughters of thine Uncles, and of
thine Aunts, that have abandoned with thee the company of the wicked; and the
true-believing Wife that shall be given thee, if thou will marry her, and that
she be not the Wife of a True believer. We know what we have commanded
True-believers, touching their wives and their slaves; we have instructed thee
therein, to the end thou offend not God, he is gracious and merciful to such as
obey him. Thou shall retain whom of thy wives thou shall desire to retain, and
shall repudiate such as thou shall desire to repudiate, and shall lie with them
that shall please thee; it is better that thou repudiate them without offending
God, than to see them malecontented, and sad; they shall be contented with the
good that thou shall do to them, in divorcing Mahomet had Nine wives. See
Gelaldin.
them; God knows what is in your hearts, he is Omniscient, and most merciful.
It is not lawful for thee to know other Women than thine own, it is not lawful
for thee to exchange them, although the beauty of others please thee, except
thy slaves; God regards all. O ye that believe! enter not into the houses of
the Prophet without permission, except at the hour of repast, and that by
chance, and without design; if ye are invited, enter with freedom; when ye
shall have taken your repast, depart out of the House, and tar^y not to
discourse one with another, this molesteth the Prophet, he is ashamed to bid
you be gone, but God is not ashamed to tell you the truth. The wives of the
Prophet shall have the face covered when ye shall speak unto them, this better
resented of purity both in them and in you, You ought not to importune the
Prophet of God, neither to know his wives; this would be a most enormous sin;
if ye conceal any design, or discover it, know that God knows all. They shall
(...) ^fend God in suffering themselves to be (...) fathers, their Children,
their Brethren, their Nephews, their Maidservants, and their ^he slaves, they
shall fear God, ^e sees (...) God and the Angels* pray for the Prophet. O
(...) ^ Bless the (...)* (...) ^din.
pray for the Prophet, and obey him: (...) displease God and his Prophet, (...)
be (...) this World, and shall feel rigorous (...) the other; such as do injury
without rea^ to those (men and women) that (...) in God, ^mmit an exceeding
great sin. (...) wives, and thy daughters, and (...) True believers, that they
cover themselves with (...), they shall be more honored, and shall (...) no
displeasure, God is gracions and merciful* If the wicked, the who (...), and
(...) of Medina, that are weak in their (...), quit not their Impiety, I will
give thee absolute power over them, and few among them will (...) thee; but
take thou them, and slay them (...) thou shall meet them, God so commanded
(...) so that were before thee; thou shall and (...) the Law of God: The People
will enquire of thee, when shall be the Day of Judgment* Say unto them, That
God alone knows it, and thou known not if it shall be very (...); but that
God hat^ prepared for Infidels a^ (...), wherein they shall (...) they shall
(...) no protection, they shall be cast (...) into the (...), and shall say,
Would to (...) we had (...) Divine Majesty, and (...) his (...)* they shall
say, Lord, we (...) and Superiors, they seduced us (...) the right way; Lord,
chastise them dou^, and give them thy curse. O ye that believe! be not like
them that displeased Moses, he was innnocent of the crimes that they laid upon
him, he was inspired of God; fear God, and speak with civility, your works
shall be acceptable to him, and he shall pardon your sins; he that shall obey
God, and his Apostle, shall be happy; fidelity and obedience are pleasing to
him in Heaven and in Earth, and upon the Mountains. Such as depart far [from
him] as did Adam, do injury to themselves, and are ignorant, he shall chastise
those (men and women) that shall be disobedient and impious; he will give his
grace to those (men and women) that shall believe in his Law, he is gracious
and merciful to them that obey him.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Chapter of Saba, containing Fifty four Saba is a ^ovince
Licmen. ^e Gelal^n.
Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Praised be God, whatsoever is in
Heaven, and in the Earth, appertains to him; praise is due unto him, he is
most Wise and Omniscient: he knows whatsoever enters into the Earth, and
comes out of it, whatsoever ascends to Heaven, and descends, he is
gracious and merciful to his creatures. The wicked demand if they shall see the
Day of Judgment; say unto them, yes, and that thy Lord knows the time; he
knows what is past, present and future, and all that is in Heaven and in the
Earth, even to the weight of an Atome; what is yet less, and what is yet
greater than an Atome, is written in a Book that discovers every thing; he
shall reward the True believers that have done good works; he shall give them
his Mercy, and enrich them with precious treasures: Such as have endeavored to
suppress his Law, shall feel the effects of his indignation. They that
understand the Scripture, know that God has taught thee the very truth, to
guide the People into the right way, into the path of honor and virtue; but
the wicked said among them, will ye believe a man, who affirms, that after
your death ye shall rise again, and be new creatures? He lies impudently, he
is possessed of the Devil. Certainly they that believe not in the Resurrection,
are in an exceeding great error, and shall suffer most grievous pains; see they
not what is above, and what is below them? Consider they not the Heaven and the
Earth? If I will, I can render it barren, and cause a piece of the Heaven to
fall upon them for a sign of my Omnipotency. We gave our grace to David, and
spoke to the Mountains, Birds, and Metals with him, to praise me; we commanded
him to make Cuirasses, and Iron was soft in his hand, as Wax. O Lineage of
David! be not ungrateful, I see whatsoever ye do. We made the Winds subject to
Solomon, he commanded them Evening and Morning, from the East to the West; we
gave him a Fountain, and a Brook of dissolved Brass; the Devils, through our
permission, wrought it to his mind, and we punished in the Fire of Hell such as
refused to obey him. They built for him lofty Palaces, and De p^ind pied.
spacious houses; they formed Basins for Water, Channels, and Pools: We said
unto him, O Lineage of David! be not ungrateful for my graces, for that few
persons do acknowledge [them.] When he dyed, through our Commandment, nothing
discovered his death to the Devils, but the worms that had eaten the end of his
staff whereon he leaned; when the Devils saw him fall, they perceived, that had
they known the future, and what was hid from them, they should not have
labored so long a time in his Service. The Inhabitants of Saba have a mark of
my Omnipotency in their Country, viz. two Gardens, the one on the North side,
and the other toward the South, (it was said unto them) eat of the good things
that your Lord has given you, and return him thanks; their Country is
delicious, God has been merciful toward them, nevertheless they are
ungrateful and impious; we sent the River of Arem that overflowed their
Gardens; we changed them into two Gardens of Thorns of Cyprus, and a little An
Indian Date. See Gelaldin.
Tamarinde; thus did we punish them, because of their impiety. We established a
way with many Cities, for facility of commerce among them, and the City which
we blessed, and spoke unto the People to follow that way Night and Day with
safety, and withou fear: They said, God destroys us through the length of
this way; they returned to their impiety, and we dispersed them upon the Earth,
to serve for example to Posterity, and instruction to such as persevere in my
Law, and acknowledge my graces. The Devil caused them to believe his Opinion,
they followed him, except some of the True believers that were among them; he
had no power over them, but to know them that believed in the Resurrection, and
such as doubt. Thy Lord observes and regards all. Say unto them, invoke your
Idols, they have not power of the bigness of an Atome, neither in Heaven, nor
Earth, God has no Companion, they shall find none to protect them at the Day
of Judgment, none shall intercede for them without the permission of his Divine
Majesty; if they receive any relaxation in their ^ear* they enquire of each
other what God spa^e, and an^wer, that he spoke (...) truth; that he is most
(...) most mighty, say unto them, who enricheth you with the good things of
Heaven and Earth? They will say that it is God. Say unto them, Who of you, or
of us follows the right way? Or who of you, or of us is seduced? Enquire not
after our sins, we are not curious to know what ye do, God shall assemble us at
the Day of Judgment, and shall judge our differences with equity, he is an
exceeding great Judge; say unto them, Let us see the Idols that ye have
worshipped; certainly there is but One God, Omnipotent and Wise. We have not
sent thee but to declare to men the joys of Paradise, and to preach to them the
pains of Hell, but the greatest part knows it not; they ask in what time they
shall see the punishment that is preached to them; and if thou speak the
truth; say unto them, when the time thereof is come, ye shall not be able to
retard, or advance an hour: They have said, That they will not believe in the
Alcoran, but thou shall see them one day assembled in the presence of thy Lord,
thou shall see that they shall accuse one another; the Poor shall say unto the
Rich, you have hindered us to obey the Commandments of God; they shall answer,
have we seduced you from the way that was taught you? On the contrary, you were
wicked and malicious: They shall say, on the contrary, you employed Night and
Day your Artifices to render us ungrateful for the graces of God, and to induce
us to believe that he has Companions equal to him; they shall repent of their
sins, when they shall see their punishment; we will lay Chains upon their
Necks, and they shall be chastised after their demerits. The chief Inhahitants
of the Cities, said to the Prophets that we sent to them to preach the torments
of Hell, that they believe not their words. We have (said they) more riches,
and more Children than those that believe in their discourse; we shall not be
damned, as they affirm; say unto them, my Lord gives and takes away Riches as
seems good to him, but the greatest part of the People know it not; your
wealth and your children shall not give you access to God; such as shall
perform good works, shall be rewarded, and shall live eternally in the delights
of Paradise; they that shall endeavor to suppress our Law, shall be cast
headlong into the Fire of Hell: Say unto them, My Lord gives, and takes away
Wealth as to him seems good; he makes vain the alms which ye shall give, if
ye observe not his Law; he is the Rich of the Rich: Be thou mindful of the day,
when I shall assemble the Idolaters, and shall say to the Angels, Behold them
who have adored you; they shall say, praised be God, thou alone art our master
and protector; they adored not us, they worshipped the Devil; the greatest part
of them believed in his word, this day they are not able to benefit, or hurt
one another; they will say to the unjust, taste the torments of Hell Fire,
which ye would not believe. They said when thou did preach unto them our
Commandments, this man would hinder us to worship the gods of our fathers, he
is a Blasphemer. They have said, That the Alcoran is but Sorcery and Magic,
and read not the books that we have sent unto them. Their predecessors did like
them; they traduced our Apostles, and hindered them to preach the tenth part of
what we had inspired into them; they traduced them, but how were they
chastised? Say unto them, I preach to you to pray to God two by two, or alone,
or in company; ye shall know one day, that your friend Mahomet is not possessed
of the Devil, and that he preaches to you the pains of Hell; I require no
reward of you for mine exhortations, God shall reward me, he sees all. Say
unto them, God teaches his Prophet the Truth, and what is to come; the truth
appeared, and falsehood was discovered, and the liars were deprived of his
mercy; if I wilfully go astray, or if I act what God has enjoined me, this
shall be for my Soul, God hears, and is present at all things. Thou shall see
the Infidels filled with fear, and affrighted when they shall come out of their
sepulchers; they shall not escape the punishment of their incredulity; they
shall then say, That they believe in the Alcoran, but I will show to them from
far the Law which they have despised in the World; they shall be precipitated
with their ignorance, into a place remote from mercy and pardon. They shall be
separated from the True believers, because they have doubted the Commandments
of the Law of God.

CHAP. XXXV. The Chapter of the Creator, containing Forty and five Verses,
written at Mecca.
This Chapter is entitled the Chapter of Angels, in the Book Tefsir anf
Joahir, which treats of the Exposition of the Alcoran in Turkish.

IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Praise be to God, Creator of Heaven
and Earth, who created the Angels, the Messengers of his Commandments; they
have wings, two, three, and four; he makes of his Creature what seems good
to him, he is Omnipotent; none can comprehend the Grace that he has given to
his People, it is incomprehensible, he is Omnipotent and most Wise. Oh People!
remember the grace of God, Is there a Creator beside him? He enricheth you with
the riches of Heaven and Earth, there is no God beside him. How can the wicked
Blaspheme against his Divine Majesty? If they traduce thee, certainly they
traduced the Prophets that were sent before thee; they shall be one day
assembled before God to be judged. Oh ye People! what God has promised is
infallible; glory not in the wealth of the Earth, beware lest the Devil seduce
you, and render you proud, because that God does a while defer the punishment
of your crimes. The Devil is your Enemy, be ye his Enemies, he leads them
that follow him into the Fire of Hell, where they shall suffer the rigors of
infinite pains; their sins shall be remitted that believe in God, and do good
works: Oftentimes, he that delights ^o what he does, does believes he does
well; God misleadeth and guides whom it pleases him; be not unwilling to
depart from the wicked, God knows all their actions. He sends the Winds
that drive the Cl^uds unto barren and dry places, to refre^h the (...), and
cause it to revive after its death, (...) manner will he raise again the Dead.
He tha^ (...) greatness, shall find in God all manner (...); good speeches
ascend even to his (...) Majesty, and our good works are ^ptable to him. Such
as conspire against the (...), shall endure great torments, and their (...)
become vain and unprofitable. God has created you of dust and mire, he created
(...) men and women; the Woman neither conceives, nor brings forth, but
through his permission; no man can either prolong or shorten his life, but
following what is written in the Book [kept in Heaven] these things are easy
to God. Those two Seas are not like to Euphrates, whose water is sweet, and
pleasant to drink; the Water of the Sea is cold, and salt, nevertheless ye eat
of the Fish of the one, and the other; Ye Fish out of the Sea, Gems to adom
you; you see the Ship to run upon the Waters, and cleave the waves, for the
advantage of your commerce, peradventure you will return thanks to God for his
graces. He causes the Night to enter into the Day, and the Day into the Night;
he created the Sun and the Moon, that run in the Heaven till the Day appointed.
That God who created these things, is your Lord, the Empire of the World is
his, the Idols that ye worship have no more power than the skin of an Almand;
if ye invoke them, they shall not hear you, they shall deny you at the Day of
Judgment, and are not of power to let you know either the joys of Paradise, or
the torments of Hell. Oh ye People! ye are poor and necessitous, ye have need
of Gods assistance, and God has no want of you; praise is due to him in every
place; he will destroy you, if it seem good to him, and create another new
People in your place; none shall bear the burden of another, be it never so
light or heavy, no, not when they are near of kin. Preach thou the torments of
Hell to such as fear their Lord, without seeing, him, and make their prayers at
the time appo^d. He that takes heed of offending him, labors for himself;
all the World shall be one day assembled before him to be judged; the blind are
not like to such as see clear; darkness is not like to light; the shade and
coolness are not like to the heat of the Sun; the Living are not like the Dead;
God causes himself to be understood of whom he pleases; thou can not make
the Commandments of God to be understood by them that are in their Sepulchers;
we have sent only to preach the pains of Hell, and the joys of Paradise, there
is no place in the World where they have not been preached; if the Infidels
traduce thee, their predecessors likewise traduced them whom we sent
heretofore, to preach to them the Mysteries of Faith, and the Scriptures; they
were surprised in their sins, were rigorusly chastised. See thou not how thy
Lord caused Rain to fall from Heaven, to make the Earth produce many fruits of
sundry sorts, and to nourish in the Mountains the Goats, the Stags, and Hinds?
To nourish the Crows and Ravens, the men, and beasts of diverse kinds and form?
God gratifieth his Creatures that acknowledge his benefits; he is Omnipotent and
merciful. They who devoutly read the Book of God, who make their prayers at the
time appointed, and bestow in pious works, secretly or publicly, part of the
wealth that we have given them, have hope of a recompense that shall never
perish; God shall recompense and augment his graces upon them; he is merciful
toward the good, and accepts the acknowledgment of his graces. The Book that
we have sent thee contains the Truth, it confirms the ancient Scriptures,
God knows and sees all things. We have given the understanding of the
Alcoran to such as we have chosen among our creatures; there be some who have
ill discharged what we have taught them; some have perfromed what was enjoined
them, and others* have taught it with affection and diligence through Gods
permission. This is a great grace, they shall enter into the Garden of Eden,
where they shall remain eternally; they shall be adorned with Collars of Gold,
enriched with precious stones, they shall be clothed with fine silk, and shall
say, praised be God, who has delivered us from affliction, he is most
merciful, and accepts the thanks of his creatures; such as through his
special grace shall enjoy the house of eternity, shall be free from all pain,
and the Infidels shall be cast headlong into the fire of Hell. They shall not
die in those torments, and their torture shall never be assuaged; thus shall
the wicked be chastised, they shall in vain implore succor of God, and say,
Lord deliver us from these pains, we will do better than we have done
heretofore; I will no more prolong your life on Earth, I have sent you my
Prophets and Apostles, They preached unto you my Commandments, you would not
hear them, taste now the pains of Hell, which ye have merited, the wicked shall
this day be deprived of protection. Certainly God knows whatsoever is in
Heaven and Earth, he knows all that is in the hearts of men. He it is that
has made you to multiply on Earth; impiety shall rise against the impious, it
shall render them abominable before God, and put them into the number of the
damned: Say unto them, have ye well considered the Idols that ye have
worshipped? Tell me, What have they created on Earth? Were they Gods companions
in the Creation of the Heavens? Has God sent to them a Book, and reasons, to
authorize their impiety? Certainly the wicked instruct one another only in
pride and arrogance; God sustaineth the Heavens and the Earth, he alone is able
to sustain them, he is gracious and merciful. The wicked swore to fight for the
increase of the faith, if there should come to them a Preacher to instruct
them; and when he came, they augmented their wickedness, became proud in the
Earth, and conspired against the true believers; their conspiracy fell upon
themselves, and they can expect none other things than what was ordained
against their predecessors, the Law of God admits none alteration. Consider
they not what was the end of their Predecessors? who were more wealthy and
powerful than they? Nothing is impossible to God, he knows all things, and is
omnipotent. Should God punish the people when they offend him, he should leave
no living creature on the Earth, he deferreth the chastisement of the wicked
until the time appointed; when their time shall be come, he will punish them
according to their demerits, he sees all.

CHAP. XXXVI. The Chapter entitled, O Man, containing fourscore and eight
Verses, written at Mecca.
Reader, the Mahometans have entitled this Chapter with two Letters of the
Arabique Alphabet, i. s. The Bedaoi says, that i signifies ia, that is to say
O particula vo^ativa, and s, is an abreviation, that signifies insan, [i. e.]
Man, and that the Angel speaking to Mahomet, began this Chapter in this manner;
O man! I swear by the Alcoran, etc. See Tefsir, Kitab el tenoir.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Oh man! I swear by the Alcoran,
full of Doctrine, that thou art a Prophet, sent to teach the people the right
way. This Book was sent by the Omnipotent and merciful, that thou may
instruct men in that which was not taught their Predecessors: Certainly, what
was said is true, viz. That the greatest part of them is incredulous; We will
put a chain upon their neck, and bind their hands to the very chin; they shall
lift up the head to complain, but we will place before and behind them a great
obstacle, we will cover their sight with darkness, and they shall not see a
jot. Misery is upon them; whether thou do reprove, or not reprove them, they
shall not be converted. If thou preachest to them that believe in the Alcoran,
and to such as believe in what they have seen, proclaim to them a general
pardon of their sins, and a very great reward. I make the dead to arise again,
and write exactly in a Book the good and the evil that men commit. Relate to
them the ^ble of those of the City, whither thy Lord sent his Prophets; we sent
unto them two Prophets* ^ they slandered both of them; we succored them by
(...) third; they all three said to the Inhabitants of this City, we are sent
from God to preach to you his Commandments. They answered, ye are but men like
us, God has not sent us a sign to make you known, ye are liars. They said,
certainly God knows that he sent us to you; we are obliged only to preach to
you his Commandments; They answered, would ye make us Infidels like your
selves? If ye end not this discourse, we will ^one you, and make you to suffer
heavy torments. They said, be your evil with you, Who has heretofore so ill
instructed you? Certainly you are wicked: Then a man came running from the
utmost part of the City, who said unto them* Oh people! obey the Apostles of
God, obey them that require no reward from you for the pains which they take in
teaching you, and who are in the right way. Wherefore shall not I worship him
that created me, and before whom ye all shall be assembled to be judged? Will
ye worship another beside him? If it be his will to chastise me, your Idols
cannot save me, I should be extremely erroneous, should I believe in your Gods;
hear and understand what I say unto you. [Nevertheless they slew him] and said
unto him, Go, enter into Paradise; He said, in dying, would to God this people
knew the graces that his Divine Majesty has conferred on me, he placed me in
the number of the blessed: After his death we did not send Angels from Heaven
to chastise the wicked; I will send them but once to destroy them; they shall
one day be dumb, for shame that they have not followed the True-believers, and
of being mocked by them that I sent to preach unto them my Commandments: Will
they not consider how much people we have destroyed in times past, who are not
returned, and that shall be one day assembled before me to be judged? The
Earth, dry, dead, and barren, as a sign of my omnipotency for the wicked; we
made it revive, and become green again, and to bring forth fruits, with which
they were satiate; we there created Gardens, Date-trees, and Vines, we caused
Fountains to flow; they eat of the fruits which are not the works of their
hands; will they not acknowledge the works of their Lord? Praise is due to him
that created the male and the female of all Plants that the Earth produces,
who created man and woman, and many other things, of which they have no
knowledge. It is a sign of my omnipotency, to separate the day from the night,
and to make the Sun to run to his appointed place. We have appointed to the
Moon her Signs, she goes and comes always through her old way; the Sun
neither hastneth, nor retardeth his course at any time, neither does join
himself by night to the Moon; the night comes not until the end of the day.
And all, to wit, the Moon, the Sun, and the Stars exalt my glory in the Heaven:
It is a mark of mine omnipotency, to have born their fathers upon the waters in
the Ark, and to have given them vessels like the Ark to bear them; had it
pleased me, I had caused them to be drowned, without succor and salvation; I
saved them through my special grace, until the time appointed. The wicked
despise the signs of Gods omnipotency, and scoffed, when they were required to
fear the wrath of his Divine Majesty, present, and to come, and that their
iniquities shall be forgiven them. When it was said unto them, Give alms of the
wealth that God has given you, they answered, shall I give him to eat, to whom
God shall give bread when it shall please him? They are in a very great error.
They will enquire of you when the day of Judgment shall be; and if ye believe
it, tell them that they must expect but one sole voice, that shall surprise
them, they shall quarrel, they shall not be able to make their Testament,
neither return to see their Parents; in the end they shall go out of their
Sepulchers, and present themselves before God, when the Trumpet shall sound:
Then shall they say, we are most miserable, to have departed from our graves,
behold what God has promised us! The Prophets spoke to us the Truth, viz. That
the world ought to expect but one voice: This day shall all men be assembled
before their Lord, no injustice shall be done to any person, and every one
shall be rewarded, and chastised after his works: Such as shall go into
Paradise, shall be in exceeding great repose, with all manner of contentment,
they and their wives shall be safe from all evils, lying on delicious beds,
they shall have all sorts of fruits, and whatsoever they shall desire, they
shall be saluted on the behalf of the Lord, gracious and merciful. God shall
say to the wicked at the day of Judgment, Depart ye this day from the company
of the good; did I not forbid you to worship the Devil, your open enemy, but to
worship me alone, and that it was the right way? Did I not tell you that the
Devil seduced a multitude of the people? Ye would not believe it, behold Hell,
that is prepared for you, through your incredulity. I will shut their mouth,
their hand shall speak, and their feet shall be witnesses of their crimes: If
we will, we can make the Infidels blind, they shall find no way, they shall not
be able to go or come, and shall be succored of none; had it been our pleasure
we could have transformed them in their houses, and they had not been able to
go forth; I will cast their head against the ground, and will render them
infamous, whose life I shall prolong, and they shall not know their errors. We
have not made them to understand the Mysteries of the Alcoran, but that was not
necessary; it is but to preach to the living, who comprehend what is spoken to
them; it is most true, that the wicked shall be punished: See they not that we
alone have created all the Beasts of the Earth, over which they command? We
have made them subject to them: Some serve them to ride on, and others for
their nourishment, will they be ungrateful? Nevertheless they have worshipped
Idols, they adored what could not deliver them from the pains of Hell. Afflict
not thy self at their discourse, I know whatsoever they say, and all that they
keep secret in their souls: Does not man consider (...) him of dust? And that
he is too arrogant? God has taught us how he formed his Creatures,
nevertheless the wicked have said, who is he that can give life to bones that
are rotten? Say unto them, he it is that created you at first, and that knows
what he created; he makes fire to come out of the green woods which ye burn,
and created the Heaven and the Earth; cannot he create other creatures like
unto you? Yes, without doubt, he creates what pleases him, he knows all
things; when he wills any thing, he says, Be thou, and it is; praised be he,
to whom all things appertain, and before whom you all shall return [to be
judged.]

CHAP. XXXVII. The Chapter of Orders, containing Fourscore Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I See Kitab e^ tenoir.
swear by the Orders of Angels that worship God, and attend his commands, by
them that hinder men to obey the Devil, and by them that read and meditate on
the Alcoran, that your God is one sole God, Lord of the Heaven, and the Earth,
and of all that is between them, he is Lord of the West, and of the East. We
adorned the Heaven and the Earth with Planets, and have kept them safe from the
malice of the Devils; they cannot hear what is spoken in the Firmament, they
are shamefully driven away on all sides, and shall be eternally tormented; if
they hear any thing spoken, they hear it greedly, and follow [it] speedily, but
the shining Planet pursues them, [and detecteth their malice.] The wicked have
demanded if we created any thing more illustrious than they: Certainly we
created them all of the dust of the Earth: Thou art amazed at their
blasphemies, they deride thy amazement, and shall never be converted. When they
shall see Miracles, they shall scoff, and say, that it is but evident Magic to
believe that they shall dye, and after, being earth, bones, and dust, they
shall rise again with their fathers and predecessors: Say unto them, that they
shall rise again, and that they are seduced from the right way; that the world
shall be but once destroyed, and they shall see what will befall them at the
day of Judgment: They shall that day say, they are wretched, and the Angel
shall say unto them, behold the day of Judgment, behold the day that the godly
shall be separated from the wicked; behold the day which ye would not believe:
It shall be said to the Angels, gather them together, assemble their wives, and
their Idols, put them into the way of Hell, and stay them, to give account of
their deportments, and why their Idols do not succor them. Certainly they
shall desire to be in the number of them that have obeyed Gods Commandments:
They shall quarrel among them, and shall say, it is you that have seduced us
from the right way, through your Oaths; ye swore that ye followed the Law of
God, and observed his Commandments: They shall answer on the contrary, We have
no power over you, you your selves were in manifest error, the word of God
shall be accomplished against us, and we shall for company suffer the tormens
of Hell; if we seduced you, we were likewise seduced, and we shall this day be
your companions in punishment. That day shall the wicked be in this manner
afflicted: they become insolent on earth, when it is told them there is but one
God, and say, shall we abandon our gods for a foolish and lying Poet? On the
contrary, he teaches you the truth, as did the Prophets that were before him;
ye shall be chastised, and entreated according to your demerits. Such as shall
obey Gods Commandments, shall have a place of safety wherein to rest, with all
sorts of fruits, in pleasant gardens, sitting orderly on delicious beds, with
glasses full of a drink, pleasing to the taste, which shall not make them
drunk. Their wives white as fresh Eggs, shall not cast an eye upon any but upon
them; they shall talk together, and one among them shall say, I had on earth a
companion, who asked me if I believed in the Resurrection; and if after being
reduced to earth, bones, and dust, we shall rise again? come with me, let us go
see what he does; he shall see him in the bottom of Hell, and shall say unto
him, by God, it wanted little but that thou had seduced me, without the grace
of God I had been damned, as thou art, we are not in the number of the dead, we
shall not suffer any pain; on the contrary, we are in exceeding great
happiness; thus are the righteous rewarded; who are the more happy? they who
are in our felicity, or such as are near to Zacon, the tree of hell? This tree
comes out of the bottom of hell, it rises high, and the branches themselves
resemble the heads of Devils; the damned shall eat of the fruit thereof, they
shall drink boiling water, and Hell shall be the place of their habitation;
their fathers were Infidels, they followed their footsteps, and the way of them
that were seduced before them; we sent unto them Preachers, whom they refused
to hear, but consider what is the end of the righteous, and that of the wicked.
We saved Noah, and gave grace to such as obeyed him; we delivered him with his
family from a great danger, and perpetuated his progeny; he shall be praised of
all them that shall come after him, because we gave him our blessing; thus do I
recompense the righteous, he was in the number of them that obeyed my
Commandments; we saved him, and them that followed him, and drowned the
Infidels. Remember Abraham, God gave him an heart free from impiety and malice;
he said to his father and his people, wherefore worship ye false gods instead
of the true God? think ye to escape the punishment of your crimes? Then he had
a vision in heaven, and said, I am sick of your Idolatry, they departed from
him with purpose to be converted, and empty the Temples of Idols of their
Treasures; he said to the Idols, wherefore eat ye not the sacrifices that are
before you? wherefore speak ye not? and gave them a great blow with his right
hand: the people came together with wrath, because he had stricken their gods;
he said unto them, Will ye worship the works of your hands? know ye not that it
is God that created you? Then they said among them, let us build a great pile,
and put fire to it, and cast Abraham into the fire; they conspired against him,
but we rendered them ashamed and confounded. Abraham said unto them, I go
toward my Lord, he shall guide me into the way of salvation; Lord, give me a
son that may be in the number of the righteous; we declared to him that he
should have a son, exceeding wise, when he arrived to years of discretion; he
said unto him, my son, I dreamed this night that I must sacrifice thee, what
will thou that I do? He replied, my father, do what is commanded you, ye shall
find me full of patience; when his father laid him on the ground, and put the
knife nigh unto his throat; we said unto him, O Abraham! it is enough, thou
have satisfied thy dream; thus do I entreat the righteous, thus were we wont to
prove them. We redeemed his son with a fair Ram; he shall be praised of
posterity, and those that shall come after him, shall bless his memory. Thus do
I reward the righteous, he was in the number of them that obey my Commandments.
We declared to him that he should have a son called Isaac, from whom should
issue many believers, and unbelievers. Certainly we gave our grace to Moses and
Aaron; we delivered them with their followers from an evident peril, we
protected them, and they were in the number of the victorious; we gave them the
Book full of light, and conducted them into the right way; they shall be
praised in ages to come, and posterity shall bless their memory. Thus do I
recompense the righteous, they were in the number of them that obeyed my
Commandments: Elias is in the number of my Prophets and Apostles; he said unto
the people, wherefore fear ye not God? wherefore worship ye the Idol Balan, and
forsake the Creator of the world? God is your Lord, and the Lord of your
predecessors; they traduced him, and were condemned to the fire of hell, except
such among them as obeyed my Commandments. We left his memory happy to
posterity; thus I reward the righteous; he was in the number of them that
obeyed my Commandments. Lot was in the number of my Prophets and Apostles:
Remember thou, how we delivered him and his family from evident peril, except
his wife, who remained among them that were chastised; having saved him, we
destroyed the wicked; they saw in the morning the footsteps of the ruin that
befell them the night before; will ye not understand this miracle? Jonas was in
the number of the Prophets. Remember thou, that he fled in a Ship, and was the
cause of evil to the Sailors, he was swallowed of a Whale; had he not repented
of his fault, he should have continued in the belly of that Fish until the day
of Judgment; we cast him on the shore extremely feeble, we covered him with
leaves of Filbert, and sent him to preach to more than an hundred thousand
persons, that we reconverted, whose decease we deferred until the time
appointed. The Infidels have demanded if thy Lord has daughters, as they have
sons? did we create the Angels male and female in their presence? They lie,
when they say, that God has a son; has he desired to have daughters rather
than sons? how can you thus blaspheme? Consider ye not that he is God alone,
without children? have ye any reason or authority to speak in this manner?
bring your arguments, produce your reason, if ye are true. The Infidels have
said, that the Angels were of the lineage of God, but the Angels well know that
the Infidels shall be damned, because of their blasphemies. Praised be God, he
has neither son nor daughter, other than the righteous that worship him, and
obey his Commandments. You, with your Idols cannot escape the punishment of
your sins, ye shall be condemned to the fire of hell. There is none among the
Angels that knows not his place, and his order in Paradise, to praise and
worship his Divine Majesty. If the Infidels say, we observe the Religion of our
Predecessors, we are in the right way; Say unto them, that if they believe not
in the Alcoran, they shall in fine know their incredulity. We have promised
protection to believers, and Prophets, they shall be protected and victorious;
depart for a time from the wicked, consider how God punishes them, they shall
feel the punishment of their impiety; will they cast themselves headlong into
the torments of hell? assuredly they will be astonished when they shall feel
them; depart from their company, and consider that they shall not be able to
escape the punishment of their crimes. Praise thy Lord, the Lord of power and
greatness, above the wicked; salvation be to the Prophets, and eternal praise
to the God of the Universe.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The Chapter of Truth, containing fourscore and eight Verses,
written at Mecca.
Reader, Mahomet entitled this Chapter with the Letter named in the Arabique
Alphabet, Ssad, which signifies in this place, Ssidk, that is to say, Truth.
See the Gloss of Gelaldin, Kitab el tenoir. They have entitled it the Chapter
of Truth.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the Alcoran, that this
Book teaches the way of Salvation; nevertheless, the Infidels resist the
Faith, and are among themselves of a different opinion. How many have we
destroyed in times past, that were like unto them? They cried, and required
succors, but they were no longer to be succored. The Infidels wonder, that a
man like themselves should be sent to instruct them: they say, That he is a
Magician, and a liar, to preach one sole God. It is a strange thing! Their
Doctors forsook their Assemblies, they went to preach through the City, and
said, Persist to adore your Gods; we abjure the belief of the unity of God, the
last Sect did not preach it; it is an evident lie. Was Mahomet chosen among us
to receive alone the Alcoran descended from Heaven? Certainly they doubt the
Alcoran, they shall know the truth, when they shall be in the fire of Hell.
Have they in their power the Treasures of the mercy of thy Lord, omnipotent and
bountiful? Possess they the Kingdom of the Heavens and Earth, and whatsoever is
betwixt them? If it be so, let them ascend into Heaven with their forces;
assuredly, they shall be shamefully beaten in all places. The wicked heretofore
defamed Noah, Aad, Pharaoh, the maker of Charms and Temod, the Inhabitants of
the City of Lot; those that dwelt in the Forest, and their companions, traduced
the Prophets, and were punished after their demerits; nevertheless, the
Infidels consider not that they shall be chastised, when the trumpet shall
sound at the day of Judgment, and that they shall no more return on earth to be
converted. They say in scorn, Lord give us to see the Book of the Account of
our sins, before the day of Judgment. Persevere, and be patient, be not
troubled at their discourse, and call to mind our servant David, stout and
zealous in my Law; the Mountains and the Birds praised me with him; they
assembled in his presence, and obeyed him; we gave force to his reign, and
endued him with knowledge and eloquence. Have thou learnt David's quarrel, when
they hindered him to enter into the Temple? and how he feared his enemies? When
they entered toward him, they said unto him, Be not afraid, we have a dispute
among us, judge our difference with equity, and teach us the right way. This man
is my brother, he has fourscore and nineteen sheep: I had but one, which he
has ravished from me, because he was stronger than I. David said, He has done
thee wrong, art thou troubled for one Ew? The greatest part of men arose
against their neighbor, except such as believe in the Law of God, and observe
his Commandments, which are few in number. Then David knew that we had tried
him, he implored pardon of his sin, he humbled himself, worshipped us, and was
converted. We gave him pardon of his fault, we drew him near unto us, and
lodged him in a place of content. I said unto him, O David! we have established
thee on Earth, to determine the differences that shall arise among the people,
follow not thine own appetite, it will seduce thee from the way of Salvation;
such as shall err from my Law, shall suffer grievous pains at the day of
Judgment. We have not in vain created the Heaven, and the Earth, as the wicked
affirm; misery shall befall them, they shall be cast headlong and burnt in the
fire of Hell. Shall I alike entreat the believers, and unbelievers? the
righteous and the wicked? This Book! we have sent it to thee, and blessed it,
to the end the people may meditate the mysteries thereof; and the wise reap
advantage for their salvation. We gave Solomon to our servant David, he was
extremely zealous in our service. Remember that horses, ready and vigorous,
were presented to him about evening; that he forgot to make his prayer at the
hour of Vespers; and said, What? Have I preferred the love of the wealth of the
Earth, to the remembrance of God, even until the Sunset? He caused them to be
led back again, and sacrificed some of them (for expiation of his fault.) He
caused their legs and necks to be cut off. We tried Solomon, we See Tefsir anf
Ioahir in Turkish.
caused a supposititious person to sit on his Throne, and afterward restored
him to his dominions. He said, Lord, give me thy mercy, give me so happy a
reign, that the like has not been seen; thou art liberal toward thy
creatures. We made subject to him the winds, which blowed at his command, where
it pleased him. We made the Devils subject to him; some built his Palaces,
others dived into the Seas to bring him Pearls, and others were bound and
chained to attend his commands; he retained and dismissed whom he listed, with
rendering an account. We drew him near unto us, and lodged him in a place of
content. Remember our servant Job, that he prayed to his Lord, and said, That
the Devil had heaped misery and affliction upon him. It was said unto him,
Strike the Earth with thy foot; thou shall see water spring forth to wash thee,
and to drink: We restored to him his children, and his riches, through our
special grace, to be an example to posterity. It was said unto him, when his
wife would have made him to murmur, Take rods in thine hand, strike thy wife,
and swerve not from what thou have promised. We found him patient, and zealous
in obedience to our Commandments. Remember our servant Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
affectionate and zealous in our Law; we saved, and chose them among the
righteous. Such as have my fear before their eyes, shall enjoy the delights of
the Garden of Eden; where they shall repose upon most glorious beds; they shall
there have all sorts of fruits, and delicious drink; and their wives shall not
look on any but on them. Behold, what is promised to them at the day of
Judgment, and these pleasures shall never end. The wicked and Infidels shall be
precipitated into the fire of Hell, they shall drink boiling water in
abundance, and water extremely cold, full of all manner of noysom smells; they
shall be precipitated into the flames, and shall say to them that have obeyed
them upon Earth, May ye be perpetually tormented, you have seduced and misled
us. On the contrary, may yout selves be tormented, you have been the cause of
our misery, and shall be damned with us. Then shall they say, Lord increase the
punishment of him that is the cause of our misery: Shall we not be able to see
them whom we believed on Earth to be Infidels, and whom we derided? cannot our
eyes see? Thus shall the damned quarrel. Say (to the people) I am sent only to
preach unto you the Unity of God, the Omnipotent Creator of Heaven and Earth,
and of all that is between them. Behold, the best Sermon that I can make unto
you; nevertheless you despise it. I know not what happened in Heaven when the
Angels quarrelled. God has inspired it into me, and I am sent but to instruct
you, and to preach publicly the pains of Hell. Remember thou that God said to
his Angels, I will create man of the mire of the Earth; when I have formed him,
I will breathe against him, and inspire my Spirit into his body; prostrate your
selves before him with humility. The Angels there prostrated themselves, except
the Devil; he was proud, and already in the number of the wicked. Thy Lord said
unto him. Wherefore do thou not humble thy self before the work of my hands?
Thou art in the number of the proud; he replied, I am better than man, thou
have made me of fire, and have created him of the dust of the Earth. Then thy
Lord said unto him, Get thee hence, thou shall be chastised on all sides, and
my curse be upon thee until the day of Judgment* He answered, Lord, defer my
punishment until the day of the Resurrection; he said, I will defer it until
the day appointed. He replied, through thy permission I will tempt all the
world, except such as shall be zealous in thy Law, and shall obey thy
Commandments. He said, I tel^ thee true, I tell thee true, I will fill Hell
with thee and those that shall follow thee. Say unto the people, I require of
you no recompense for my instructions, I am not importunate. Certainly this
Book i^ sent only to instruct men, you shall one day know the truth of what it
contains.

CHAP. XXXIX. The Chapter of Troops, containing seventy five Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God gracious and merciful. This book was sent by God, the
Omnipotent and wise. We sent it to thee, the contents thereof are most true:
worship one God alone, and obey hi^ Commandments; faith proceeds from him
alone: Such as worship any other but him, worship Idols. They have said, we
would not invoke our Idols, had they not power to draw u^ near to God:
Certainly God shall judge one day the difference that is between the believers,
and unbelievers; he guides not him that is a liar an^ impious. If he would
have a son, he would make choice of one of his creatures, that should be
pleasing to him; praised be God, there is bu^ one God, always victorious, he
created the heavens and the earth with proportion; he maket^ the night to enter
into the day, and the day into the night; he created the Sun and the Moon which
perform their course in heaven until the da^ appointed, he is omnipotent and
merciful: He hat^ created all of you of one sole man, of whom he created his
wife; he has given you clean beasts, male and female; he formed you in the
wombs of your mothers, form upon form: he brought you out of three The
obscurity of the mothers belly, her womb and the skin that infolds you in the
womb. See Gelaldin.
obscurities, he alone is your God and your Lord, the kingdom of the world
appertains to him, there is no God but he. How can the Infidel depart from
his service? If ye will not worship him, he has nothing to do with you, he
desires not that his creatures should be impious; his Will is that they praise
him; this is his pleasure, and none shall bear the burden of his neighbor, ^e
all shall be assembled before him, he will show ye what you have done, he
knows what is in the hearts of men: When man is touched with any affliction,
he invoketh God, and turns; and when he is in prosperity, he forgets his
vows; he has said that God has a companion equal to him, and erreth from the
way of his Law. Say unto him, thou shall be awhile tolerated, in the end thou
shall be cast headlong into the fire of hell; and he that shall pray to God day
and night* erect, prostrate, or on the knee, with fear of the torments of hell,
shall enjoy the mercy of his divine Majesty. Are such as labor, to be compared
to them that are idle? They that have judgment will understand this discourse.
Say unto them oh ye people that believe in your Lord! have his fear before your
eyes; such as shall do good works in this world, shall enjoy abundantly the
riches of the earth, God will innumerably reward them that persevere in
obedience to his Commandments. Say unto them, I am commanded to worship one
God, to profess his Unity, and to be obedient to him. Say unto them, I
apprehend the day of Judgment, if I disobey God my Lord. Say unto them, I will
worship but one God; worship ye others, whom ye will. Such as shall despise the
Law of God, shall lose their souls, and families, at the day of Judgment. These
are two great losses, and most certain they be involved in eternal fire. Thus
God preaches to true believers. O my creature! speak unto them that have my
fear before their eyes, that they adore not Idols, and that if they turn to
their Lord, they shall enjoy the delights of Paradise. Proclaim to them that
hear my Word, and obey my Commandments, that they are in the right way, and
well advised; can thou deliver from the fire of hell him that shall be
condemned? Certainly such as obey God, shall enjoy the pleasures of Paradise,
wherein flow many rivers, and there shall they dwell eternally. This is the
promise of God, he swerveth not from that which he promises. See thou not
that God sends rain from heaven, and makes the rivers to run upon the earth,
he causes plants to spring forth, and herbs of diverse colors; thou see them
become yellow, and then altogether dry; this is a sign of his omnipotency.
Has not he to whom God has given the light of faith, received a great grace
from his divine Majesty? Misery is upon them that have an heart hardened, and
forget his Law; they are manifestly seduced; he has sent an excellent book for
the instruction of men, his precepts are alike in purity, and without
contradiction: They that fear God, tremble when they hear mention of this book,
and find their rest in the word of his divine Majesty. This book is the guide
of the righteous, God by it guides whom pleases him. He whom God shall
seduce, shall find none to guide him* he shall be precipitated into the fire of
hell at the day of Judgment. It shall be said that day to the wicked, taste the
torments that ye have merited; their predecessors defamed the Prophets, and
were punished when they least thought of it; God rendered them ignominious in
this world, and they shall feel in the other, torments much more grievous, and
they know it not. We have taught in this book what is necessary for the
salvation of the people, peradventure they will learn it; it is in the Arabique
tongue, without falsehood and contradiction, perhaps the people will fly from
impiety; God teaches you a parable: Two men are associates in their traffic,
the one is wicked, the other an honest man, are they alike? Praise is due to
one sole God; the greatest part of the Infidels understand it not. Thou shall
die, all men shall die, and ye shall be assembled at the day of Judgment, when
ye shall dispute together; Who is more unjust, than he that blasphemeth against
God, and against the known truth? Shall not the wicked be damned? Such as shall
believe the Prophet, and fly impiety, shall obtain from God what they desire;
such is the recompense of the righteous, God shall pardon their sins, and
reward them for their good works: does not he protect his servant? They will
terrify thee with the Idols which they adore; but he whom God shall mislead,
shall find none able to guide him, and none shall be able to seduce him whom he
shall guide; is not he the omnipotent and revenging? If thou ask of the
Infidels, who created heaven and earth? they will say it is God; Say unto them,
have ye therefore considered the Idols which ye adore, can they exempt you from
the wrath of God, when it shall be his pleasure to chastise you? Shall they be
able to hinder his grace, when it shall be his will to pardon you? Say unto
them, my refuge is God, I am resigned to his Will, the wise trust in his divine
Majesty. Say unto them, oh people! do as you understand him. I will do as I
understand him; ye shall know in the end, that whosoever shall be condemned,
shall be ashamed, and be precipitated into eternal torments. We have sent unto
thee the most true Book, to instruct the people; He that shall follow the right
way, shall meet with nothing but good; and he that shall go astray, shall meet
with nothing but evil; thou art not the guardian of the wicked; God causes
men to die when the hour of their death is arrived; he deferreth the death of
many during their sleep, and remitteth that of others to the time appointed,
this is a sign of his Omnipotency, to such as consider it. Will ye worship any
but God? Say unto them, how shall your Idols be able to intercede for you,
since they want power? know you not this? Say unto them, we ought to invoke one
God alone, King of the heaven and earth; you all shall one day be assembled
before him to be judged. The Infidels tremble with fear, when they hear mention
of one sole God, and rejoice, when they hear speak of their Idols; Say unto
them, God is Creator of the heavens and the earth, he knows the past,
present, and future; (Lord!) thou shall one day judge the differences of thy
creatures: Should the Infidels possess all the riches of the earth, and yet as
much more, they would not be able to escape the fire of hell at the day of
Judgment; they shall be punished more grievously than they imagine, their sins
shall be set before them, and they shall feel the rigors of the torments which
they despise. Man calls upon us when he is in affliction, and when we give
him our grace, he says, he meriteth it; on the contrary, this is to prove him,
but most of them are ignorant of it; their predecessors spoke as they; the good
that they have done, has profited them nothing: and the misery that they have
merited, is fallen upon them, they shall not escape the punishment of their
crimes. Know they not that God gives and takes away wealth from whom pleases
him? This is a sign of his omnipotency for the righteous. Say unto them, oh
people! they who have offended God, ought not to despair of his grace, he is
gracious and merciful; be ye converted, and recommend your selves to his will
before ye be condemned, otherwise ye shall remain without protection; follow
the instruction that God has sent to you, before ye be (...), the punishment
of your crimes shall surprise you, ye know not the time; the wicked shall be
afflicted, for that they have not obeyed Gods Commandments, they shall know
their damnation, and the sin that they have committed, in scorning the true
believers: They shall say, had God guided me into the right way, I had had his
fear before mine eyes. When they shall see hell, they shall say, could I return
into the world, I would be in the number of the righteous; on the contrary, my
Commandments were taught you, but ye became proud, and despised them. Thou
shall see that day how the visages of Infidels shall be blackned: is there not
a place in hell prepared for the proud? God loves, and puts into a place of
felicity them that fear him, they shall not be touched, either with
displeasure or affliction; God has created all things, and disposes all at
his pleasure; he has in his power the keys of heaven and earth, such as
disobey him are damned. Say unto them, oh ignorant [men] will ye enjoin me to
worship another god, besides God? It has been preached to you, and your
predecessors, that all your good works shall be unprofitable, if ye adore many
gods, and that you shall be in the number of the damned: there is but one God,
worship him, and be mindful of his graces. The Infidels have not praised God as
he ought to be praised, they have no knowledge of his power, he shall make the
earth to tremble, and gather together the heavens by the strength of his right
hand at the day of Judgment; praised be God, he has no companion. When the
Trumpet shall sound the first time, he shall cause to die, whom he will have to
die in the heavens and earth; the second time all the world shall rise again
and attend his Commandments; the earth shall be full of the light of the Lord
thereof; he shall bring his book, wherein shall be written what the Prophets
and Martyrs have taught, he shall judge the world with equity, and shall not do
injustice to any; every one shall be rewarded and chastised for his works, he
knows all that they have done, he shall send the Infidels into the fire of
hell, in troops; when they shall be arrived at the gate, it shall open before
their eyes; it shall be said unto them, behold Hell, which ye have merited;
were there not Prophets and Apostles, to teach you the Commandments of God, and
to preach unto you on Earth the coming of this rigorous day? They shall say,
yes, but the word of God, shall be accomplished against the wicked. It shall be
said unto them, go, enter into Hell, ye shall abide there eternally, it is the
habitation of the proud. Such as shall have the fear of God before their eyes,
shall be conducted in troops to the gate of Paradise, the gate shall open
before their eyes; it shall be said unto them, behold what ye have gained, the
peace of God is with you, ye have not been ignorant, enter into Paradise, ye
shall dwell therein eternally. They shall say, praised be God, for that we
believed in his Law; and because we are heirs of his grace, we will go into
Paradise, into what place shall seem good to us, God gives his blessing to the
righteous. Thou shall see the Angels about the Throne of thy Lord, who shall
praise and exalt his glory; they shall say, God has judged his creatures with
equity, praise is due to the Lord of the Universe.

CHAP. XL. The Chapter of the True believer, containing Eighty five Verses,
written at Mecca.
Reader, Gelaldin entituleth this Chapter, Of the Pitiful.

IN the Name of God, Gracious and Merciful: God is prudent and wise. This Book
is sent by the Omnipotent, who knows all things, who pardons sins, and
accepts the conversion of his creatures, he is severe in his chastisements,
and indulgent to his People, there is no God but he, and all the World shall
one day be assembled before his Divine Majesty [to be judged.] No man disputes
against the Precepts of the Alcoran, but the wicked; be not thou discontented
if they live on Earth with some felicity; the People of Noah's time contemned
his instructions, their Posterity did like them, and every Nation has
conspired the death of them whom God sent to instruct them; they disputed to
obscure the truth through their lies, but they were punished; and after what
manner? So is the Word of God accomplished against the wicked, they all shall
be damned. The Angels that are about the Throne of God, and those that bear
him, praise and exalt his Divine Majesty, they believe in his Unity, and beg
pardon of him for the True believers; Lord, thy mercy extends through the
whole World, nothing is hid from thee, either in Heaven or Earth, pardon their
sins that convert, and embrace thy holy Law; deliver them from the Fire of
Hell, open to them the gate of the Gardens of Eden, which thou have prepared
for them, their Fathers, Wives, and Children, and them of their Lineage that
shall do good works, thou art Omnipotent and wise. Depart from sin, he that
shall depart [from it] shall resent the effect of God's mercy at the Day of
Judgment, and shall enjoy eternal felicity; the Infidels shall be hated of God,
his hatred is infinitely more dangerous than yours; will ye be Infidels after
being called to the observation of the Law of Salvation? They said, Lord, will thou cause us to die twice? And shall we twice rise again? But they shall say
at the day of Judgment, Lord, we confess we have offended thee, we acknowledge
our sin, in having renounced the belief of thine Unity; shall we never go out
of Hell, to observe thy Law, and follow the way of Salvation? No, ye shall
suffer in the Fire of Hell, because that ye have believed them that adored
Idols, and because ye have said, that God has companions equal to him. All
things obey one sole God Omnipotent, he it is that made you to see his
Miracles, and sends you the riches of Heaven and Earth; none consider it, but
such as are converted. Pray to God, and observe his Law, although it be against
the will of the wicked; he elevateth his Creatures to what degree he lists,
he has created his Throne, and sent his inspirations to whom he sees good, to
preach the Day of Judgment; that Day shall the People come out of their
Monuments, and none shall be able to hide himself from his Divine Majesty. Who
shall command that day? It shall be God alone, victorious; that day shall he
recompense every one after his works without injustice, he is exact to make
account. If thou preach to the wicked the Day of Judgment, their heart will
lift them up, and they shall be full of affliction, their prayers shall not be
heard, and none shall intercede for them: God knows them that have eyes of
treachery, and sees all that is in the hearts of men, he judges of every
thing with truth; the Idols which they worship are without power, God alone
understands all things, and is Omnipotent. Consider they not what was the end
of their predecessors? Who were more powerful, and more wealthy than they? God
surprised them in their sins, there was none of power to save them, for that
they despised the Prophets of his Divine Majesty, they contemned his Law, and
were impious; but he severely chastised them, he is Omnipotent, and most
severe. We sent Moses with Miracles, with Reasons clear and intelligible to
Pharaoh, to Haman, and Caron; they said that Moses was a Sorcerer, and a liar;
and when he preached to them the truth on our behalf, they said, kill him, with
all those that believe him, and make their wives infamous; but their conspiracy
was but impiety: Pharaoh said, hinder me not to kill Moses, let him invoke his
God to save him; I fear that he may alter your Law, and introduce some disorder
in the Land; Moses said, God, mine and your Lord, shall defend me from the
malice of the proud, that believe not the Day of Judgment: Then a man of the
domestiques of Pharaoh, that secretly professed the true Law, said, will ye
slay a man that declares that God is his Lord? And that has made you to see
Miracles? If he be a Liar, his lie shall be against him; but if he speak the
truth, something of what he has preached shall befall you. God guides neither
the wicked nor liars. Oh People! you this day command on Earth with splendour;
who shall defend us from the wrath of God, if it fall upon us? Pharaoh said, I
speak nothing to you, but what I have told you heretofore, and I will guide you
all into the right way; he of his Domestiques, that secretly professed the true
Law, said, Oh people! I fear lest ye be chastised, as have been your
predecessors, as were the people of Noah, Aad, Temod, and those that were after
them; God will not do injustice to men, I fear for you the Day of Judgment, a
day, when ye shall rise again with terror, to render account of your actions;
he whom God shall seduce shall find none to guide him. Certainly Joseph came
heretofore with instructions, clear and intelligible: Nevertheless ye doubted,
even until his death, and said, that after him God shall not send a Prophet
like unto him; thus does God seduce the wicked, that doubt of his Law; he
hates such as dispute without reason, they are abhorred of them that believe
in his Divine Majesty; thus God hardneth the heart of the proud, and Tyrants.
Pharaoh said to * Haman, build me an high Palace, peradventure Haman as
Pharaoh's ^ieutnant ^eneral. ^ee Gelal^in.
I shall arrive at the Heavens, and as high as the God of Moses, I believe him
to be a Liar. Thus Pharaoh delighted in his wicked actions, he erred from the
right way, and his conspiracy was but his destruction. He of his Family that
was a True believer, said, Oh people! follow me, I will guide you into the
right way, the riches of the Earth pass away lightly, and the riches of Heaven
are Eternal; he that does evil shall find evil; who does good, man or woman,
believing in God, shall enter into Paradise, where he shall be enriched
innumerably with all manner of riches. Wherefore invite you me to precipitate
my self into the Fire of Hell, since I exhort you to your Salvation? Ye invite
me to be wicked, and to believe that God has companions, and I know it is not
so; I call you to the Omnipotent and merciful [God] doubtless I will not
worship your Idols, they cannot hear you, either in this World, or in the
other; we all shall be one day assembled before God, who will condemn Infidels
to the Fire of Hell; consider hereafter what to you I have preached; I am
resigned to the will of God, he beholds all the actions of his creatures; he
shall chastise them for the evil that they shall commit, and for their wicked
designs. He sent his punishment upon the Lineage of Pharaoh, they deserved to
be precipitated into the Fire of Hell, they shall burn Evening and Morning. It
shall be said to them at the Day of Judgment, oh People of Pharaoh! go, enter
into the Fire of Hell. The Infidels shall quarrel in Hell, the poor shall say
unto the rich; We followed you, are ye able this day to deliver us from Eternal
flames? They shall answer, we all are damned with you, God is a most just Judge.
The damned shall say to the Ministers of Hell, Pray to your Lord, that he may
assuage these torments for one day; they shall answer, had ye not on Earth the
Prophets and Apostles of God to instruct you? They shall say, Yes; pray
therefore to God your selves; the wicked love nothing but impiety; I will
protect on Earth my Prophets, and them that observe my Law, and particularly at
the Day of Judgment; that day the wicked shall have no excuse that shall
advantage them, my curse shall fall upon them, and they all shall be damned. We
taught Moses the way of Salvation, and made the Children of Israel heirs of his
instructions, to instruct them that shall understand them. Persevere and be
patient, the promise of God is infallible; implore pardon of thy sins, and
exalt the praise of thy Lord Evening and Morning. They that dispute against the
Commandments of God are without reason, and have naught in their Souls but
pride and ignorance: Implore succor of God, he understands and sees all
things, the Creation of the Heavens, and of the Earth, is greater than the
Creation of men, but the greatest part of men know it not; the Blind is not
like to him that sees clearly; he that does good, is not like to him that does
evil, neither is obscurity such as the light, but few men consider it.
Doubtless the Day of Judgment shall come, nevertheless the greatest part of men
will not believe it: Your Lord has said, Call upon me, I will hear you; such
as shall resist my Law, shall*go into Hell, and be Eternally seduced. God has
created the Night for repose, and the day for travel, he is bountiful toward
his creatures, but the greatest part of the people are ungrateful; God is your
Lord, Creator of all things, there is no God but he. How can the wicked
Blaspheme? So do they blaspheme that are ungrateful for the graces of God; he
has established you on Earth, he has covered you with the Heavens, he has
formed you, enriched you; he is your God, your Lord, blessed be God, Lord of
the Universe, he it is that gives and depriveth you of life, there is no God
but he, be obedient to him, and observe his Law; praised be God, Lord of the
Universe, who has created you of mire. Say unto the Infidels, I am forbidden
to worship the Idols that ye adore; God has taught me his unity, I have
received command to worship none but the Lord of the Universe; he created you
of dust, and mire, and congealed Blood, he causes you to be born little
Infants, he makes you to arrive to the age of discretion, to virility, and old
age; many die before that age, and all attain to the time of their destiny;
peradventure ye shall understand his Unity; he it is that makes you to live
and to die, and when he wills any thing, he says, Be thou, and it is. See ye
not, that they that dispute against his Commandments, depart from his Law? Such
as reject our Commandments, and what we enjoined our Prophets to preach to men,
shall find their errors, when they shall see Chains on their Necks, and Fetters
on their feet; they shall be dragged and burned in Hell; then shall it be said
unto them, where are those Idols that ye adored upon Earth? They shall answer,
they are departed from us, certainly they are without power; thus God seduceth
Infidels to their confusion. It shall be said unto them, These pains befall you,
for that ye were proud and insolent without reason; enter within the gates of
Hell, which is the habitation of the proud, ye shall dwell there Eternally. Be
patient and and persevere, the word of God is infallible; I will make thee to
see a part of what I have promised to men, I will cause thee to die, and thou
shall behold them all assembled to be judged. Certainly we sent Prophets before
thee, we have spoken to thee of one part of our Apostles, and the rest are
concealed from thee; neither Prophet nor Apostles can preach any thing without
God's permission; he chastises the wicked when he pleases, he shall judge the
differences that are between them and the Prophets, and shall destroy the
unbelievers. God has created the beasts for your use; some ye eat, and others
serve you to ride on, [from them] ye reap profit, they bear the burden, as
likewise do the Ships for the advantage of your commerce; God manifests to
you his graces: And what graces! Will ye despise them? Do not unbelivers
consider the end of them that were before them, who were more powerful and rich
than they? Their Treasures did not save them; they derided the Prophets and
Apostles that preached to them; and in the end felt the pains that they had
despised. When they shall fear the torments of Hell, they shall say, We believe
in One God alone, and renounce Idols. This profession of Faith shall be
unprofitable to them in Hell; they shall incur the rigor of the Law of God,
that was observed against their predecessors, and all unbelievers shall be
damned.

CHAP. XLI. The Chapter of Exposition, containing Fifty and Four Verses,
written at Mecca.
Reader, Gelaldin entitled this Chapter, Of Adoration.

IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. The Alcoran was sent by the
gracious and merciful God: It explaineth Divine Mysteries in the Arabique
Tongue, to them that have knowledge to understand them; it proclaims to the
good, the delights of Paradise, and preaches to the wicked the torments of
Hell; nevertheless, the greatest part of the world depart from the Faith, and
hear not thy words: They say, We have obdurate hearts, we cannot comprehend
what thou preachest, our ears are stopped, we are too remote to hear what thou
say. Observe thy Law, we will live after our own. Say unto them, I am a man
like you, your God is one sole God, be obedient to him, and beg pardon of him
for your sins: Misery is upon unbelievers, that pay not Tithes, and believe not
in the day of Judgment. The believers that shall do good works, shall enjoy an
infinite reward. Say unto them, How, will ye be Monday and Tuesday. See
Gelaldin.
wicked toward him that created the Earth in two days? how can you say that he
has a Companion equal to him? He is sole Lord of the Universe; he raised the
Mountains, blessed the Earth, and gave to every Region the particulars thereof
in four days, for them that shall have need: After this he ascended into
Heaven, that was like unto smoke, and said unto Heaven and Earth, Ye shall obey
me, either through force or affection: They answered, Lord, we will be obedient
to thy Commandments. Thursday and Friday. See Gelaldin.
He created seven Heavens in two days, and disposed every Heaven after his own
will; he adorned them with Stars, and preserves them from the malice of the
Devil. This is an effect of his Omnipotency; he is omnipotent, and knows all
things. If the unbelievers depart from the Faith, say unto them, I have
threatened you, as heretofore thunder did the people of Aad and Temod, when the
Prophets taught them the Law of the ancient True-believers, to wit, To worship
but one God: They said, Were it Gods pleasure to alter our Law, he would have
sent us Angels to reach unto us; we will not beiieve in thy Mission. The people
of Aad waxed proud on the Earth without reason, and said, Who is more powerful
than we? will they not consider, that he that created them, is more powerful
and wealthy than they? Nevertheless they despised our Commandments. We sent
against them a cold and impetuous wind, in an unhappy time, that made them to
suffer on Earth shame and ignominy, because of their crimes: He shall cause
them to feel the pains of Hell, that are much greater than those of the Earth,
and they shall be eternally deprived of protection. We instructed the men of
Temod in the right way; they preferred blindness to light, and impiety to
Salvation; they were surprised by thunder, and suffered great afflictions,
because of their sins. We saved none of them, but the believers, who had our
fear before their eyes. Be thou mindful of the day that the enemies of God
shall be assembled in Hell, they shall defend their cause before the Judge,
until testimony be brought against them; their ears, their eyes, and their skin
shall be witnesses of their iniquities: They shall say, Wherefore do ye witness
against us? They shall answer, He that made us to speak, gives speech to every
thing; he it is that created you, and ye are this day assembled before him to
be judged. Ye did not well conceal your selves, when ye offended him; your
ears, your eyes, your skin are witnesses against you; ye believed that God
should not see your sins, this was your opinion: Certainly he shall chastise
you and you all shall be in the number of the damned* Persevere, and be thou
patient, the fire of Hell shall be their habitation; they shall not be able to
please God in the flames. We have given them the Devils for their Companions,
who caused them to delight in sin. The word of God shall be accomplished
against them, as it was accompllshed against their Predecessors, as well men as
Devils, that are condemned. The unbelievers have said, Hear not that Alcoran,
it is full of error; peradventure, ye shall be seduced. I will cause them to
suffer grievous pains, and will chastise them after their demerits; such is the
reward of Gods enemies. They shall remain eternally in the fire of Hell,
because they despise his Commandments. The wicked shall say at the day of
Judgment, Lord, let us see the Devils, and the men that seduced us? we will
trample them under our feet, and precipitate them to the bottom of Hell. Such
as shall have professed the Law of God, as shall have obeyed his Commandments,
shall be visited by the Angels, and shall that day be free from fear and
affliction. They shall*say unto them, Rejoice ye in Paradise, that is prepared
for you; ye shall there find all the contentments that ye shall desire; they
have been prepared for you by the gracious and merciful. There is nothing
better than to pray to God, than to do good works, and to profess his unity.
Good and evil are not alike: Expel evil with thy good works. There is an
exceeding great antipathy between Faith and Impiety: Faith is given to such as
persevere to do well, and to them that are endued with the grace of God. The
Devil will tempt thee, but implore assistance from God; he hears and knows
all things. The night and the day, the Sun and the Moon, are Signs of his
Omnipotency: Adore neither the Sun, nor the Moon, worship God that created
them. If the Infidels resist the Faith, the Angels that are in Paradise desist
not, notwithstanding, to exalt the glory of his Divine Majesty, day and night,
without intermission. It is a sign of his Omnipotency, to see the barren and
dry Earth to change the face, and become green, when it is watered with rain.
He that makes the plants to revive, is he that makes every thing to live and
die, he is Omnipotent. Such as depart from our Commandments, cannot hide
themselves from us: shall he that shall be precipitated into Hell, be better
lodged than he that shall be saved at the day of Judgment; Do what shall please
you, your Lord beholds all your actions. I will chastise them that traduce
the Alcoran, it is a precious Book, it is approved by the ancient and modern
Scriptures, it is sent from the glorious and merciful. None other thing shall
be spoken to thee, than what has been spoken to the Prophets that preceded
thee; thy Lord is merciful and just. Had we sent the Alcoran in the Persian
tongue, to a Prophet, an Arabian by Nation, the wicked would have said, That
the Divine Mysteries are not well explained. Say unto them, It is the guide of
Believers, and a remedy to their ignorance. Infidels have deaf ears, they are
blind, and hear not, as those that are called too far off: Certainly, we gave
the Book and the Law to Moses. Unbelievers doubt, but if thy Lord had not said,
That he would defer their punishment until the day of Judgment, he had already
chastised them in this world, because they doubt of the truth. Whosoever shall
do good, shall find good; and the evil that a man commits, shall be against
him. Thy Lord does no injustice to his Creatures: None but he knows the day
of Judgment; no fruit nor flower springs out of the Earth, and woman neither
conceives, nor brings forth, but by his permission. Be thou mindful of the
day that thy Lord shall call Idolaters, and demand of them, where be their
Idols? They shall say, Lord, we acknowledge thy Unity; none of us will hereafter
adore those false gods. They that worshipped one God, departed from Idolaters;
they know that the punishment of their sins is infallible. Man never cease to
require riches, and is troubled when evil befalls him; if we give him good
after his affliction, he says, that he foresaw it, and has no thought of the
coming of the day of Judgment; if he be converted, thy Lord opens to him the
Gate of Paradise. I will make the wicked to know their wickedness, and will
most severely punish them; when we bestow wealth on man, he follows his
Idolatry and his sin; and when he is touched in affliction, he abounds in
prayer: Say unto them, know ye not that the Alcoran proceeds from God?
nevertheless ye have renounced it; who is more impious than he that impugneth
the known truth? I will cause them to see my Miracles, even to the utmost parts
of Heaven and Earth, and in their own persons, to the end they may know the
truth of the Alcoran. Suffices it not them that thy Lord sees all things?
nevertheless, they are in doubt of the Resurrection, and of being assembled
before him to be judged; certainly God is omniscient.

CHAP. XLII. The Chapter of Counsel, containing Fifty and three Verses, written
at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. God is Prudent, Wise, Majestic; he
understands all things, and is omnipotent; God has sent thee the same
inspirations that he sent to them that did precede thee; he is omnipotent and
wise, whatsoever is in Heaven and in Earth appertains to him; he is
omnipotent, and knows all things; the Heavens open at his command, the Angels
exalt his glory, and implore his pardon for them that are on earth; he is
merciful, he beholds them that invoke Idols, and knows them all, but thou
art not their Tutor. We have inspired into thee the Alcoran in the Arabic
Tongue, to preach to the Inhabitants of Mecca, and such as dwell about that
City; we have sent thee to preach unto them the day of Judgment; there is no
doubt that one part of men shall be saved, and the other shall be damned; had
it pleased God, he had created them of one and the same Religion, he gives his
grace to whom he lists, and Infidels shall be deprived of succor, because
they have required the protection of Idols; but God is the true protector of
the world: he reviveth the dead, and is omnipotent; he shall one day judge all
the difficulties, and resolve all your doubts in your Religion, he is my Lord,
I recommend my self to his divine will; he created your wife of your selves, he
created all beasts male and female, and caused you to multiply; there is not
any thing like unto him, he keeps the keys of the Treasures of Heaven and
Earth, and takes away, and gives wealth as pleases him. The Law that I gave
to Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, is that which I commanded thee to observe,
viz. to believe in one God. The Infidels are angry when thou preachest to them
the unity of God, he teaches it whom he pleases, and guides into the right
way them that obey him; the wicked approve some points of his Law, and reject
the rest, although they have knowledge of his Unity, and that through the envy
that is risen among them; if thy Lord had not heretofore said that he would
defer their punishment until the day of Judgment, he had already destroyed
them; many of those, who after them shall have knowledge of the Scriptures,
shall doubt of his Law; but follow thou the way that is appointed thee, and
follow not their appetites: Say unto them, I believe in the Book that God has
sent, I have received commandment to preach unto you, that God is your, and our
Lord; ye shall answer for your actions, and we shall answer for ours; it is not
necessary to dispute against us, God will one day assemble us in his presence
to judge our differences, he is our refuge; such as dispute against the faith,
after knowledge of the truth, are without reason; their arguments shall be vain
with God, they shall be the object of his wrath, and shall suffer exceeding
great pains. God has sent the Alcoran with truth and balance; he will not
instruct thee when the day of Judgment shall be: Such as have no faith in him,
ask when it shall come, and they that believe him, fear the coming thereof, and
know it to be infallible; such as doubt, are erroneous from the right way. God
is merciful to his people, and enricheth whom he pleases; he is strong and
omnipotent, he increases the graces of him that desires the riches of Heaven;
he gives the wealth of the Earth to them that affect it, and depriveth them of
the riches of Heaven: Are there wicked ones among men that teach them a false
Religion prohibited of God? God has not revealed it to them; had he not
deferred their punishment until the day of Judgment, he had already destroyed
them; they shall in the end feel grievous torments; ye shall see them fear
their own deportments, ye shall see them chastised after their demerits; and
the believers that do good works, shall enjoy the delights of Paradise, where
they shall find whatsoever they shall desire; this is the great grace of God;
this is that which he has proclaimed to the faithful that believed, and have
done good works: Say unto them, I require none other recompense for the pains
that I take in preaching to you, than to love my kindred; he that shall do any
good work, shall be rewarded, God is merciful, and good works are pleasing to
him. Will they say that thou have blasphemed against God? If it please God, he
shall hinder thee to hear this discourse, or will imprint patience in thine
heart; he abolisheth lies, and confirms the truth through his words; he
knows whatsoever is in the hearts of men; he accepts the conversion of his
Creatures, he pardons their sins, and knows all their actions; he hears
the prayers of the faithful, that do good works, and augmenteth his grace upon
them; but Infidels shall undergo the rigors of eternal pains. Had God equally
enriched all his Creatures, they had been in confusion upon earth; he enricheth
whom he pleases; he sees and knows all; he sends rain when men despair of
his grace, he is the Protector of believers, and praise is due to him
eternally: the Creation of the Heavens, and of the Earth, and of all that
moves between them, is a sign of thine Omnipotency: If evil befall you, believe
that ye have deserved it; nevertheless, he pardons you many things; ye cannot
escape his punishment on earth, and none is able to protect you against him;
the vessel that runs upon the water, big as a mountain, is a token of his
Omnipotency, to them that persevere in his Law, and acknowledge his graces. He
shall reprove the wicked for their sins, and shall pardon many: They that
dispute against his Commandments, cannot escape their punishment; the riches
that we possess are the riches of the earth; the riches that God bestows on
them that trust in him, are eternal: They that depart from mortal sins, that
repent to have committed them, that beg of God to be heard, and persevere in
their supplications; they that take counsel, and consult among them what they
ought to do, that employ in good works part of the wealth that God has given
them, that implore his help in their afflictions; such as do good, and such as
commit evil, shall be recompensed, and punished according to their works. God
abhors Infidels; ye have no power over them that implore his assistance in
their affliction, and repent; your power extends over them that do injustice
to the people, and disobey on earth the Commandments of his divine Majesty;
they shall suffer great torments. Such as persevere in well-doing, and pardon
their neighbor, do what God has Commanded. He whom God shall mislead, shall
find none to guide him. Thou shall see that the Infidels shall ask if they may
return into the world, when they shall behold the fire of hell; thou shall see
them fly with extreme fear of external ignominy; they shall look awry upon
hell, and the believers shall see that the wicked, that have lost their souls,
that have mislead their family, and all the impious, shall be eternally damned,
none shall be able to save them, and he that God shall mislead, shall not find
the right way. Say unto them, beg pardon of God before the day come, that ye
shall find no way to return into the world, nor excuse for your sins. If they
disobey thee, we have not sent thee to be their Tutor; thou art sent only to
preach unto them. When we give to man any prosperity, he rejoices, and when
affliction befalls him, he is ungrateful for the gra^e of his Lord, King of
the heavens and (...). God gives children, sons and daughrers to whom he
pleases, he knows all things, and is omnipotent; he speaks not to man but
by inspiration, and parable, without being seen; he sends his Prophets and
Apostles, into whom he inspireth what pleases him; he knows all things, and
is omnipotent; Thus have we sent thee our spirit to teach thee our
Commandments; thou know not before what was written in the Alcoran, neither
thy mysteries of faith, we have sent it to thee to be a light to the world: I
will guide into the way of Salvation whom I please. I will guide him into the
way of the Lord, to whom belongs all that is in Heaven and Earth, and who
disposes of all things.

CHAP. XLIII. The Chapter of Ornament, containng Eighty and nine Verses,
written at Mecca.
Exteri entitled this Chapter, The Chapter of Gold.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful: God is prudent and wise. I swear by
the Book that teaches to do well, that we have sent it in the Arabique tongue,
peradventure ye shall understand the Alcoran; it is written in our original
Book, majestique and mysterious. Shall I conceal from you the Book of
Salvation, if ye be wicked? How many Prophets and Apostles have we sent in past
Ages whom unbelievers have despised? We destroyed the most powerful among them,
and all have incurred the pain of their predecessors. If thou ask of them who
created Heaven and Earth; they will say, that it is the Omnipotent, who knows
all things. Who has extended the Earth under you? Who established the ways to
guide you? It is God, he causes the rain to descend from Heaven in your
necessity; he makes the dead, dry, and barren fields to revive; in like manner
shall the dead come out of their Sepulchers. He it is that created whatsoever
is in the world, of diverse kinds and species, and created the Ships, and beast,
to carry you. Remember the grace of your Lord, say, praised be he that created
for us these things; we had not the power to create them. They also shall
return before the Lord to be judged. The Infidels have divided God into many
parts. Certainly he that says that there are many Gods, is impious; has he
appointed you to say, that the Angels which he has created are his daughters,
seeing that he gives you Sons? When it is declared to some Infidels that a
daughter is born to him, he is not satisfied, (he desires to have a son) will
they say that God adorneth himself, and takes Ornaments to beautify him like
their Idols? It is a manifest error they say, that the Angels that worship God,
are the daughters of his divine Majesty; I will write what they say, and will
require of them an account of their discourse at the day of Judgment. They
have said, had it pleased God, we had not adored the Angels; They know not what
they say, and ignorantly blaspheme: do they observe any Scripture that has
been taught them heretofore? On the contrary, they say that their fathers lived
in like manner, and that they follow their steps; they have said as much to all
the Prophets that were sent unto them. When thou spakest to them to observe
what is contained in the Alcoran, and to abandon the Idols which their fathers
worshipped, they answered, that they believed neither in thee, nor in thy
mission; but we avenged our selves upon them; Consider what is the end of
blasphemers; Remember thou, that Abraham said to his father, and his people, I
am innocent of the sin that you commit, in adoring Idols, I worship him alone
that created me, he shall guide me into the way of Salvation, and has left his
words to posterity; perhaps the Infidels shall be converted. I deferred
heretofore the punishment of Idolaters, until they had learned the truth, and
that a Prophet came to instruct them; When he preached unto them the truth,
they said, that it is but witchcraft, and that they would give no faith to it.
Had the Alcoran been sent to a man, Olid bin Maguirhe, and Aroua bin Mesroud,
in whom the Arabians had confidence See Kitab el tenoir.
Master and Lord of two Cities, or Villages, they had esteemed and approved it.
Would they dispose of the graces of God? He has divided the riches of the
world among men; Some there be that are more eminent, and scorn each other, but
the mercy of God is more advantageous than the riches of the Earth, which they
accumulate: Although all the people be not of the same Religion, we cease not
to bestow on the wicked houses adorned with seelings, enchased with silver,
stairs, doors, and beds of silver and gold; These things are the riches of the
Earth, and Paradise is for them that are righteous. I will cause to fall
headlong with the Devils, such as shall reject the Law of the merciful; the
Devils shall be their companions, they shall seduce them from the way of
Salvation, and they shall not know it. When we shall come to judge the Universe,
they shall say, Would to God we had been as remote from you, as the West is
from the East. Oh what company for you! This day your repentance and your hopes
shall be vain; ye were Infidels for company, ye shall be companions in the Fire
of Hell. Will thou make the blind to see, and the deaf to hear? Will thou guide
them that wilfully err? If they dye before being punished on Earth, I will be
avenged on them in the other World. Shall I show thee during thy life, the
punishment that we have prepared for them? We can do it, but do thou only what
has been commanded thee, thou art in the way of Salvation, instruct men
therein; an account of thy mission shall be required of thee. I will require an
account of their mission that we sent heretofore to instruct the People, we
will demand of them, if we appointed them to worship any other God but us. We
sent Moses to Pharaoh, and his Ministers, he caused them to see our Miracles,
and preached to them our Commandments; he told them that he was the Messenger
of the God of the Universe, nevertheless they scoffed. I showed them no greater
Miracle than that of Moses his sister, and we chastised them, because of their
incredulity. They said unto Moses, Oh Magician! pray unto thy Lord, that he
deliver us from these evils, and we will be converted; when they were
delivered, they violated their promises; and Pharaoh said to his people, Am not
I King of Egypt? does not the River Nilus flow under my obedience? Know ye not
that I am more powerful than that poor wretch Moses, that knows not what he
says? Give him Phoraoh caused Bracelets of gilded Iron to be given, with
Collars, to criminals, and made them to go through the City* See Gelaldin* And
Kitab el tenoir.
Bracelets of Gold; we will see if the Angels, and those that follow his
Doctrine, will testify the truth of his words. He terrified his Subjects, they
obeyed him, for they were Infidels, but we were avenged on them when they
provoked us; we drowned them, and made them serve for example to Posterity,
like those that preceded them in impiety. The people would not hearken to the
Son of Mary, when he spoke by Parable; they said, Our Gods are more profitable
to us than his lies and questions. On the contrary, they were refractory; he is
our Servant, we conferred on him our grace, and made him like to the other
Prophets of the Children of Israel: Had it pleased me, I had created Angels on
Earth in your place; the coming of Jesus, the Son of Mary, shall be a sign of
the certainty of the day of Judgment, doubt not concerning that day. He said
unto men, Follow me, it is the right way, beware lest the Devil seduce you, he
is your open Enemy. I come to teach you the Commandments of God, to resolve the
doubts, and judge the differences that are among you; fear God, and obey him,
he is your Lord and mine, worship him, it is the right way; the people doubted
his Doctrine, but misery shall be upon the wicked, they shall suffer great
torments at the Day of Judgment; will they expect that day for their
conversion? It shall surprise them, and they know it not; that day shall they
be enemies one of another, God shall say to the righteous, fear not, ye shall
not this Day resent any affliction; the believers that have obeyed my
Commandments, shall enter into Paradise, you and your wives shall there
rejoice, ye shall drink in cups of fine Gold; ye shall there find whatsoever ye
shall desire, and all that can content the mind, and delight the eyes, and ye
shall dwell eternally in supreme felicity; behold the Paradise that ye have
gained by your good life! it is enriched with abundance of fruits, which ye
shall eat with contentment; and the wicked shall remain eternally in the Fire
of Hell, they shall not be eased in their miseries, and shall be dumb with
despair; we do no injustice to them, they draw mischief on themselves, through
their disobedience; they shall demand of the Keeper of the Fire, will thy Lord
never deliver us from these pains? He shall answer them, Ye shall abide there
eternally; We have taught men the truth, but the greatest part of them would
not believe it. The wicked have conspired against thee, and we conspired
against them; think they that I know not their secrets, and whatsoever they
utter? The Angels our Messengers keep account; say unto them, If God have a
Son, who shall we first adore? Praised be God, King of the Heavens and of the
Earth; the matter is not as the Infidels deliever it: Leave them implunged in
their impiety, let them laugh and rejoice, until the day of their punishment
arrive: One God alone ought to be worshipped in Heaven and Earth, he is most
wise and Omniscient. Praised be he to whom appertains the Kingdom of the
Heavens and Earth, and whatsoever is between them. He knows the hour and the
day, that all the World shall be assembled before him to be judged. The Idols
that the Infidels adore, shall not be able to intercede for them; the good
intercede for them that have knowledge of the truth; if thou ask of men, Who
created them? They will say, It is God; How can they then depart from his
Commandments? Lord, this People is incredulous; Depart thou far from their
company, they shall in the end, too late, acknowledge their errors.

CHAP. XLIV. The Chapter of Smoke, containing Fifty nine Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. God is Prudent and Wise. I swear by
the Book that distinguishes good from evil, that we sent it the Night of
blessing, to teach the People the torments of Hell; this Book explaineth our
Commandments, and all that we heretofore commanded the Prophets; this is a
special grace of thy Lord, he hears and knows all things, he is Lord of
Heaven and Earth, and of all that is between them, believe in his Omnipotency.
There is no God but he, he gives life and death to whom he lists, he is your
Lord, the Lord of your fathers and predecessors; the wicked deride this
discourse, but the Day of Judgment attends them; that day the Heaven shall
resemble Smoke, that shall cover the World; that day shall the People say,
Behold here grievous torments; Lord deliver us from this misery, we will
believe in thy Law: Their conversion shall be in vain, because when the Prophet
preached to them, they scorned his words, and said, That he was a foolish
Teacher; and when they were comforted on Earth, they returned to their impiety:
Remember thou the day when they were vanquished, and taken by force, and that
we were revenged on their impiety; We heretofore tried the People of Pharaoh;
my beloved Prophet preached to them my Commandments, and said, Come follow me,
Oh ye servants of God! I am a faithful ^essenger of his divine Majesty, resist
not his law; will teach you his Commandments, he shall defend me from your
malice, he shall preserve me from being stoned; but if he will not believe me,
depart far from me. He prayed to his Lord, when he knew, that that people was
unbelieving, and impious. God said unto him, Go forth by night out of the City
with my servants; if the men of Pharaoh pursue thee, enter into the Sea,
through a path large and spacious; thine enemies that shall follow thee, shall
be drowned. How many Gardens, Fountains, and places of Pleasure, wherein they
took delight, did ^hey forsake? They fell into the power of another with all
their treasures, and none lamented them, either in Heaven or Earth, they
expected ^ot that punishment. We delivered the Children of Israel from Pharoahs
tyranny, he was ^owerful, and a great sinner. We elected them through our
certain knowledge among all the world, and tried them through our Miracles, and
Commandments. The wicked say, we shall dye and not rise again; if the
Resurrection be true, cause our fathers to revive, to evidence the truth of thy
words; Are they more powerful than their predecessors, whom we destroyed,
because of their ^mpiety? We have not created in vain the Heaven and the Earth,
and whatsoever is between them* we created them for certain signs of our ^nity,
the greatest part of the world understand ^t not; the day of Judgment is the
time appointed for their punishment, that day none shall be able to save his
neighbor, or parent, or friend; nor shall any be saved, but those to whom God
shall give his mercy, he is omnipotent and merciful. The fruit of the Tree of
Hell, called Zacon, shall serve for food to the wicked, it shall boil in their
bellies like pitch, or water. They shall cry* Take the wicked, drag them into
the fire of Hell pour upon their heads all manner of torments It shall be said
unto them, taste the pains o^ Hell; ye believed [your selves] to be the
omnipotent and precious on Earth, behold the punishment of which ye doubted!
The righteou^ shall be in delicious places, in Gardens adorne^ with Fountains,
they shall be clothed with purple they shall behold each other face to face; w^
will assemble them with women, pure and clea^ who shall have most beautiful
eyes, they shall have fruits, savoury and delicious, of all seasons; the shall
never dye, and shall be delivered from the torments of Hell, through the
special grace (...) thy Lord; behold supreme felicity! Certainly we have sent
the Alcoran in thy tongue, peradve^ ture the Arabians will learn it; they covet
thy (...) ine, but persevere thou, and expect the time of (...) punishment of
their crimes.

CHAP. XLV. The Chapter of Genuflexion, or Knee-bowin^ containing fifty nine
Verses, (...) at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and mercif^ God is most prudent and Wise. This
Book sent by the Omnipotent and Wise. The Heaven and the Earth are most certain
signs of his Uni^ to such as believe in his Law; your Creation, a^ ^he Creation
of all Creatures, are mark^ of his greatness to them that have his fear before
their eyes; the difference of the night, and the day; the rain that he sends
from Heaven, to cause fruits to spring out of the Earth, and to revive it after
its death; and the diversity of winds, are signs of his Omnipotency to them
that have knowledge to comprehend it. I relate to thee the wonders of God with
truth; in what will (...) believe, if they believe not in the word of his
divine Majesty? Misery is upon them that hear the Commandments of God, and
become proud, as if they had not heard them. Preach unto such men, that they
shall suffer the rigors of infinite pains. They deride the Faith when they are
spoken to: Certainly, they shall be punished in the fire of Hell, their riches
shall not be able to save them, neither the Idols which they adore; they shall
be eternally damned. This Book guides men into the way of salvation; they that
shall not believe in the Law of God, shall feel the effects of his fury. He
created the Seas that bear the Ships for the advantage of your commerce,
peradventure ye will acknowlged this grace: He has created for you, all that
is in Heaven and on Earth; it is a sign of his goodness to such as consider it.
Speak unto them that believe in the Law of Salvation, that they pardon those
that have not the fear of God before their eyes. God shall chastise them after
their demerits. Whosoever shall do good, shall find good; and ye shall be
assembled before his divine Majesty, to be judged. Certainly we instructed the
children of Israel in the (...) our Commandments; we taught (...) and gave them
the grace of (...) them with all sorts of riches an^ (...) them to all the
world. We taught (...) none disputed against our Commandments, but suc^ as had
knowledge, and that through the envy tha^ arose among them; but thy Lord shall
judge (...) differences at the day of Judgment. We have sent thee our Law,
observe it, and follow not the appetites of the ignorant, they shall not be
able (...) deliver thee from eternal pains. The Infidels (...) each other, and
the true believers obey Go^ This book is the light of the world, it guides i^
to the way of salvation, and the mercy of Go^ them that believe in his divine
Majesty. Do (...) wicked imagine they shall be entreated like the (...) ly in
their life and death, and that they shall not (...) judged? God has created
heaven and earth (...) a mark of his power, he shall judge every o^ according
to their works, and shall do injustice (...) none: Consider how they worship
what come^ into their fancy, God has seduced them from h^ certain knowledge, he
has rendered them (...) has hardened their heart, and blinded them; wh^ shall
guide, if God seduce them? Do they (...) consider it? They say, our
Resurrection shall (...) like the life of this world, some die, others (...)
born; length of years cause us to die; they kno^ not what they say, and speak
but by opinion When they are preached unto, they have no (...) discourse to
utter, But make our fathers to revive, what ye say be true. Say unto them, God
cause^ you to live and die, and shall assemble you at the day of Judgment;
there is no doubt in this, b^ the greatest part of the people know it not. Go^
is the King (...) the heavens and earth, and of the day of (...); that day
shall he assemble (...) see all Sects, and all Religion (...) upon their knees,
eve^ Sect (...) their sins written in a particular boo^ and (...) all ^hastifed
after their demeri^ ^t shall be said unto them, Behold the Book that speaks
against you, we have exactly written what you have done; God shall give his
mercy to the Righteous, that is, Supreme felicity. It shall be said to the
wicked, have not the Commandments of God been preached to you? Ye became proud
and were incredulous; when it was ^old you that the promises of God, and the
Day of Judgment were indubitable; ye said that it was but an opinion, and that
ye believe it not; in the end ye shall acknowledge your offense, and shall
suffer the pains that ye despised; God shall say unto them at the Day of
Judgment, I have this day forgotten you, as ye forgot the coming of this day,
the ^ire of Hell shall be your Habitation, none shall de^iver you, because ye
derided my Law, and waxed ^roud with the Riches of the Earth. They shall never
get out of this Fire, neither be able to repent. ^raise be to God, Lord of the
Heavens and Earth, ^lory is due to him in all places, he is Omnipo^ent and wise.

CHAP. XLVI. The Chapter of Hecaf, containing Thirty five Verses, written at
Mecca.
Hecaf is a Valley in the Country of Licmen, upon the frontiers of Arabia. See
Gelaldin, and ^he Book entitled, Kitab el Tenoir.

IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful: God is most Prudent and Wise. This
Book was sent by the Omnipotent and Wise. We created the Heavens and the Earth,
and all that is between them, for a sign of our Omnipotency and Unity, and
appointed to every thing a prefixed and limited time. If the Infidels depart
from that which has been preached to them, say unto them, Have ye considered
the Idols that ye adore? Show me what they have created on earth, are they
God's companions in ^he Creation of the Heavens? Bring me a Book sent from
Heaven before the Alcoran, that contains like it, what remained of the
Doctrine of our Predecessors, we shall see if ye be true: Who is more seduced
than he that worshippeth things that can neither hear his prayers, nor protect
him at the Day of Judgment? That day shall the Infidels be enemies to each
other, and the Idols shall not acknowledge them that have worshipped them. When
they heard the Alcoran read, they affirmed it to contain the truth; and when
they were commanded to observe it, they said, That it is but Magic. Will they
say, That thou have invented it? Say unto them, If I have invented it, ye
cannot deliver me from the punishment of God, he knows all that is in this
Book, it is sufficient that he is witness between you and me, he is gracious
and merciful: Say unto them, I am not the first Prophet, nor the first Apostle
that God has sent, I know not what God shall determine of you and me, I do but
what he has inspired into me, and am sent to preach the torments of Hell; have
ye considered in what condition ye shall be, if the Alcoran be sent from God?
Ye have renounced it, but one of the Children of Israel is witness that it is
sent from God, and has believed in his Divine Majesty. (...), ye are become
proud; God guides nor (...) ^roud. The Infidels say to the Belie^ers, (...)
(...) were any good thing, you should not exceed us in observing it, it guides
not into the way of Salvation, it is but an old Fable; the Book of Moses that
came before it, teaches the right way, and the Will of God: Say unto them, the
Alcoran confirms the Scriptures sent heretofore to them that preceded us, it
is in the Arabique Tongue; he preaches the pains of Hell to unbelievers, and
declares the joys of Paradise to the Righteous. Such as shall believe that God
is their Lord, and shall obey him, ought to fear nothing, they shall suffer
none affliction at the Day of Judgment, they shall enjoy Paradise for the
reward of their good works. We have recommended to man, to honor Father and
Mother, and to do good to them; his Mother bears him with pain, she brings
forth with dolor, she gives him suck, and weaneth him at the end of Thirty
months; she has care [of him] until he be in a condition to govern himself,
and has attained to Age of discretion. Then he says, Lord, inspire me to be
grateful for the grace that thou have given to my Father and Mother; if I do
well, thou will accept it, take care of my Posterity, I trust in thee, and
desire to obey thy Commandments: Their prayer shall be heard, their sins shall
be pardoned, and they shall enjoy the joys of Paradise, prepared for the
Righteous. He that shall speak to his Father and Mother in civility, and shall
say unto them in derision, will ye bring me yet once more into the World after
my death? will ye revive me from my grave? Many are dead heretofore, that are
not returned* He shall be punished of God, his Father and Mother shall require
help of his Divine Majesty, and shall say unto him, My Son, misery is with
thee, believe in God, and in the Resurrection, the Word of God is infallible;
if he reply that it is an old Fable; he shall feel the punishment of God, the
Word of his Divine Majesty shall be accomplished against him, as it has been
accomplished against them that did precede him in impiety, as well Devils as
men, they shall be damned; they shall be in sundry degrees of pains, he shall
chastise them after their demerits, and no injustice shall be done to them. It
shall be said to the wicked that would depart out of Hell fire, Ye expelled
your felicity, when ye lived in the World; your punishment was deferred until
this present, ye shall this day be punished in this Fire, because of your pride
and crimes. Remember thou the Brother of Aad, who preached the torments of Hell
in the Valley of Hecaf, his words was heard in his time, and are come to
Posterity, viz. worship but one God alone; if you do otherwise, I apprehend for
you the Day of Judgment: They answered him, Art thou come to hinder us to adore
our gods? Let us see the torments that thou preachest to us, if thou art true:
He said, God knows in what time he will chastise you; I preach to you what
has been appointed me to preach, but I see that ye are obstinate. When they
beheld a black cloud appear, which approached the place of their habitation,
they said, Behold a Cloud that shall give us Rain; on the contrary, it is the
punishment that ye have demanded, it is full of an impetuous wind that shall
destroy you through the Commandment of God; in the Morning their houses were
found empty of inhabitants. Thus God chastises the wicked; ye dwell in the
places which they inhabited; they had hearts, eyes, and ears, but their hearts,
eyes, and ears were to them unprofitable; the evil which they despised befell
them, when they neglected to observe the Commandments of God. We have destroyed
whatsoever is round about Mecca, and have made the effects of our Omnipotency
to appear; peradventure the inhabitants thereof will be converted. The Idols
that they worshipped, and those to whom they sacrificed, did not save them; on
the contrary, they forsook them, because of their blasphemies. Remember thou,
that we sent to thee Devils, that desired to hear a Lecture of the Alcoran;
when they heard thee, they said, Hark, he begins; and when thou made an end,
they returned with exceeding great fear, and said to their companions, We have
heard a Lecture of a Book sent from Heaven after the Book of Moses, it
confirms the ancient Scriptures, teaches the truth, and guides the people
into the way of salvation. O people! hear him that calls you to the Law of
God, and to the observance of his Commandments; believe him, God shall pardon
your sins, and deliver you from the pains of Hell: such as shall not hearken to
him, shall not escape the punishment of their crimes, and shall be deprived of
protection at the day of Judgment; such men are seduced from the way of
salvation. Consider they not that God, who created Heaven and Earth, did not
labor in creating them? that he is able to give life and death, and is
omnipotent? Be thou mindful of the day that the Infidels shall desire to get
out of the fire of Hell; it shall be said unto them, Are not the pains that
were preached to you true? they shall say, yes Lord; it shall be said to them,
Taste then the torments which ye have merited through your impiety. Persevere
thou, as the Prophets thy Predecessors persevered. Be not impatient, till thou
see the punishment of Infidels; they shall see it when they shall rise again,
and shall believe that they have been but an hour in their Sepulchers: This is
that which God has commanded to preach; he shall destroy those only that
disobey his Commandments.

CHAP. XLVII. The Chapter of the Combat, containing fourscore and eight Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Good works are vain and
unprofitable to the wicked, and to them that hinder their neighbor to follow
the Law of God; he pardons their sins, who believe in what Mahomet has
preached; it is the very truth that proceeds from his Divine Majesty, but the
Infidels have followed vanity, and the believers have embraced the truth sent
from their Lord: Thus God speaks to the people in Parables. When ye shall
meet the Infidels in time of war, cut their necks, pursue them until ye take
them prisoners, then bind them; after this, ye shall either give them liberty,
or put them to ransom, until their party shall lay down arms. If God pleased,
he could give you victory without fighting, but his will is to prove you; he
guides into Paradise, them that are slain for the defense of his Law, and
gives them his grace. Oh ye that believe in God! If ye protect the Law of God,
God will protect you, he will confirm your steps, and destroy the Infidels,
because they have contemned his Commandments, and their good works shall be to
them unprofitable; consider they not what has been the end of the impious that
were before them, and that God has destroyed them? He shall destroy them in
like manner, because he protecteth the Believers, and Infidels are deprived of
his protection; he makes the righteous to enter into Paradise, into Gardens
wherein flow many Rivers. The punishment of the wicked is sometimes deferred in
this world, they live like beasts, but the fire of Hell is prepared for their
punishment. How many Cities, stronger, Mecca.
and more opulent than that which they caused thee to abandon, have we
destroyed? They found no protection. Are such as embrace the Law of God like to
them that follow their own appetites? God has promised Paradise to them that
have his fear before their eyes; there be in Paradise rivers of water, that
receives no alteration; there be rivers of milk that never corrupts, rivers
of wine, savoury and delicious to the taste; rivers of honey, pure and clean;
fruits of all sorts, and the grace of God for them that shall obey his
Commandments; the wicked shall remain eternally in the fire of Hell, where they
shall drink a boiling liquor, that shall burn their entrails. There be persons
among the Insidels, that hear what thou do preach; when they are gone from
thee, their Doctors demand of them what thou have said concerning the day of
Judgment? God has hardened the hearts of such men, and they shall never follow
but their own passions. God increases the graces of them that obey his
Commandments, and fortifieth them in their perseverance: Shall the Infidels
tarry until the day of Judgment surprizeth them? The signs of that day has
already appeared, that day shall repentance be in vain: There is no God but
God, implore from him parden of thy sin; and for these men and women, that
believe in his Law, he knows what they do day and night: If the Chapter of
the place where Justice is rendered, had not been sent, and had not made mention
of Combats, thou had not seen them, that doubt of the Law, look upon thee
with eyes troubled, because of their fears of dying. Teach them obedience, and
speak to them with civility. Had they believed, and obeyed, when they were
appointed to fight, they had performed a good work. Have ye disobeyed? Have ye
abandoned the Law of God, to defile the Earth? and to deprive your selves of
his mercy? God renders them whom he curses, and who comprehend not the truth
of the Alcoran, deaf and blind. Have they a firm heart? Such as have returned
to their impiety, after having known the right way, were tempted of the Devil,
and particularly, when they told the Infidels that they would obey them in any
thing, God knows all their secrets; what will become of them when the Angels
shall cause them to die? they shall beat them before and behind, because they
have incurred the wrath of God, and despised his Commandments; their good works
shall be unprofitable; think they that God will never make manifest their
malice? If thou will, I will make it appear, thou shall know them by their
countenance, thou shall discover them by their voice and speech. Say unto them,
God knows all your actions; he shall prove you, to discover the believers,
and the unbelievers. The wicked, who hinder the people to follow the way of
Salvation, that contradict the Prophet, after they have had knowledge of the Law
of God, hurt not his Divine Majesty, their actions are vain and unprofitable.
Oh ye that believe! obey God, and his Prophet, and render not your good works
ineffectual through disobedience; he pardons not the wicked, who seduce the
people from the way of Salvation, and die in their impiety: Be not
faint-hearted and flothful, ye shall be victorious, God is with you. He will
not deprive you of reward; the life of this world is but foolish pastime and
delusion; if ye believe in God, and have his fear before your eyes, he will
recompense you for your good works, he requires not an account of your riches;
if he do require [it] of you, it is to hinder you to be avaricious, and to
banish usury from among them that believe in his Law: Oh people! ye are
commanded to make some expense for the love of God: He that shall be a niggard,
and avaricious in this occurrence, shall be avaricious, and a niggard to
himself. God is rich, and ye are poor; if ye despise his Law, he will create in
your place other persons, that shall not do like you.

CHAP. XLVIII. The Chapter of Conquest, containing twenty nine Verses, written
at Mecca.
This is the Chapter, Of the taking of the City of Mecca.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. We have given thee a manifest
victory. God pardons the sin that thou did commit, when thou were too
prompt, and when thou were too tardy, [to fight for his Law;] he shall
accomplish his grace upon thee, he shall guide thee into the right way, and
shall powerfully protect thee; he has delivered the hearts of the believers
from fear, to augment their faith; he disposes the forces of the Heavens and
Earth, he knows all, and is most prudent. He shall make them that shall obey
his Commandments, to dwell in Gardens, wherein flow many rivers, and shall
remit to them their offenses, this is supreme felicity: The Infidels, the
wicked, the disobedient, and unjust, that have evil thoughts of God, shall be
accursed of his Divine Majesty, misery shall always pursue them, and his wrath
be eternally upon them; he has prepared for them the pains of Hell. God
disposes the powers of the Heavens and Earth, he is omnipotent and wise. We
have sent thee to be witness of the deportments of those of thy Nation, to
proclaim to them the joys of Paradise, and to preach to them the pains of Hell,
to the end they may believe in God, and in his Prophet, that they may praise
him, honor him, and exalt his glory evening and morning: Such as shall obey
thee, obey God; the hand of God is stronger than the hand of men; he that shall
sin, shall offend against his own soul; and he that performed what he has
promised to God, shall have an exceeding great reward. Such of the Arabians as
have no inclination to follow thee, say, thou imployest our wealth and persons
to go with thee, implore therefore pardon of God for us; but they speak not
with the mouth, what they have in the heart; Say unto them, who but God is able
to do ought for you? if it be his will to bring good or evil upon you, he is
omnipotent, and knows all that you do. Ye believed that the Prophet and True
believers should be slain when they fought for the Law of God; ye believed that
they should never return to their houses. This opinion rejoiced your heart, but
you were deceived, and were your selves destroyed with them that believed not
in God, nor his Prophets; God has prepared the fire of Hell for Infidels; the
Kingdom of the Heavens and Earth appertains to him, he punishes and
chastises whom he lists, he is gracious and merciful. When ye shall go to
the spoil, such as refused before to follow you to the fight, will say, Permit
us to go with you; they would pervert the Word of God. Say unto them, Ye shall
not follow us in this occasion, God has not heretofore ordained it; they will
reply, Certainly ye are envious against us; on the contrary, they understand
not the Law of God, except very few among them. Say to the Arabians, that
refused to follow thee, Ye shall be called to fight against miserable men, ye
shall fight them, nevertheless they shall still be obedient to God; if ye obey
and fight for the Faith, he will largely reward you; if ye desert his service,
as heretofore ye have done, he shall severely chastise you. The blind, the
lame, and the sick, are not obliged to go to the war. He that shall obey God
and his Prophet, shall dwell eternally in Gardens, wherein flow many rivers;
and he that shall disobey Gods Commandments, shall be punished for his
disobedience. God accepted their action that repaired to thee under the tree,
he knew what they had in their hearts, he confirmed their steps, and gave them
victory, he is omnipotent and wise. God had promised you great spoil, he gave
it you, and delivered you from the hands of the people; this shall serve for a
sign of his omnipotency to the true believers, he will conduct you into the
right way; none but you could have achieved that conquest, he well knew that
that was for none other, he is omnipotent: if the wicked fight you, they shall
fly, they shall turn the back, and find none to protect them. Observe the Law
of God against them, do as was heretofore commanded you; the Law of God admits
no alteration; God has delivered you from their hands, and delivered them into
yours in the midst of* Mecca, having given you victory over them; he beholds
all their actions, they have despised the Commandments of his Divine Majesty,
and hindered you heretofore to go to the Temple of Mecca; they are at present
prisoners, without the assistance of the True believers that were within the
City with you; ye had not known them, ye had trampled them under foot without
distinction, and had offended God without knowledge of your sin. God bestows
his mercy on whom he pleases; had ye been separated from the unbelievers, we
had severely punished them. When they were succored of the ignorant, and had
some advantage, God put his Prophet, and all the believers in a place of
safety, they had recourse to the word of force and virtue, wherein they did
better than the Infidels; God knows all. Assuredly the Dream of the Prophet
of God was true, when he dreamed that ye were in the Temple of Mecca without
fear, your hair shaven, and beards trimed; fear nothing, God knows what you
know not; in lieu of this Dream, he has given you a great victory; he it is
that has sent you his Prophet, to teach you his Law, more salutary than all
other Laws of the world. It is sufficient, that God is witness that Mahomet is
his Prophet, and Apostle; it suffices that the True-believers, who are with
him, bear testimony. God increases his mercy toward those Infidels that
convert; thou shall see them worship God, humble themselves before his Divine
Majesty, and implore his grace; thou shall know them by their aspect, they
shall have in their countenance the marks of their zeal; it is so written in
the Old Testament and the Gospel; they are like a Plant that produces its
leaves, that grows strong by little and little, and becomes big, afterward it
takes strength upon its roots, becomes a great Tree, and the wood thereof
serves to make war against Infidels. God has promised his mercy, and an
exceeding great reward to the Infidels that shall be converted, that shall
believe in his Law, and do good works.

CHAP. XLIX. The Chapter of Enclosures, containing Eighteen Verses, written at
Medina.
Exteri entituleth this Chapter, The Chapter of Walls.

IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. O ye that believe! prefer not what
ye have done, to what God and his Prophet has performed, and fear God, he
hears whatsoever ye say, and sees all that you do. O ye that believe! when
ye shall speak to the Prophet, speak not louder than he; cry not, as when ye
talk among your selves, lest ye render your good works vam and unprofitable,
and know it not; God has tried the virtue of them that speak low in the
presence of the Prophet, he shall pardon their sins, and give them an exceeding
great reward. They that call thee behind the Enclosures, know not what they do;
had they attended until thou had been toward them, they had done very well,
God is gracious and merciful. O ye that believe! if any Infidel desires to
^reach to you, distinguish the truth from a lie; if ye give credit to the
ignerant, ye shall repent you. Know that the Apostle of God is among you; ye
shall offend God, if ye obey unbelievers in many things; God wills that ye
embrace his Law, it shall rejoice your hearts, and make you to abhor
disobedience and impiety: Such as abhor it, are steadfast in their faith,
through his special grace, he knows them, and is most wise. If two Nations,
or two Provinces, of such as believe in God are at odds, reconcile them; if the
one do injury to the other, fight against him that is unjust, until he repair
what God has ordained; if he make reparation, reconcile them with equity; be
just, God loves them that do justice to his people: All those that believe in
his Law, are brethren; make peace among your brethren, and fear God, he shall
give you his mercy. O ye that believe! scorn not your neighbor, peradventure
that he shall one day be of better value than you. O ye women! scorn not
others, perhaps they shall one day be more worth than you. Utter no reproaches,
and give no name to your neighbor that may displease him; call him by his
name, otherwise ye will disobey God: Such as repent not, are exceedingly too
blame. O ye that believe in God! take heed of evil thoughts, these are
oftentimes in the number of sins; do no displeasure to your Neighbor, and
speak to each other nothing that may displease: Who among you would eat the
flesh of his dead Brother? ye shall abhor it; fear therefore God, who is
gracious and merciful to such as have his fear before their eyes. O people! we
created you Male and Female; we have caused to issue out of your Loins, People
and Nations; ye know each other, but your greatest honor is, to fear God, he
knows you, and understands all your secrets. Some among the Arabians have
said, We believe; say unto them, Say not we believe, but say, We are obedient,
otherwise faith shall not enter into your hearts; if ye obey God and his
Prophet, ye shall be recompensed for your good works, God is gracious and
merciful to them that obey his Commandments. Such as are beloved of God,
believe in his Unity, and in his Prophet, they doubt not of his Law, and employ
their persons and wealth for the propagation of the faith. Say unto them, Know
ye not that your Law proceeds from God? He knows whatsoever is in the
Heavens and Earth, he knows all. They think to do thee a pleasure in saving
them, Say unto them, Believe not that ye pleasure me, for it is God that
guides you into the way of Salvation; ye ought so to believe it; God knows
all that is in the Heavens and Earth, and beholds whatsoever ye do.

CHAP. L. The Chapter of the Thing Judged, containing Forty five Verses,
written at Mecca.
Mahomet has entitled this Chapter with the Letter Kaf of the Arabique
Alphabet, which signifies in this place, Kada el mer, that is to say, the
thing judged; See Gelaldin, and Bedaoi, who have entitled this, The Chapter of
Judgment, or the thing judged. Many Mahometans say likewise, that Kaf is a
Mountain that environeth the World, and that Mahomet sw^re by that Mountain.

IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the Alcoran, worthy of
praise, that the inhabitants of Mecca wonder that a man of their Nation
teaches them the torments of Hell; they say, that he speaks strange things.
What, say they, Shall we die? Shall we be Earth, and return into the World?
Behold a very strong return! we know assuredly what the Earth will do with us,
we have a Book, wherein all is written; they impugn the known truth, and are in
a great confusion: See they not Heaven above them, how we have built it, how we
have adorned it, and how there is no defect? We have extended the Earth, raised
the Mountains, and caused all sorts of fruits to spring forth, for a sign of
our Omnipotency. We have sent the blessed Rain from Heaven, made Gardens to
produce Grain, pleasing to the Reapers, and Date-trees, exceeding each other in
height, to enrich our creatures. We have given life to the dead dry, and barren
Earth; so shall the dead come out of their sepulchers. The People of Noah's
time, those that inhabited near the Well, Temod, Pharaoh, the fellow-citizens
of Lot; they that dwelt in the Forest, and People of King Teba, did heretofore
traduce our Prophets, Teba was a King of Licmen. See Bedaoi.
and felt the punishment denounced against Infidels. Was it a trouble to us to
create men at first? Nevertheless they are in doubt if they shall rise again.
We created man without difficulty, we know the motions of his Soul, and
penetrate into his heart, as the blood into the veins of his Body. O man! think
upon the day that thou shall see thy good and evil Angel near thee, at the
right hand, and on thy left, they have observed and written all that thou have
done; represent to thy self death before thine eyes, it is inevitable: Think on
the Angel that shall sound the Trumpet at the Day of the Resurrection; that day
shall the wicked behold what was promised them, and all men shall come before
God to be judged. Their guardian Angels shall conduct them, and be the
witnesses of their deportments: It shall be said to the Infidels, Behold the
day of which ye would have no thoughts; we have now opened your eyes, ye shall
see this day more hard than Iron; their guardian Angels shall say unto them,
Behold here before your eyes all that ye have done* cast into Hell those
obstinate Infidels that have hindered their Neighbor to do good, that have
offended in doubting of God's Law, and have affirmed there was another God with
God; cast them into the most grievous torments. Then shall the Devil say to
them, Lord, I did not seduce them, they seduced themselves; God shall say,
Dispute not before me, what was heretofore promised you is infallible, my Word
admits no alteration, and I will do injustice to none. God shall ask at the
Day of Judgment, If Hell be full? It shall answer, Is there any more? Paradise
is prepared for the Righteous, who shall have the fear of God before their
eyes, it is promised to them that shall be converted, that shall obey the
Commandments of his Divine Majesty, and persevere in their obedience. It shall
be said to them, Enter ye into Paradise, exempt from all evil; behold the
eternal day, ye shall have all that ye shall desire, and more. How rich and
powerful Cities have we in times past destroyed? Their inhabitants sought in
their Countries places of retreat, and escaped not the puishment of their
crimes; this ought to serve for example to them that comprehend it, to them
that hear it, and to such that saw it. Certainly we created in Six days,
without difficulty, the Heaven and Earth, and all that is betweem them.
Persevere, be not impatient for the words of unbelievers, exalt the glory of
thy Lord before the Sun go down, and before it rise; pray to thy Lord at the
entrance of the Night, the last of all shall be worship. Hearken when the Angel
shall call thee to general Judgment; that day shall all the World hear the
Trumpet; the people shall come out of their sepulchers, and Earth shall open
before the eyes of men. I give life and death, and all the World shall be
assembled before me to be judged. This assembly is easy for me to accomplish;
I know what the wicked say, thou shall not cause them by force to embrace my
Law: Teach it those that fear the torments prepared for Infidels.

CHAP. LI. The Chapter of Things dispersed, containing Sixty Verses, written at
Mecca.
Gelaldin and Falkredin entitle this, the Chapter of things that disperse.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the Winds that disperse
the dust, by the Clouds charged with Rain, by the Ship that runs upon the
Waters, and by them that divide the Wealth of the Earth; that what has been
promised to you, is true, and that the Day of Judgment is infallible. I swear
by Heaven, and the Stars thereof, that ye are in an exceeding great error; God
expels liars far from him, he curses them that blaspheme, and such as
believe not in the Resurrection: They ask, When shall be the Day of Judgment?
That day shall they be punished in the Fire of Hell. It shall be said unto
them, Taste the torments that ye have with impatience demanded. They who had
the fear of God before their eyes, shall be in Gardens, adorned with Fountains,
they shall enjoy the pleasures prepared for them by God, because they are
Righteous; they sleep very little by Night, implore pardon of God at the
dawning of the Day, and give alms to the poor that beg, and the poor that are
bashful. God manifests on the Earth, and in your persons, the signs of his
Omnipotency; consider ye not that what is promised to you is written in Heaven?
God is Lord of Heaven and Earth, he is truth it self, will ye not confess him?
Did the Angels convey to thee the books of Abraham? When they entered into his
House, they saluted him; he likewise saluted them, made signs to his servants
to bring a fat Calf roasted, which he presented to them; he said unto them,
Wherefore do ye not eat? And was afraid in his mind, of their coming: They
said, Fear not, we are the Messengers of God; they declared to him that he
should have a Son, that should be a great personage. Then his wife drew near,
crying with a loud voice, and smiting her Face, said, One that is barren
bears no Child; they said, The thing shall come to pass as we have spoken,
thy Lord ordains what pleases him, and knows all. Abraham said unto them,
O ye Messengers of God! what is your design? They replied, We are sent from God
to destroy the Cities inhabited by the wicked, and cast upon them stones of
Fire, whereon are inscribed the names of them that they shall strike: We will
cause all the Righteous to depart from among them; if we find there but one
Family of Righteous, we will there leave an example to Posterity for them that
fear the torments of Hell. Moses is a sign of our omnipotency; we sent him to
Pharaoh with reasons clear and intelligible, he despised my Commandments, and
said, That Moses was a Magician, and possessed of the Devil, but we surprised
him, and drowned his People, to his great displeasure; Aad is an example of our
Omnipotency: We sent an impetuous Wind against those wicked people, that
destroyed them. Temod is an example of our Omnipotency, with his Nation; they
waxed proud, and resisted the Commandments of their Lord; when it was said to
them, that the punishment of the wicked was deferred to another time; but
Thunder surprised them, they saw it, they had not the power to stand on their
feet, and were deprived of protection. The People of Noah's time are an example
of our Omnipotency, we destroyed them, because they were impious: We built
Heaven with strength and virtue; I am he that gives power and strength; we
extended the Earth, and created of every thing, Male and Female; perhaps ye
will consider it. Say unto them, Turn ye to God; I am sent from him to preach
to you the pains of Hell: Believe not that God has another God with him; the
wicked said heretofore, that the Prophets and Apostles whom he sent, were
Magicians, and possessed of the Devil: Have they recommended to their Posterity
to do the like? Certainly they are in a great error. Separate thy self far from
their company, and be not troubled at what they say; preach the Alcoran, it is
profitable to the Righteous; I did not create the Devils and men but to worship
me. Say unto them, I require nothing of unbelievers for instructing them; I
require not that they nourish me, God enricheth whom he pleases, he is
omnipotent; the wicked shall be chastised as heretofore have been their
predecessors, in their malice, their time shall come, and misery shall befall
them at the day of Judgment.

CHAP. LII. The Chapter of the Mountain, containing thirty nine Verses, written
at Mecca.
IN the name of God gracious and merciful. I swear by the Mountain, upon which
God spoke to Moses, by what is contained in the book written in parchment, by
the first Temple of Mecca, by the arches of the heavens, and by the sea full of
water, that God is one sole God, and the punishment promised to unbelievers is
infallible, they shall not be able to escape it in the day when the heaven
shall tremble, and the mountains shall walk; that day shall be unhappy to the
incredulous, they shall be precipitated in the fire of hell; it shall be said
to them, behold the flames that ye despised; is this Magic? See ye it not?
enter, have patience, or ye will despair; ye shall be chastised after your
demerits. They that shall have the fear of God before their eyes, shall be in
delicious gardens, which God has prepared for them, and shall be delivered
from the pains of hell; It shall be said unto them, Drink and eat at your
pleasure, for recompense of your good works; they shall repose upon beds well
ordered, we will marry them to wives that shall have fair eyes, they shall be
attended of their family, and be largely rewarded for their good works; every
good action shall be to them a degree of happiness; We will give them such
fruits and Vines as they shall desire; they shall present to each other the cup
to drink, they shall not speak an evil word, and shall not sin; they shall have
Pages about them for their service beautiful as polished pearls, they shall
discourse among them, concerning what they did before on Earth, and say, We
were in the world, we and our families, with a great apprehension of the pains
of hell, but God has gratified us, he has delivered us from eternal flames.
They shall say moreover, we worshipped in the world but one God, most just, and
most merciful. Remember thou to preach the Alcoran; thou art not ungrateful for
the grace of God, thou art not possessed of the Devil; will they say that thou
art a Poet, a Rimer? that nothing must be expected from thee but fables of past
Ages? Say unto them, ye expect the time of my destruction, but I with you,
expect the time of your [ruine.] Do their Superiors command them to speak in
this manner? Will they be obstinate in their errors? Will they say, that
Mahomet has invented the Alcoran! Certainly they are incredulous, let them
bring any discourse like to this book, in Doctrine and Eloquence, if what they
affirm be true. Were they created of any thing? have they created any thing?
have they created themselves? have they created the Heavens and the Earth?
Certainly they are incredulous: Have they in their power the treasures of thy
Lord? are they Giants? Have they a ladder, that may raise them to hear what is
spoken in Heaven? let them produce some reason of their opinion; Believe ye
that God has daughters, and that ye have sons? Will ye require of him a Salary
for obeying his Law? Is he your debtor? The wicked are liars; do they know what
shall be? do they write it? Desire they to conspire against thee? The wicked
often conspire against the righteous, that worship but one God: Praised be God,
he has no companion; If the Infidels should see a piece of the heaven to fall,
they would say, It is a cloud driven by the winds; leave them in their
obstinacy until they come to the day of their death, that day shall their
conspiracy be vain, and they deprived of protection: They likewise shall be
punished before their death, but the greatest part know it not. Have patience,
and expect the Judgment of God, thou shall soon see it; I will protect thee,
and thou shall not want help; Praise thy Lord, exalt his glory when thou shall
rise, praise him in the night, and before the Stars disappear.

CHAP. LIII. The Chapter of the Star, containing sixty Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I sweat by the Star that
disappeareth, that your friend Mahomet erreth not, he speaks nothing of his
own, he speaks but what has been inspired into him by the omnipotent and
most bountiful God. The Angel approached him in the highest place of Heaven,
within the length of two bows, and somewhat nearer; God has inspired into
him, what he has inspired into his servant, who altered nothing of what has
been inspired into him. He has spoken what he has seen, and in what form the
Angel was. Dispute not against him concerning what he saw; he another time saw
the Angel in heaven, near to the Tree that is at the right side of Gods The
Turks believe that there is an Apple Tree at the right side of the throne of
God, and that none can ascend higher than its branches, no not the Angels See
Gelaldin.
throne; and although that tree was covered with that which covered him, his
sight was not dazzled, and he is not in error. Certainly he has seen the great
wonders of his Lord: Have ye considered Alat, Az, and Menat, those three Idols?
Will ye swear that God has daughters, and that ye have sons? Ye will make a
false oath, and shall be in a manifest error; Those Idols have nothing but the
names which your fathers and you have given them, God has not commanded you to
worship them. Ye follow only your passions, remote from the truth, God teaches
you the way of Salvation by the mouth of his Prophet; does man obtain from
Idols what he required of them? God is God in the beginning, and the end; How
many Angels be there in Heaven, whose prayers are unprofitable, if God does not
accept them? They that believe not in the day of Judgment, say, that Angels are
Maidens; they understand not what they say; they speak through opinion, and
that opinion is not conformed to truth. Depart thou far from them that reject
our Law, and desire only the goods of the Earth, and are ignorant of all other
things. Thy Lord knows them that go astray from the right way, and such as
follow the path of Salvation; all that is in the Heavens, and Earth, is Gods,
he shall chastise the wicked, and reward the just. He See Gelaldin, Great and
small sins.
pardons their venial sins, who fly sins mortal, he is exceeding merciful.
He knows that he has created you of Earth, and that he formed you in your
Mothers womb. Extol not your selves, he knows such as have his fear before
their eyes. Have thou seen him that abandoneth the faith? A little wealth was
given him, and nothing more; does he know what must befall him? Has he knowledge
of what is to come? Will he not learn what is written in the books of Moses,
and Abraham? To wit, that none shall bear the burden of another: man shall have
but what he shall have gained; he shall in the end see his labor be rewarded
after his works, and all shall appear in the presence of thy Lord. He it is
that causes to laugh and mourn, to live and to die; he created the Male and
Female of every thing, he gives and takes away man's soul when he lists; he
is most Rich, and has no want of any person. He is the Lord of the Planet,
which men adored. He destroyed Aad, and Temod, drowned the People of Noab, who
were most erroneous and unjust, overthrew the City of Lot, and covered it with
burning stone. In whom will they believe, if they believe not in thy Lord? This
Prophet is sent to preach to you the pains of Hell, as did the other Prophets
that were before you; the Day of Judgment approaches, and none but God knows
when it will come; wonder ye at this discourse? Ye scoff, and lament not when
ye are spoken to; but ye shall be surprised in your sin, if ye humble not your
selves before God, neither worship him.

CHAP. LIVE. The Chapter of the Moon, containing Fifty five Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. The Day of Judgment approaches,
the Moon was divided into two parts, nevertheless Infidels believe not Miracles
when they see them; they say that this is Magic, they lie, and follow but
their passion, but all is written. The History of past Ages, full of salutary
Counsels, was preached to them; nevertheless Preachers were to them
unprofitable; depart thou far from them, when they shall be called to the
Universal Judgment, which they will not believe; that Day shall their eyes be
troubled with fear; they shall come out of the Earth, dispersed, like frighted
Grasshoppers, they shall flock to him that shall summon them to Judgment, and
shall say, Behold here a Day, unhappy for the wicked. The People heretofore
belyed Noah, and said, That he was possessed of the Devil. Noah exhorted them,
and invoked his Lord; in the end, he said, That his strength was gone, and that
he was overcome through the malice of men; then was he powerfully succored; we
opened the gates of the Heavens, and caused an extraordinary Rain to fall; we
caused Fountains to issue forth from under the Earth, the water of Heaven and
Earth were gathered together, and overwhelmed the Infidels, because of their
sins: We saved Noah in the Ark, well pinned, and chaulked, it floated upon the
waters through our permission, to serve for a token of our Omnipotency; will
any of the unbelievers of this time consider this? Will they consider the
punishment of their crimes, and the pains of Hell? We have made the Alcoran
easy to be understood, will there be any that study it? The wicked that
traduced Aad were chastised, but with what chastisement? We sent against them
an impetuous wind, in a day to them unfortunate, that caused men to fall like
Palms rooted up; consider what was their punishment; we have rendered the
Alcoran intelligible, will there be any one that will study it? Temod and his
People traduced the Prophets, and contemned their exhortations; they said,
There is a man among us, who would seduce us from the right way, if ye follow
him, he will lead you into Hell; was he alone elected among us to receive the
inspirations of God? No, he is an Impostor; but in the end, they knew them that
were wicked, and liars. We sent the Camel to prove the Infidels; their Prophet
observed what they did, and was patient, the water was divided for them, and
for the Camel, and each at his day found to drink, nevertheless they called
their companions, and slew the Camel of Salhe, but in what manner were they
chastised? I darted Thunder against them, which made them dry as Chaff; we have
made the Alcoran easy to be understood, Will there be any to study it? Lot's
Citizens traduced him, and despised his instructions; we sent against them an
hot wind, with burning stones, that destroyed them, and we in the Morning saved
Lot, with his Family, through our special grace; thus do I recompense them that
acknowledge my benefits. Lot had preached to them the pains of Hell, we
surprised them; when they disputed against his exhortations, they saw his
guests enter into the City, in the figure of men; we blinded their sight, and
said, Taste oh ye wicked! the punishment of your crimes; in the Morning they
were chastised with a perpetual chastisement, because they despised the words
of Lot. We have made the Alcoran intelligible, will there be any that will
study it? Certainly the men of Pharaoh were preached unto; they would not obey
my Law, and despised my Miracles, but we surprised them in their sins; Are the
Infidels that are among you of more value than those that preceded them? Find
ye any Salvation for them in the Scripture? Will they say they shall obtain
victory over the believers? On the contrary, they are vanquished, and turn the
back. Certainly the hour of their punishment shall speedily come, their time
approaches, and their pain in Hell shall be greater than that of the Earth,
they are wholly seduced from the way of Salvation, and shall be dragged, and
cast headlong into Eternal flames. We have created all things by our sole
power; we spoke but one word, and in the twinkling of an eye the thing was; we
heretofore destroyed a great number of Infidels like unto them, will there be
any that considers it? All the good and the evil that they have done is
exactly written. The Righteous shall dwell in pleasant Gardens, they shall
drink in Eternal Rivers, they shall not speak a Lie in their Assemblies, and
shall dwell eternally near to the most Majestique and Omnipotent God.

CHAP LV. The Chapter of the Merciful, containing eighteen Verses, written at
Medina.
IN the name of God gracious and merciful. The merciful has taught the
Alcoran; he has created man, and given him the use of reason; he created the
Sun and the Moon to count seasons, the Stars and Trees adore him; he has
elevated the Heavens, established Justice, and commanded to weigh with good
weights; he has created the Earth for the habitation of men, with all sorts of
fruits, grain, and leaves; he created the winds and tempests: Oh men and
Devils! what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own Lord? He created man of Earth,
like a pot, and the Devils of the flame of fire: what Lord do ye blaspheme, but
your own Lord? He is the Lord of both the Wests, and both the Easts, what Lord
do you blaspheme, but your own Lord? He makes the fresh water to mingle with
the salt, and the one easily mingleth with the other: what Lord do ye
blaspheme, but your own Lord? he brings Pearls and Coral out of the Sea; what
Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own Lord? he has created the Ships that float
upon the Sea, big as Mountains; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own Lord?
all things shall have end, and the majestique and glorious face of thy Lord
shall be permanent; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own Lord? Whatsoeoer is
in Heaven and in Earth, imploreth his grace, he is ever himself; what Lord do
ye blaspheme, but your own Lord? Oh ye men and Devils! I will require an
account of your actions; what Lord will ye blaspheme, but your own Lord? Oh ye
men and Devils! pass the extremities of Heaven and Earth, go beyond them if ye
can, ye have not the power; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own Lord? If he
send against you flames without smoke, and smoke without fire, ye cannot defend
your selves; what Lord do you blaspheme, but your own Lord? When the heaven
opens, it resembles a rose, or a crimson-coloured skin; what Lord do ye
blaspheme, but your own Lord? The time will come, when an account shall be
required from men and Devils of their sins: what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your
own Lord? The wicked shall be known by their countenance, an account shall be
required of their readiness and negligence; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your
own Lord? Behold hell! which the wicked would not believe; they shall turn
round about, and round about in boiling water, of which they shall drink; what
Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own Lord? Such as have had the fear of God
before their eyes, shall enter into gardens, where the trees are covered with
branches and leaves, adorned with Rivers and fountains, with abundance of all
sorts of fruits; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own Lord? They shall
repose upon fair beds, lined with Crimson; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your
own Lord? They shall gather the fruits of this garden, to their contentment;
what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own Lord? They shall there have wives, who
shall not cast a look, but upon them, and whom no person, man, or Angel shall
touch before them; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your Lord? They shall
resemble Coral and Rubies; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own Lord? Good
deeds are recompensed with good deeds; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own
Lord? There be yet other Gardens, wherein are herbs exceeding green, Rivers,
Dates, Pomegranets, and all sorts of fruits; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but
your own Lord? There be in these Gardens women, who have eyes exceeding black,
and bodies exceeding white, they are covered with pavillions, and none, either
men, or Angels shall touch them before their husbands; what Lord do ye
blaspheme, but your own Lord? They shall repose upon green Carpets, near
rivolets, bordered with flowers; what Lord do ye blaspheme, but your own Lord?
Praised be the name of God thy Lord, honor and glory are due to him eternally.

CHAP. LVI. The Chapter of Judgment, containing fourscore and nineteen Verses,
written at Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. The day of Judgment will come, none
can deny it. That day shall many be afflicted and humbled, and many shall be
elated, and rejoiced; the Earth shall tremble, the Mountain open, and be
dispersed like dust carried away by the wind; ye shall he present at that day,
in a threefold manner; These are the Blessed.
Some shall have in their right hand the book, wherein shall be written all
their actions. These are the Damned.
Others shall have it in their left hand, and The Prophets.
such as preceded them in well-doing, shall be the nearest to his divine
Majesty, and the highest in Paradise; there shall be a great number of the
first Ages, and few of the latter; they shall repose upon beds, adorned with
Gold, and precious stones; they shall look upon each other; young boys shall go
about them with vessels, Cups, and Goblets, full of delicious drink, that shall
not offend the head, neither intoxicate them; they shall have all the fruits
that they can covet, and such viands as they shall desire; they shall have
women with black eyes, and who shall be white as polished pearls, for
recompense of their good works; they shall not hear an evil word spoken, they
shall not sin, and shall hear perpetually the voice of them that bless them;
They that shall hold their book in their right hand, shall be near to an
Apple Tree, fresh and without thorn, and near the Tree of Muse is a fruit
common in Egypt.
Muse, under a pleasant shadow, by flowing water, with store of fruits of all
seasons: they shall use [them] with freedom, lying on delicious beds. We have
created the daughters of Paradise Virgins, and affectionate to their husbands,
for the content of them that shall have in their right hands the book of the
account of their actions, and of many of those that were in the first Ages, and
of many of such as shall be in the latter: Those that shall have their book of
account in the left hand, shall be tormented with an exceeding hot wind, they
shall drink boiling water, they shall be in a black, hot, and salt smoke, for
that they were luxurious in the world, for that they were negligent to observe
the Commandments of God, and continued in the enormity of their sins. The
Infidels say, what! after death we shall be earth, and dust, and shall we rise
again with our fathers and predecessors? Say unto them, You, your Predecessors,
and posterity, shall all be assembled before God to be judged; Then, oh wicked
Impostors! shall ye eat of the fruit of the Tree * Zacon; Zacon is the tree of
Hell. See Gelaldin.
ye shall fill your belly, ye shall drink boiling water, and be daily altered;
behold your condition at the day of Judgment. We created all of you; if ye
believe it not, consider the wealth ye possess; did you your selves create it?
We have appointed that ye shall dye; we can if we please, put other creatures
like unto you in your place, and metamorphize you into another form, which ye
know not; we caused the soul to enter into the body; if ye consider not this,
think upon your tillage; do ye make the earth to bring forth fruits? or do I
cause them to spring forth? If I will, I can render your fields dry as straw,
without grain, nevertheless are ye proud; Ye say, what! shall our grain that we
have sown be lost? No, we will preserve it; Consider the water that ye drink,
have ye made it to fall from the Clouds? or did we cause it to descend? if we
please, we can render it so salt, that ye shall not be able to drink it; if ye
acknowledge not this grace, consider the fire that ye kindle; did ye create the
wood that burns? We created it, to put you in mind of the fire of Hell, and
for the profit of the people. Exalt the name of God most mighty. I swear by him
that makes the Stars to fall, (this is a great oath, if ye understand it,)
that the Alcoran is a book worthy of praise, all therein is written in good
order, no person shall handle it that is not clean and purified; it is sent
from God, Lord of the Universe: If ye renounce what is written in this book, ye
shall be in the number of Infidels, and shall know the truth when the soul
shall forsake your body; I know this better than you, but ye do not consider
it; if ye believe not to rise again, cause your soul to return into your body,
when it shall be upon your lips; when a righteous man dies, he shall find
rest, and all manner of contentment in the delights of Paradise, if he be of
them that hold the book of the account of their works in the right hand, and
shall be free from eternal pains: If he be in the number of Infidels, and
seduced, he shall be precipitated into hell; this is a most certain truth,
Exalt the name of thy Lord Omnipotent.

CHAP. LVII. The Chapter of Iron, containing twenty nine Verses, written at
Medina.
IN the name of God gracious and merciful. All that is in the heavens and
earth, exalts the glory of God, he is omnipotent and wise; the Kingdom of the
Heavens and Earth is his, he gives life and death to whom he pleases, he is
without beginning, and without end, he knows all that men make manifest, and
whatsoever they keep secret, he knows all things. He it is that created the
earth and the heavens in six days, and ^itteth on his throne, he knows
whatsoever enters into the earth, and all that comes out; he knows
whatsoever descends from heaven, and whatsoever ascends; he is with you in
whatsoever place ye are, and sees all your actions; the Kingdom of the heavens
and earth is his, and all things obey him; He makes the night to enter the
day, and knows what is in the heart of men. Believe in God and his Prophet,
expend in pious works some part of the wealth that he has given you, he shall
give you more. Do good abundantly to them that believe in his Law; wherefore
will ye not believe in God, and his Apostle, who teaches you the Commandments
of your Lord? Ye have promised him to embrace his Law; he has inspired his
Commandments into his servant, to bring you out of darkness, and guide you into
light; he is gracious and merciful. Who hinders you to make any expense for
his glory? The inheritance of the heavens and earth is his; Such as for his
service have expended any thing before the taking of Mecca, are not equal in
merit to them that fought to conquer that City; they are far above them that
fought not, and shall be protected of his divine Majesty; he promises Paradise
to the righteous, and knows all your actions. Who is he that shall lend to
him any alms? he shall increase his substance, and give a great reward: Be thou
mindful of the day when thou shall see those men and women that have obeyed my
Commandments, with a light that shall go before them; it shall be said to them,
this day it is declared to you, that you shall enter into, and dwell eternally
in Gardens, wherein flow many Rivers, and where ye shall find supreme felicity.
Be thou mindful of the day that the wicked shall say to the True believers,
Behold us, cast your eye to our side, that we may partake a little of your
light. They shall say unto them, Return upon your steps to demand light. There
is a place, betwixt them, that has a secret gate, full of grace and rep^se for
the righteous, and without, environed with misery for the wicked; they shall
call upon the righteous, and say, Were not we of your Religion? they shall
reply, Yes, but ye betrayed your souls through disobedience, ye doubted of the
Law of God; your blasphemies rendered you insolent, until the hour of your
death; the Devil made you proud, and moved you to rise against the Commandments
of his divine Majesty: this day there is neither ransom, nor favor for you:
the fire of hell is the habitation of the wicked. Oh what an habitation! Such
as believe in God think it no trouble to humble their hearts at the remembrance
of the Alcoran, and the truth that it contains; they are not like them that
heretofore had the knowledge of the written Law, they have been a long time
without Prophets, their hearts are hardened, and the greatest part of them have
been impious. Know, that God restores life to the earth after the death
thereof: we have taught you the mysteries of faith, peradventure ye will
comprehend them; God shall multiply the benefits that the righteous shall lend
to him, and shall return them a great reward: Such as believe in God and his
Prophet, are righteous: Martyrs shall be recompensed of God, they shall be
covered with light, and the wicked that disobey his Commandments shall be
damned eternally: the life of this world is but vanity, sport, and delusion, it
is but pride: the abundance of wealth, and children, is like to the rain; the
wicked wonder at the plants that it produces; in the end they wither, become
yellow, and then are altogether dry; the impious shall suffer great torments,
and the good shall enjoy the mercy of God; the life of this world is but matter
of pride, implore pardon of God; Paradise, large as heaven and earth, is
prepared for them that shall believe in his divine Majesty, and his Prophet,
this is an immense grace, which he conferreth on whom he pleases. All the evil
that ye suffer on earth, in your goods and persons, is written in a Book,
before it befall you; it is an easy thing to God; to the end that ye afflict
not your selves extraordinarily in your displeasures, and that ye rejoice not
overmuch in your contentments; God loves not the proud, he has not to do
with the covetous, who recommend avarice to the People, and who neglect their
duty. Praise is due to him, praise is due to him in all places; certainly we
sent our Messengers with our Commandments, we sent with them their Scriptures,
and Balance, that People might weigh with good weights. We gave Iron to men,
it causes great evils, and great good in the World, God knows them that
fight with zeal for his Law and his Prophet, without seeing him, he is Strong
and Omnipotent. We sent Noah and Abraham to instruct the People; we instructed
their Progeny in the Scripture; some followed the right way, and many disobeyed
our Commandments; we sent after them our Prophets and Apostles; we sent Jesus
the Son of Mary, we taught him the Gospel; we put civility, clemency, and
chastity into the hearts of them that followed him; we did not command them to
keep Virginity, they kept it of their own accord, because of their desire they
had to please God; they have not observed their Law as they ought, many have
been disobedient, but we have rewarded those among them that believed. O ye
that believe in Jesus! fear God, and believe in his Prophet, ye shall have
double the reward of God's mercy, he shall pardon your sins, he is gracious and
merciful: I teach you these things, to the end that such as have heretofore
received the written Law, may know, that they have no power over the grace of
God, he gives it to whom he lists, certainly it is immense.

CHAP. LVIII. The Chapter of the Dispute, containing Twenty two Verses, written
at Medina.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. God has heard the speech of her
that disputed with thee, concerning the action of her Husband; she exhibited to
him her complaints, he hears all your discourses, he hears and sees all.
No person among you shall swear never to touch his Wife no more than his
Mother; your wives are not your mothers; your Mothers are those that conceiyed
and brought you forth; they that speak in that manner, speak uncivilly, but God
is gracious and merciful. He that shall have sworn to touch no more his Wife,
and shall desire (afterward) to know her, shall give liberty to a Slave, for
satisfaction of his Oath, before he touch her; this is commanded you, God
knows all your actions: if he have not the power to free a Slave, he shall
fast two Months together, before touching her; if he cannot fast, he shall give
to Fifty poor: Thus ought ye to do, if ye believe in God and his Prophet, God
so appointed it, and has prepared great torments for them that transgress his
Commandments. They that shall disobey him and the Prophet, shall be covered
with shame and ignominy, as were their Predecessors in impiety; God has sent
his Commandments on Earth, those who shall reject them, shall be severely
tormented at the day that he shall revive them, he shall declare to them all
that they have done, he has kept account, and they have forgotten it, he sees
all. See thou not that all that is in the Heaven and Earth is Gods? If ye be
Three secretly met together, he is the Fourth; if ye be Five, he is the Sixth;
if ye be more or less, he is always with you wheresoever you are. He shall
relate to men at the Day of Judgment all that they have done, he knows all
things. See thou not the actions of them to whom private meetings were
prohibited? They return to their sin, and do what was forbidden them; they
assemble secretly with malice to conspire against thee, and to disobey thee;
and when they come toward thee, they say, that thou have spoken things that
God has not inspired thee to utter; they know in their Souls that God will
chastise them for their discourse, and that they all shall go into Hell, where
their Rendezvous is: Oh ye that believe! make no private meetings to offend
God, to conspire against his Prophet, and to disobey him; assemble ye to
perform acts of Virtue, and to serve God; have his fear before your eyes, ye
shall once appear before his Divine Majesty to be judged. Private assemblies
proceed from the Devil, for the affliction of the Righteous: He brings no
evil upon them, but through God's permission; and all believers ought to resign
themselves to his Divine Will. O ye that believe! when ye shall be assembled
with your Prophet, and are entreated to enlarge your selves, enlarge ye your
selves, God shall enlarge to you his grace. When ye are bid to rise, rise, God
shall raise up all the True believers that are among you, and place the learned
some degrees above others, he knows your actions. O ye that believe! when ye
shall be disposed to deliver any secret to the prophet, speak to him with
truth, good shall befall you, and [he] shall purify you: If ye fear to impart
to him your secret, God will not give you his grace. Make your prayers at the
time appointed, distribute Tithes, obey God and his Prophet, God knows what
ye do: See thou not them that have abandoned his Law? The wrath of his Divine
Majesty is fallen upon them, they are of different opinion in their lie, and know
not that they lie, but he has prepared for them a great punishment, because of
their blasphemies; they have concealed their Faith, and are seduced; certainly
he has prepared for them grievous pains, their Wealth and their Children shall
not be able to deliver them from his Indignation, they shall be precipitated
into the Fire of Hell, where they shall abide eternally. Be thou mindful of the
day, when he will cause them to revive; they shall swear, as they swear before
thee, that they believed in his Law; they affirm they do good, and are Liars,
the Devil has prepossessed them, and has made them forget the word of God;
such as follow him are damned. They that transgress the will of God, and that
of his Prophet, are overcome of the Devil; God has said in the Scriptures,
thou shall not obtain victory over me, neither over my Prophet, he is
Omnipotent, and always victorious; thou shall find none of them that believe in
his Law, and the Day of Judgment, that does not exactly observe the
Commandments of his Divine Majesty, and those of his Prophet, although their
Fathers, their Children, their Brethren, and companions oppose them. God has
imprinted Faith in their hearts, he has strengthened them through his Spirit,
and shall cause them to enter into gardens, wherein flow many Rivers, where
they shall abide eternally: He shall be satisfied with their obedience, and
they shall be content with his grace. Such as shall obey his Commandments shall
be happy.

CHAP. LIX. The Chapter of Exile, containing Twenty four Verses, written at
Medina.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful: Whatsoever is in the Heavens and
Earth, exalts the glory of God, he is Omnipotent and Wise; he it is that has
exiled the wicked from among them that have knowledge of the written Law; when
he the first time exiled them, ye believed not that they should depart from
their Houses; ye believed that their Cittadels would defend them from his
punishment, but he surprised them, and did cast terror into their hearts, and
they destroyed their dwelling places with their own hands, to assist the True
believers. O ye that are wise! consider their end. If God had not appointed
them to quit their Country, he had chastised them in some other manner; they
in the end shall suffer the pains of Hell fire, because they have disobeyed his
Commandments, and his Prophet; he that shall disobey him, shall be severely
chastised: ye cut not Palm Trees, and leave none standing, but through Gods
permission; he covers with shame See Kitab el tenoir.
and infamy them that disobey him. He commands you to give to the Prophet a
part of the spoil that ye shall gain from your enemies, as well of Horses and
Camels, as of other spoils; he endueth him with power and authority over whom
he pleases, he is Omnipotent. He enjoineth you to give to the Prophet a part
of what ye shall conquer over them of the City of Mecca; he commands what
pleases him. Give a share to God, to the Prophet, his Parents, Orphaus, the
poor, and Pilgrims, that no disorder may arise among you that are rich; perform
what the Prophet shall command you, abstain from what he shall prohibit you,
and fear God, he is severe in his chastisements: Do good to the poor, that have
forsaken their faculties and houses, and separated themselves from the wicked,
for the Service of God, and to defend his Law and Prophet. They that before
them forsook their houses for the Service of God, affect those that have
followed them, they bear them no malice for the wealth they possess, although
themselves are necessitous. They that are not avaricious, shall be happy; such
as shall succeed them, shall pray for them, and say, Lord, pardon our sins, and
our brethren, that were our Predecessors in the observance of thy Commandments;
infuse no malice into our hearts against them that follow thy Law, thou art
gracious and merciful: See thou not, that the wicked say to their brethren,
wicked as themselves, Had ye not so soon left Medina, we had gone out with you,
and had never obeyed him whom ye have obeyed; had ye fought, we had defended
you; God sees that they are impious; had they delayed to go forth, they should
not have gone forth with them; had they fought, they would not have succored
them, they had turned the back, and had found no protection, they fear men more
than God, because they are ignorant. [The Iews] shall not fight against you
together, unless in their Fortres^es, and behind Walls; the War among them is
cruel, but think not that they may assemble and unite themselves, their hearts
are divided because they are ignorant, they are like their Predecessors, who
were chastised and slain, and shall suffer great torments at the Day of
Judgment; they are like to him whom the Devil has seduced, and said to him, I
am innocent of thine impiety, I fear God, Lord of the Universe; the end of both
is to be cast headlong into the fire of Hell, where they shall abide Eternally;
such is the reward of the wicked. O ye that believe! fear God, and consider
what ye shall do at the Day of Judgment; fear God, he knows whatsoever ye do;
be not like to those that forget his Commandments, he forgets them, and they
continue in the number of the damned, they shall be most miserable; and such as
shall go into Paradise shall be blessed. If we should make the Alcoran to
descend upon a Mountain, it will open it self, with the fear it will have of
the Word of God. Thus do I speak in Parables to the People, peradventure they
will be converted. There is but One only God, who knows what is present,
future, and past, he is gracious and merciful; there is but one God, King of
all things: He is holy, the delieverer, true, the punisher, strong, powerful,
glorious. Praised be God, he bath no companion, he is God the Creator, who has
formed whatsoever is in the World, all glorious Attributes are due to him;
whatsoever is in Heaven and Earth, exalt his glory, he is Omnipotent and Wise.

CHAP. LX. The Chapter of Trial, containing Eighteen Verses, written at Mecca.
Some Mohammedan Doctors have entitled this the Chapter of Vocation, because it
entreats of Women that forsook thrir Husbands, to follow the Law of Mahomet,
who appointed to try their hearts, intention, and to know their Vocation.

IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. O ye that believe! obey not mine,
nor your enemies; ye show kindness to them when ye meet them; nevertheless they
reject the truth that has been sent unto them, and chase away the Prophet and
you also; and that, because ye believe in God your Lord; seek not their
friendship; when ye fight against them for my Law, I know what ye ought to
fear, and ye know it not; he that shall do what is here above prohibited,
follows an evil way; if they have advantage over you, they will be your
enemies, they will stretch forth their hands and Tongues against you, they will
revile you, and desire that you may renounce your faith; if ye do it, ye shall
have no content in your Wives or Children, at the Day of Judgment, ye shall be
separated from them, and God shall behold all your actions: Ye have a fair
example in Abraham, and them that were with him, when they said to the People,
we are innocent of the sin that ye commit, in worshipping any other God but
God; Abraham said to his Father, I will not implore pardon of God for thee, I
am not able to deliver thee from his punishment, if thou art an Idolater; Lord,
all our confidence is in thee, our refuge is in thy mercy: protect not
unbelievers against us, pardon our sins, thou art merciful and wise; ye have in
them a fair example for them that fear God, and apprehend the day of Judgment.
God has not to do with them that obey Infidels, neither has he need of any
person, and praise is due to him in all places; peradventure he will establish
for the future great amity between you and them that ye hate, he is omnipotent,
gracious, and merciful; he does prohibit you the conversation of them that
fight not against you for his faith, and that expel you not from your houses;
he does not forbid you to do them justice, he loves the just; He forbids
you to converse with them that fight against your faith, that drive you from
your houses, and aid to expel you; he prohibiteth you to obey them, and to
contract amity with them: such as obey them, shall be exceedingly too blame. O
ye that believe in God! when the wives of your enemies shall throw themselves
into your party, try their conscience: if ye know them to be faithful, and to
believe in the Law of God, restore them not to the incredulous Infidels, it is
not lawful for them to know them, neither for the women to teach them: give
them subsistence, ye shall not sin in espousing them: marry them not after the
laws of unbelievers; demand of them what dowry they require: they shall demand
of you what ye are willing to bestow on them: continue in accord, God so
commands, he shall be your judge at the day of Judgment, he knows all your
actions, and is most wise. If your wives revolt to the party of unbelievers,
and ye suffer any damage, ye shall repair that damage to him that suffers,
out of the booty that ye shall conquer; fear God, and believe in the Law of his
divine Majesty. O Prophet! when women shall desire to embrace thy Religion,
with firm purpose to believe in one only God, not to steal, neither to commit
adultery, neither to murder their children, to lie, blaspheme, or be
disobedient, receive them, implore pardon of God for them, he is gracious and
merciful. O ye that believe! obey not them against whom God is angry, they
despair of their salvation, as the wicked despaired, that died heretofore in
their impiety.

CHAP LXI. The Chapter of Array, containng fourteen Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Praise God all that is in heaven
and earth, he is omnipotent and wise. O ye that believe! say not that ye do
that which ye do not. God abhors them that say they do what they do not; and
loves them that fight in rank and file for his Law, like to a strong wall.
Remember thou that M^ses said to his people, Ye shall do me no harm, ye shall
know in the end that I am the Messenger of God: but God seduced them from the
right way, when they departed from obedience to his Commandments, he guides
not the wicked. Remember thou that Jesus, the son of Mary, said to the children
of Israel, I am the Messenger of God, he has sent me to confirm the old
Testament, and to declare to you that there shall come a Prophet after me,
whose name shall be Mahomet. When he came with miracles, reasons most
intelligible, and arguments infallible, they said that he was a Magician; who
is more impious than he that blasphemeth against God? The Infidels would
extinguish with their mouth the light of faith, but God shall make it manifest
against their will; he has sent his Prophet to guide the people into the way
of salvation, to teach them the truth of his Law, and make it more evident than
all other Laws of the world, against the will of Infidels. O ye that believe!
Will ye that I teach you one thing, that shall deliver you from the pains of
hell? Believe in God and in his Prophet; employ your wealth and persons in
fighting for his Law; ye shall do exceeding well, if ye have knowledge to
understand it; God shall pardon your offenses, he shall cause you to enter into
gardens, wherein flow many rivers; he shall cause you to go into the beautiful
Palaces of Eden, where is supreme felicity; he shall confer upon you yet
another grace, which ye desire, viz. victory over your enemies. Oh ye that
believ^! maintain the Law of God; Jesus, the Son of Mary, said to his Apostles,
Who will maintain the Law of God with me? he shall be supported, and protected
of God. The Apostles answered, We will maintain it; One part of the Children of
Israel believed in Jesus, and another rejected his Law; we gave succor to them
that believed, against their enemies, and they were victorious.

CHAP. LXII. The Chapter of the Assembly, containing eleven Verses, written at
Medina.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Praise God all that is in heaven
and earth, praise the King, holy, majestique, and omnipotent, who has sent his
Prophet, an Arabian by Nation, to preach his Commandments to the Arabians, to
purify them, to teach them the Scriptures, and mysteries of faith, they were
before seduced from the right way. They that shall come after them, shall not
see a Prophet equal to him, this is a special grace of God, the omnipotent and
wise; he conferreth it on whom he lists, and his graces are immense. They
that preach the old Testament, and perform not what it enjoyneth, are like to
an Ass charged with books; Such are they that disobey the Commandments of God;
he guides not the impious. Oh ye Jews! believe not your selves to be the
beloved of God, expect death, ye shall understand your error; they believe not
that they shall be chastised for their sins, but God beholds all the unjust.
Say unto them, Ye shall find one day the death that ye fly; ye be sent back
before God, who knows what is present, past, and to come; he shall set before
you all that ye have done, to be judged. Oh ye that believe! when ye are called
to the assembly of Friday, to make your prayers, pray, and quit your trade;
this shall be a good act, if ye understand it; when you shall have finished
your Prayers, separate your selves, go whither you please, and beg of God his
grace, call frequently to mind his divine Majesty, and ye shall be happy. When
the Infidels saw any thing of profit, or any divertisement, they forsook thee,
and went out from the Sermon; Say unto them, how great riches and delights are
there with God? He is the Rich of the Rich.

CHAP. LXIII. The Chapter of the Wicked, containing Twelve Verses, written at
Medina.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. When the wicked shall come to visit
thee, they will say, That they are witnesses, that thou art a Prophet sent from
God; he well knows that thou art his Prophet, he sees that they dissemble,
and sell their Faith to enjoy wealth in the World, wherein they commit evil;
they say with the mouth, We believe in the Law of God, and are impious in their
Souls, impiety is imprinted in their hearts, and they will not learn the
Mysteries of Faith; the beauty of their bodies shall not displease thee, when
thou shall see them; they erect themselves when they speak, and resemble a
piece of wood set up against a wall; they fear all rumors that fly abroad, and
are your enemies. Beware of them, doubtless God will destroy them; how can they
blaspheme against his Law? When it was said to them, Come to the Prophet, he
shall beg pardon of God for your sins, they shook the head, and withdrew with
pride; misery is upon them; whether thou implore pardon for them, or do not
implore it, God will not pardon them, he abhors the wicked. They say, Do no
good to them that follow that Prophet of God, until they abandon him; the
treasures of Heaven and Earth are Gods, but they comprehend it not; they say,
If we return to the City of Medina, we will drive thence shame and infamy, and
will there establish Greatness and Honor; on the contrary, Greatness, Power,
and Victory proceed from God, his Prophet, and them that believe in his Law,
but Infidels understand it not. Oh ye that believe in God! your Riches, and
your Children ought not to seduce you from his Service; such as shall forsake
it, shall be in the number of the damned; give alms of the Wealth that he has
given you, before the Hour of your Death arrive; then shall the wicked say,
Lord, if thou had not so soon caused me to die, I had embraced thy Law; God
retardeth not the day of any one, when the Hour is come; he knows all that ye
do.

CHAP. LXIV. The Chapter of Deceit, containing Eighteen Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Praise God whatsoever is in Heaven
and Earth, he is King of all things, Praise is due to him, he is Omnipotent; he
it is that has created you; some observe his Commandments, and others are
unbelievers, he beholds all your actions. He created the Heavens and the
Earth, he formed you, and ye shall be one day assembled before him to be
judged, he knows all that is in Heaven and Earth, he understands your
secrets, and what ye publish, he is not ignorant of what is in the hearts of
men. Have ye not heard what did heretofore befall the wicked? They were
punished, they died in their misery, and in the end shall suffer grievous
torments, because God has sent them Prophets to instruct them, and they said,
What! shall a man like our selves teach us the right way? They despised them,
and forsook the Law of God; he has not to do with them, neither has he need
of the World, praise is due to him in all places; do the wicked believe that
they shall not rise again? Contrariwise, God shall make them to revive, and
shall declare to them all that they have done; this thing is easy to his
Divine Majesty; Believe in God, his Prophet, and the light that he has sent
you, he knows all your actions. Remember thou the day, when he shall Summon
all to Judgment, this shall be the Day of Deceit; they shall be known that have
deceived themselves, and those that have deluded their Neighbors. That day
their sins shall be pardoned, that shall have believed in his unity, and have
done good works, they shall dwell eternally in Gardens, wherein flow many See
Kitab el tenoir.
Rivers; the Infidels that despise his Commandments shall be precipitated into
Hell, where they shall burn eternally. No evil befalls you, but through God's
permission; he gives patience to him that believes in his Divine Majesty, and
knows all. Obey God and his Prophet; if ye obey him not, know, that the
Prophet of God is obliged only to preach the truth of Faith; there is but one
God, all True believers resign themselves to his Divine Will. O ye that
believe! ye have Children, and Wives, that are your enemies, beware of their
malice, if ye pardon them; if ye depart from them, God shall be to you gracious
and merciful. Wealth and Children do often hinder you to obey God; but know,
that he rewards abundantly the Righteous; fear him with all your power,
hearken to his Commandments, obey him, give alms; he that is not avaricious
shall be blessed; if ye lend any thing to God, he shall cause it to multiply,
he shall pardon your sins, he accepts the acknowledgment of his benefits, and
is most merciful. He knows what is present, past, and future, he is
Omnipotent and Wise.

CHAP. LXV. The Chapter of Divorce, containing Eighteen Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Oh Prophet! when you repudiate
them, following the Ordinances and Laws, and reckon the time that they ought to
tarry before they marry again; Fear God your Lord, cause them not to depart
their houses, neither expel them before the time appointed, if they be not
taken in Adultery; such are the Ordinances of God, he that shall trangress
them, shall do injury to himself, peradventure God will enjoin something
concerning them, of which ye are ignorant. When the time that they ought to
tarry shall be finished, retain, or dismiss them with civility; ye shall take
persons of your Religion, honest men, that shall be witnesses of your Actions,
depose with truth what ye have seen; it is so appointed to them that believe in
God, and the day of Judgment. God shall deliver from affliction him that shall
have his fear before his eyes, and shall enrich him, when he least thinks of
it; he that shall trust in him, shall not be deceived, he does what he
pleases, and has appointed a prefixed time to every thing. If the Women hope
no more to have their three months, and doubt that they are misreckoned, they
shall tarry three months before they marry again, if they be not Nurses; if
they be with Child, ye shall abstain till their delivery; whosoever fears
God, rejoiceth in the observance of his Commandments. What is above, is
ordained of God; he shall pardon their sins, that have his fear before their
eyes, and give them an exceeding great reward. Cause them that ye repudiate, to
dwell in your houses, or near to you, abuse them not; if they be with Child,
allow them what shall be necessary for them, until they shall be delivered; if
they desire to nurse their Children, ye shall give them an honest salary, and
entreat them with civility and courtesy; if ye like not this, ye shall cause
them to be nursed by another, whose pains ye shall reward. If ye be not
wealthy, you shall allow according to your power; God does not enjoin any one
to expend more than his ability permits; he shall give you good after evil;
how many have been the Cities that have heretofore disobeyed the Commandments
of God, and of his Prophets? We have kept an exact account of their sins, their
Inhabitants have been chastised, and shall be in the end, in the number of the
damned; God has prepared for them grievous torments. Oh ye that are wise! fear
God, he has sent you the Alcoran; he has sent you a Prophet, to teach you the
mysteries of his Law, to lead you out of darkness, and to guide into light them
that shall believe in him, and do good works: He shall open to them the Gate of
Paradise, wherein flow many Rivers, where they shall dwell eternally, with all
manner of content. God! He it is, that created the seven Heavens, and as much
of Earth, and ordains among them what pleases him, to the end ye may know
that he is Omnipotent, and knows all things.

CHAP. LXVI. The Chapter of Prohibition, containing Twelve Verses, written at
Medina.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Oh Prophet! prohibit not for the
contentment of thy wives, to do that which God has permitted thee, he is
gracions and merciful; he has appointed to do what is permitted by your Law,
he is your Lord, is Omniscient and most Wise. When the Prophet went to visit
one of his wives, God revealed to him, what she desired to say to him; he
approved one part, and rejected the other; when he told his Wife what was in
her will to speak to him, she demanded of him, who had revealed it to him; he
that knows all things has revealed it to me, that ye may be converted, your
hearts are inclined to do what is forbidden; if ye act any thing against the
Prophet, know, that God is his protector, the Angel Gabriel, and all the
believers will defend him, the Angels shall protect him against you. If it be
his will to repudiate you, God shall give him for the future, other wives in
your place, that shall be obedient; True believers, humble, faithful, devout,
contented, mild, clean Virgins, and not Virgins: Oh ye that believe in God!
strengthen your selves, you and your Families, in obedience to his
Commandments; the Idolaters shall burn in the Fire of Hell, with their Idols;
the Angels deputed to torment them, disobey not God, they execute whatsoever is
commanded them. Oh ye that are Infidels! there is no excuse for you, ye shall
be chastised after your demerits. Oh ye that believe! turn to God with
affection, he shall pardon your sins, and make you to enter into Gardens,
wherein flow many Rivers; the light of Faith shall go before the Prophet, and
them that have followed him; when God shall recompense them, they shall say,
Lord, give us thy light, pardon our sins, thou art Omnipotent. Oh Prophet!
fight against the Infidels, and the wicked, fortify thy self against them,
Hell shall be their habitation. God teaches unbelievers a Parable, and says,
the wives of Noah, and the wives of Lot were under the power of my two
Servants, righteous men; they betrayed them, but did not escape the punishment
of their sin. It was said unto them, enter into the Fire of Hell with them that
go into it. God teaches them a Parable, that follow his Law; take example by
the Wife of Pharaoh, she prayed to God, and said, Lord build me an House in
Paradise, deliver me from Pharaoh, from his works, and unjust men. Mary the
daughter of Ios^phat preserved her Virginity; we inspired into her our Spirit,
she believed the words of her Lord, and the Scriptures; she was in the number
of them that obey.

CHAP. LXVII. The Chapter of Empire, containing Thirty Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful* Praised be he to whom belongs the
Empire o^ the World, who is Omnipotent, and has created Life and Death, to let
you know which is the better; he is Omnipotent and merciful. He has created
seven Heavens, one upon another; thou see nothing of what he has created,
that is not proportioned; raise yet thy sight to Heaven, thou shall not there
see any thing defective* behold it twice, or more often, thou shall not
perceive therein any thing vain, or imperfect. We have adorned the Heaven, and
the World with Stars, we expelled thence the Devils, we prepared for them a
great fire, and the torments of Hell for unbelievers. They shall hear horrible
and terribble voices, that proceed from despair and wrath; when they shall be
cast thither headlong, when they shall enter into Hell by Troops, the Overseer
of the torments shall say unto them, Had you none on Earth that preached to you
the pains of Hell? Yes, shall they reply, they were preached to us, but we
traduced our preachers, we said, that God did not command to do what they
declared; that they were liars, and seduced from the right way; had we heard
them, and had we been wise, we should not this day have been in the number of
the damned; they shall confess their sins in the bottom of Hell. Such as fear
God, without seeing him, shall receive pardon of their offenses, and an
exceeding great reward. Speak secretly, or publicly, God knows whatsoever ye
have in your hearts, since the time of your creation, he is blessed and
omniscient. He has established ways upon the earth, go on all sides, and live
of his good things: ye all shall revive, and be one day assembled before him to
be judged. Believe ye that he who is in heaven, cannot render the earrh dry and
barren, and cause it to tremble? Believe ye, that he who is in heaven is not
able to send against you an impetuous wind, to destroy you? Ye shall hereafter
feel what are the torments of hell. Your predecessors would not believe them,
and were chastised for their incredulity. Consider ye not the birds that fly
over your heads, how they extend, and shut their wings? nothing supporteth
them, but that mercy that beholds all things. Who but God shall protect you
in your miseries? The Infidels are proud: Who shall enrich you, if God
restrains his grace? nevertheless ye persevere in your sins, and fly the
truth; Is he that creeps on his face, like to him that goes on his feet in
the right way? Say unto them, God has created you; he has given you sight,
hearing and sense, but few among you return him thanks for his graces: Say unto
them, he created you of earth, and ye shall one day be assembled before him, to
render account of your actions. The wicked demand when the day of Judgment
shall be; Say unto them, God knows, I am sent only to preach to you the pains
of hell; Their visages shall become black, when they shall see the punishment
of their sins approach. It shall be said to them, behold that which ye have
demanded with so much impatience! Say unto them, did you see that God destroyed
me, and them that were with me? No, he gave us his grace. Who shall deliver the
Infidels from the torments of hell? Say unto them, God is merciful; we believe
in him, and we are resigned to the will of his divine Majesty, ye shall know
hereafter them that shall be seduced. If the water that waters your flocks
enter under the earth, who shall give you other water, or another Fountain to
supply you?

CHAP. LXVIII. The Chapter of the Pen, containing fifty two Verses, written at
Mecca.
Bedaoi entituleth this the Chapter of the Letter Noun, n, and says, that it
is as much as to say, Whale, or great Fish: Some other Doctors say, that Noun,
n, is the name of the Ink, or Table, on which the Angels write the Commandments
of God: Others affirm it, to signify the Inkhorn; but many of the Mohammedan
Doctors entitle this, the Chapttr of the Pen.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the Pen, and by all that
is written, that thou art not possessed of the Devil; through the grace of thy
Lord, thou shall have an infinite reward; God has created thee, with a
creation high, and most illustrious. Thou shall hereafter know, and the
Infidels likewise shall know one day, them among you that are ignorant.
Certainly thy Lord knows them that are seduced, and them that follow the
right way. Obey not the wicked, they desire thee to be more in^ulgent toward
them, and themselves more ^ild toward thee; Obey not those infamous ^ars,
those bablers, sinners and seducers, and wicked persons, full of treasures and
children; When the Mysteries of faith are related to them, ^hey say, that they
are but fables of antiquity; we will put upon their noses a mark of shame and
ig^ominy; we have tried them, as Gardeners when ^hey have resolved in the
evening to cut off the mor^ing followng some fruits of their garden, for their
refection, and have not said, if it please God; By night, while they slept, God
sent fire unto their gardens, that consumed them; in the morning they called
[each other] and said, Come ^o put order to your garden, if ye desire to ga^her
the fruits; they believed the poor would en^er, they ran [to drive them away]
and found their ^ruits black, and their gardens blasted: Then they said, We are
seduced, we are sinners; one of them said that it was requisite to praise God;
then they said, Praised be God, we are great sinners: they ^pproached each
other, and complained among themselves: they said, misery is upon us; we were
^n a great error, peradventure God will give us ^ereafter more than the value
of what we have lost, we must beg his grace; thus God chastises on earth, whom
he pleases, but the torments of the other world are much more grievous: They
that have ^his fear before their eyes, shall dwell in gardens full of delights.
Shall I entreat the good like the wicked? How can ye judge it? have ye a book,
wherein you read what pleases you? have we promised to you any content at the
day of Judgment? Shall you have that day what ye have promised to your selves?
Ask of them, who will be surety for their belief? will their Idols and
companions be their surety? Let them cause them to come, if they be true: Be
thou mindful of the day when sins shall be detected, and the wicked shall be
commanded to worship God, but they shall not be able to behold him, their eyes
shall be troubled with fear, and their sight covered with shame. They are
enjoined in the world to worship his divine Majesty, but they refuse to perform
it; I will punish them by little and little, when they shall least think of it;
I will defer the punishments of their crimes, because my wrath is strong; Dos^
thou demand of men any reeompence for thy preaching? are they charged with any
expense? Have they in their power the book, wherein is the future, to write
therein what they affirm? Attend the Judgment of thy Lord, and be not like him
that was swallowed of the Whale. He invoked his Lord in his affliction: if his
Lord had not sent him his grace, he should never have come upon earth when he
repented of his sin, his Lord pardoned and placed him in the number of the
righteous. The unbelievers labor to shake thee through their looks, and that
through envy: they affirm that thou art possessed of the Devil, when the hear
thee read the Alcoran: It was not sent but t^ instruct the world.

CHAP. LXIX. The Chapter of Verification, containing Fifty two Verses, written
at Mecca.
Exteri intituleth this, The Chapter of Judgment, because that day all shall be
verified.

IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Verification approaches,
Verification approaches; God has not told thee in what time shall be the day
of Verification; Temod and Aad would not believe him that preached to them the
day of affliction and sorrow, but Temod was destroyed by an extraordinary
noise, and Aad by an impetuous wind that God sent against them Seven nights,
and eight days together; they were overthrown, stretched out like Palms fallen
upon the Earth: Did any one among them save himself? Pharaoh, and his
predecessors, with the Inhabitants of the Cities that were overthrown because
of their sins, disobeyed the Prophets and Apostles of God, and were rudely
chastised. We preserved you in Noah's Ark, when the waters swelled, to serve
for example of our Omnipotency to them that saw it, and to such as shall hear
it mentioned. Be thou mindful of the day when the Angel shall sound the
Trumpet, when the Earth shall lift it self up, and the Mountains tremble; then
what must come to pass, shall come to pass; Heaven with Weakness shall open,
and the Angel that shall bear the Throne of God, shall be upon the border of
the Heaven. Then shall Eight Angels present the books, wherein shall be written
the sins of Men, and nothing shall be concealed. Such as shall take in the
right hand the Book of the account of their actions, shall say, We find what we
believed to be true, we know with certain knowledge the coming of this day, and
the felicity of Life is in Paradise: It shall be said to them, Eat and drink of
the good things of Paradise at your pleasure. They that shall take the Book of
account of their actions in their left Hand, shall say, Would to God that this
Book had been lost, I know not what is this account; would to God that I had
been eternally buried in the Earth; the Riches, Authority, and Treasures of the
World are to me unprofitable: It shall be said to the Devils, Take them, bind
them, and throw them headlong in to Hell, put Chains seventy Cubits long upon
their arms, and cast them into fire; they would not believe in the Unity of God
the Omnipotent; they have eaten the Bread of the Poor, they are this day*
without protection and want Bread, and shall find nothing but the pains of Hell
prepared for the wicked. I swear, Although ye see, and although ye do not see
the Alcoran, it is the word of the Prophet, the Apostle of God, it is not the
word of a Poet, but few persons will believe it. It is not the word of one that
is wicked, but few men remember it, it is sent from God, Lord of the Universe.
The Infidels say, Oh Prophet! if thou speak, we will not hear thee, thy speech
shall not enter into our hearts: Say unto them, There is none among you able to
deliver you from the punishment of your crimes; the Alcoran instructs in the
way of Salvation them that believe in his Divine Majesty; I know that there are
Liars among you, whom God shall put into the number of Infidels: The Alcoran is
truth it self. Praised be the Name of God Omnipotent, and Majestic.

CHAP. LXX. The Chapter of the Ascent, containing Forty four Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Some persons have demanded when
shall be the Day of Judgment, and in what time the wicked shall be chastised?
None but God is able to deliver men from the torments of Hell; he is Lord of
the way that ascends to Heaven, the Angels and Spirits shall ascend toward
him at the Day of Judgment; that day shall seem to the wicked to endure Fifty
thousand years; expect with patience; the wicked imagine they are far from that
day, but thou shall see it speedily; that day shall the Heaven resemble
dissolved Metal; the Mountains shall be like to carded Wool, which bends
downwards; none shall ask his Neighbor who he is; and they shall look one upon
another; the unbelievers shall desire to redeem themselves from these pains,
through the loss of their Children, their Wives, their Brethren, their
Companions, their Neighbors, and the loss of all that is on Earth. The flame
of Fire shall rise upon them, and shall burn the skin of their head; they shall
call upon those that are behind them, that have, like themselves, abandoned the
Law of God; and the covetous, that shall have heaped up Treasures. Man was
created timorous, he is afraid when evil befalls him, and is arrogant when
good happens to him; except the believers, who are stable in their Faith, that
persevere in their prayers, that give alms to the poor that beg, and those that
are bashful, that believe in the Day of Judgment, fear the punishment of God,
and know none other Women but their own, and their Slaves, they shall be exempt
from affliction at the Day of Judgment; those that shall act the contrary,
shall be in the number of the unjust. They who effect what they have promised,
and preserve faithfully what to them has been entrusted, who speak the truth
in testimony, and who make their prayers at the time appointed, shall be
honored in Paradise. Wherefore is it that the Infidels, who are about thee,
cast their eyes to the right Hand, and to the left, with pride? Do they require
to enter into Paradise, and be saved? We have created them as other men. I
swear by the Lord of the East and West, That we are able to change them into a
People better than they, and that it is a thing easy for us to perform; leave
them in their errors, until they be come to the day when they are promised to
be chastised, and that they shall come out of their Sepulchers to repair to
Universal Judgment; they shall repair thither terrified, and their sight shall
be covered with shame; this is the day that has been heretofore preached to
them.

CHAP. LXXI. The Chapter of Noah, containing Twenty eight Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Before men were chastised, we sent
Noah to preach to them the pains of hell: he said unto them, O ye people! I
preach to you the pains of hell, worship one only God, and fear him, obey me,
he shall pardon your sins, ^e deferreth your punishment until the day
appointed, and shall not retard it; when his hour shall be come, did he know
it, ye would be converted. Afterward he said, Lord, I have exhorted this people
night and day, but mine exhortations have been very much in vain, they have
strengthened themselves in their impiety; and when I preached to them, they put
their fingers into their ears, and covered their heads with their garments,
that they might not hear; they continue in their impiety, and become proud: I
have preached to them publicly, I lifted up my voice, I have expounded to them
the mysteries of thy Law; I said unto them, Implore pardon of God, he is most
merciful; he shall send you abundance of rain to water the earth; he shall give
you store of wealth, and many children; he shall give you gardens embellished
with fountains, and rivers; who hinders you to honor God? He it is that has
created you in the condition wherein you are: consider ye not that he has
created seven heavens, the one upon the other? that he created the Moon with
her brightness, and the Sun with his light? he has caused the earth to bring
forth all sorts of plants; he will cause you all to return to earth, and to
revive; he has extended it, to the end ye may walk in the ways thereof, large
and spacious. Lord, said Noah, this people has disobeyed me, they have
followed that which can give them neither posterity nor profit, but rather a
most certain damage; they have conspired against me, and said among themselves,
Forsake not your gods, forsake not Od, Soa, Igout, Iaoc, and Nesar; they These
are Idols.
err from the right way; Lord, add to their confusion. Then were they drowned
because of their sins, they shall be cast headlong into the fire, whence none
but God is able to deliver them. Noah said, Lord, leave not a wicked man upon
the earth, they will seduce thy creatures from the right way, they will leave
children, liars, and impious like themselves; pardon my sins, pardon the sins
of my father, my lineage, and those that shall believe in thy Law, and destroy
the unjust.

CHAP. LXXII. The Chapter of Devils, containing twenty eight Verses, written at
Mecca.
Some Mahometans entitle this, The Chapter of Spirits.

IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful: Say to the people, I have received
an inspiration, which some devils heard of me when I read the Alcoran, and that
they said, We have heard the miraculous Alcoran read, it teaches the right
way; we believe in what it contains; we believe not that God has companions;
we believe there is but one God, we believe not that he has wives, or
children, our ignorant persons blaspheme against his divine Majesty,
nevertheless we imagine that they could not do it. There are who require aid of
the devils, and augment their confusion, because they say, that God will not
cause any to rise again; some devils have said, We have been as high as heaven,
and found it furnished with guards and stars, we stayed in a place a little
distant to hear; there is one star that watches them that hearken, and drives
them away; we know not if God hates the men that are upon earth, or if he will
teach them the right way; but we are now in the number of them that believe in
the unity of his divine Majesty: they said, Oh ye people! we were before in the
way of error; we heretofore believed that God did not operate on earth; but no
person, in whatsoever place he be, can avoid obeying his Will; we heard the
book read that teaches the right way; we believe in what it contains; he that
believes in God, will not fear any misery or injustice: there be of us that
are good, and that trust in God? others there are, who are wicked and impious:
such as obey the Commandments of God, follow the right way, and the wicked
shall be precipitated into the fire of hell. Had the Infidels followed the
right way, we had sent them from heaven abundance of rain, and given them our
grace; I will try them, and such as shall despise the Alcoran shall be
punished. The Temples belong to God, invoke one sole God in the Temples: when
his servant rises, he worshippeth his divine Majesty; it wants not much, but
these devils had published the plurality of Deities: Say unto the people,
worship God my Lord; I believe in one God, who has no companion; I can neither
guide nor seduce you, but through his permission; If I disobey him, none shall
be able to save me, and I shall want protection at the day of Judgment. I can
do no more for you, than to preach to you his Law; this is the subject of my
Embassy: He who shall disobey God and his Prophet, shall be damned, and shall
remain eternally in the fire of hell. The wicked shall know such as shall be
deprived of succor and protection, when they shall behold the pains prepared
for them. Say unto them, I know not whether what is promised to you, shall
incontinently happen, or whether God will defer it some time; none knows what
is to come, but God, and those whom he has elected to be Prophets and
Messengers of his Will; he inspireth into them his Commandments, to preach to
men; he upholdeth all the actions of men, and keeps an exact account of every
thing.

CHAP. LXXIII. The Chapter of the Fearful, containing Twenty Verses, written at
Mecca.
The Arabians have entitled this, The Chapter of the Fearful; when the Angel
Gabriel brought this Chapter to Mahomet, he was afraid of the splendor of his
light, and covered himself with his garments, which gave occasion to the Angel
to call him, and say, Oh fearful! and not, oh prophet! as he was wont.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. See Gelaldin.
O thou Fearful! Arise by night, pray to God at midnight, until two third parts
of the night and more. Read the Alcoran, and meditate thereon, observe what it
contains: although it be tedious to thee, thou will best comprehend it after
thy first sleep, because thou in the day have affairs that divert thee.
Remember thou the name of God, forsake the world to worship him, he is Lord of
the West, and East, there is no God but God, take him for thy protector: be not
impatient at what the wicked say; separate thy self from their society, without
fear, leave me to punish them: is there any one that is able to defend them?
their punishment is deferred, but I have chains of iron, bread full of thorns,
and great torments to inflict on them, at the day when the earth shall tremble,
and the mountains shall be dissolved into dust. O ye people! we have sent to
you a Prophet, our Apostle, to instruct you, as we did to Pharaoh: he was
disobedient and obstinate, and we severely chastised him. How will ye secure
your selves from the torments of hell, if ye be in the number of the wicked?
What will ye do at the day when Infants shall be men, and heaven shall be
opened? What God promises is infallible: these things are for the instruction
of them that desire to follow the way of salvation. Thy Lord knows that thou will arise about the third part of the night, or at midnight, as likewise a
part of those that are with thee; he reckons the hours and the minutes of
night and day, he knows that thou can not reckon them exactly: he pardons
thee, if thou risest a little sooner, or a little later: read during this time
what thou shall be able to read of the Alcoran: God knows that there will be
persons among you that will be sickly, others that will be in travel for their
affairs, and some that will fight for the faith; these persons shall be
excused: Read what ye shall be able of the Alcoran, lift up your prayers to
God, pay tithes, lend to God some benefit, ye shall one day find the good that
ye shall have done, and a very good reward: beg pardon of God, he is gracious
and merciful.

CHAP. LXXIV. The Chapter of the Wrapped, containing fifty Mahomet was wrapped in
his garments when the Angel brought him this Chapter.
seven Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God gracious and merciful. O thou wrapped! Arise, and preach to
the people the torments of hell; thy Lord is more powerful than the Idols, make
clean thy garments, be thou mindful of the pains prepared for unbelievers;
separate thy self from their company: lend nothing to Usury: the day that the
Trumpet shall sound, shall be extremely irksome to the wicked; that day, let me
chastise him whom I created, and to whom I gave riches, and children, and whom
I placed in plenty; nevertheless he demands more, and is obstinate, to
disobey my Commandments: I will add to his pains, because he blasphemeth
against the Alcoran: wherefore does he blaspheme? he makes his countenance
sorrowful, covered with hypocrisy: when he beholds the people, with his eyes
melancholique, and estranged from the way of salvation, he is proud, scorneth
to follow the Prophet: says, that the Alcoran is but Magic, and but the word
of man; he shall be precipitated into the bottom of hell, nothing remains to
him but to be burned: nineteen Spirits shall be appointed to torment the
wicked: they that punish the damned, are Spirits. We have mentioned this number
of nineteen, to seduce the Infidels, and confirm the truth, and the True
believers in their faith. They whom God instructs in the Scripture, and who
believe in his Law, are not in doubt of these Spirits; but such as have evil in
the heart, who doubt of his Law; and the wicked, say, that he by his number,
means God: Thus God seduceth and guides whom he pleases: no person knows
the number of his Angels, but God. I swear by the entrance of the night, and
the morning, that hell is an exceeding great punishment, prepared for the
impious. The believers, and unbelievers, the good and the bad, shall answer for
their actions; and such as shall have their book of account in the right hand,
shall go into Paradise: they shall enquire of the damned, and say to them, Who
did cast you into hell? They shall answer, We d^d not pray to God at the time
appointed; we gave not to the poor to eat; we believed there was neither
Resurrection, nor Judgment, until death surprised us; the prayers of them that
pray for them, shall be in vain. Wherefore is it that unbelievers depart from
the Law of God? They are like to the wild Ass, which flies as far as he can,
when he sees the Lion approach him; every one of them would particularly see a
book to instruct them, and apprehends not the day of Judgment: Certainly the
Alcoran teaches them the Law of God, that read it: none shall understand it,
but he that shall be pleasing to God, who shall have his fear before his eyes,
and shall implore pardon of his sins of his divine Majesty.

CHAP. LXXV. The Chapter of the Resurrection, containing forty Verses, written
at Mecca.
IN the name of God gracious and merciful. I swear that it is most true, That
men shall rise again. I swear that the wicked shall render an account of their
actions: think they that I cannot recollect their bones? I will recollect all
of them after they shall be corrupted; I am able to recollect their fingers, as
they had them in their youth. Certainly man is prone to blaspheme, before the
coming of the day of Judgment, and enquireth when that day will be. When his
sight shall be troubled, and the Sun and Moon gathered together, then shall he
say, Whither shall I fly? It shall be said to him, Thou shall have none other
refuge but in God: he shall be surprised, and all his offenses shall be
commemorated to him, and he shall witness against himself: Speak not then in a
word, if he will excuse himself, be not thou impatient; I know all that is in
his heart, I know what thou have taught him: I did read with him, that read to
thee the Alcoran, and made thee to understand it: Man presses himself to go to
his dishonor, and considers not his end, he shall raise the head, with a
countenance content to see God, but at the same instant shall have the face
covered with affliction, and shall know, that he is in the height of all
miseries; His soul shall be conducted toward God, when it shall be separate
from his body; if it renounce the Law of God, it shall go toward the damned,
toward them that extend their arms through despair. It shall be said to him,
God alone, whom thou would not obey, was thy Lord and Protector. Does man
think to be forsaken, and that no account shall be required of his actions? Was
not he created through our special Grace, of mire, and of congealed Blood? Did
we not create him Male and Female? He that has done this, cannot he revive the
dead?

CHAP. LXXVI. The Chapter of Man, containing Thirty Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Man continued a while, without
having in him any thing memorable; we created his Posterity of his Seed,
mingled with that of the Woman: we gave him sight and hearing, and taught him
the way of Salvation, Some have embraced the Faith, and others have been
Infidels; we have prepared for them Chains, and Bonds, to drag them into the
Fire of Hell. The just shall drink of Wine, that shall issue out of a fair
Fountain; all the servants of God shall drink [thereof] and shall See Exteri.
cause it to flow, as shall seem good to them. God will deliver from the pains
of Hell, such as shall satisfy their Vows, as shall apprehend the Day of
Judgment, as shall give alms to the Poor, to Orphans, and Prisoners, without
hope of thanks, or recompense, but only for the love of his Divine Majesty,
because of the fear they have of the torments of the day, grievous and irksom
to behold. God shall rejoice, and reward them for their good works, he shall
open to them the gate of Paradise; they shall be clothed with silk, reposed on
stately Beds, and shall not be troubled either with the heat of the Sun, or the
cold of the Moon; they shall be under the shadow of the Trees of Paradise,
there shall they gather fruits, as they stand, sit, and lie down; Vessels of
Silver shall be brought about them, and round Cups full of a delicious drink,
as much as they shall desire, mingled with Ginger, that shall issue out of a
clear Fountain, and shall be encompassed with young Pages to serve them, who
shall resemble polished Pearls; when thou shall behold them, thou shall see a
grace that cannot be expressed; they shall be clothed with Purple, and Green
shining silk, and shall have Bracelets of Silver; God shall give them a Drink,
clear and most pure; these delights shall be the reward of their perseverance.
We have sent thee the Alcoran to instruct the People; attend the Judgment of
thy Lord against them that scoff, and obey not, the wicked; Remember thou the
Name of God, Morning and Evening, worship him by Night, praise him a long time;
the Infidels affect the World, and think not on their end, neither the Day of
Judgment; we created them, we have given them strength to walk, and if it be
our pleasure, we will establish other Persons in their place. He that shall
desire to follow the Law of God, shall follow it; but none shall follow it, if
it please his Divine Majesty; he knows all, and is most wise, he gives his
grace to whom he pleases, and has prepared grievous torments for the unjust.

CHAP. LXXVII. The Chapter of them that are Sent, containing Fifty Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the Angels that followed
[each other] ^hick as the hair of the foretop of Horses, when God sends them
to execute his commands; by ^he Angels which he sends to punish them whom he
will destroy; by the Winds which he ^endeth, to make the Rain to fall where he
lists; ^y the Alcoran, that distinguishes good from evil; and by the Angels
that inspire into men the ^ear of the pains of Hell, and implore pardon ^f his
Divine Majesty, that the punishment promised to the wicked, is infallible. Then
shall ^ot the Stars appear any more; the Heaven shall ^pen, the Mountains shall
walk, the Prophets and Apostles of God shall assemble, to bear ^estimony
against them that have despised their ^nstructions; the good, and the wicked,
and be^ievers and unbelievers shall be separated. I will ^ot tell thee when
this day shall be, it shall be unhappy for the wicked. Have not I heretofore
destroyed the impious with their Blasphemies? Have not they left a Posterity,
wicked as they, whom I likewise have destroyed? Thus will I ^ereafter destroy
the Infidels, and misery shall be upon them eternally: Have we not created you
of weak Seed; retained in the womb of your Mothers, until the time appointed?
This is a grace that we have conferred on you: Misery shall be upon the
Infidels at the day of Judgment. Have we not created the Earth, to assemble the
Living and the Dead? Have we not raised the Mountains? Have we not given you
fresh Water to drink? Misery shall be upon the wicked at the Day of Judgment;
it shall be said unto them, Go into the Fire of Hell, which ye would not
believe; go into the Smoke, divided into three parts, nothing shall free you
from the heat thereof, and flight shall not deliver you from that Fire* it
shall cast forth black flames, that shall rise higher than the highest
buildings of the Earth, and like to large Coverlets of Beds, extremely black.
The Day of Judgment shall be unhappy to Infidels: It shall be said to them,
Behold the Day of the Separation of the good from the bad exercise your
slights, if ye can, to deliver you from the pains of Hell; the Day of Judgment
shall be unhappy to Infidels. The good, who shall have had the fear of God
before their eyes, shall be under the shadow of the Trees of Paradise, nigh to
delicious Fountains, with all sort of fruits, that they shall desire. It shall
be said to them, Eat, and drink at your pleasure, in reward of your good works;
thus are the Righteous rewarded. The Day of Judgment shall be unhappy for
Infidels. Oh ye Infidels! live in the World, ye shall be there suffered some
time; ye are wicked, but ye shall be miserable at the Day of Judgment. The
wicked deride them that exhort them to pray to God, they shall be miserable at
the Day of Judgment. In what will they believe, if they believe not in the
Alcoran?

CHAP. LXXVIII. The Chapter of News, containing Forty Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. What do the wicked enquire of each
other, touching the great news, of which they are in different Opinion? They
shall learn it, they shall learn it. Have not I created, and extended the
Earth? Have not I raised the Mountains to establish it? Have not we created
you, Male and Female? Have not we created Sleep, and the Night for repose, and
the Day of Labor? Have we not built over you Seven heavens, and the Sun full
of light? Have we not caused Rain to descend from the Clouds, to cause the
Earth to produce its Plants, and Gardens of diverse fashions? The day of
Judgment shall be a day of Joy, and Sorrow. When the Angel shall sound the
Trumpet, all the World shall come in Troops to Universal Judgment; Heaven shall
open its Gates, the Mountains shall walk, and Hell is the place prepared for
the seduced, there shall they remain eternally. They shall find there no rest,
neither drink, but of boiling, and most stinking Water, a reward conformed to
their works; the Infidels believe not that they must render an account of their
actions, and blaspheme, but we keep account, and write exactly what they do. It
will be said to them at the Day of Judgment, Taste this day the punishment that
ye have merited, your pains shall be augmented, and pains upon pains. They who
shall have had the fear of God before their eyes, shall be in a place of
felicity, in the Gardens of a most fertile Land, enriched with Grapes, and
Pomegranats; they shall drink in Cups full of a delicious Liquor, and shall
hear no vain speeches, nor lying; such is the recompense of them that obey the
Commandments of God; He is Lord of the Heavens and Earth, none shall dare to
speak when the Spirits and Angels shall be assembled before him, none shall be
able to speak or pray for another, without his permission. This day shall be
the day of truth; they that shall be acceptable to him, shall retire toward
his Divine Majesty. We have preached unto you, that the punishment of God shall
speedily come upon you; every one shall see all that he shall have done, and
the wicked shall say at the Day of Judgment, Would to God that I had been earth
and dust.

CHAP. LXXXIX. The Chapter of Them that take away, containing Forty six Verses,
written at Mecca.
IN the name of God gracious and merciful. I swear Gelaldin entituleth this,
The Chapter of them that draw forth the Soul.
by the Angels that take away the Souls from the Bodies of Infidels, and the
wicked; by the Angels that accompany the Souls of Believers; by the Angels that
exalt the glory of God: By the Angels that guide the Souls of the Righteous,
when they go into Paradise; and by the Angels that are appointed for the
affairs of the World, That all People shall rise again at the Day of Judgment;
that Day the Earth shall tremble, and the hearts of men shall tremble at the
first time that the Trumpet shall sound; at the second, their sight shall be
troubled with fear, and they shall say, Behold! we, we are returned upon Earth,
to the place whence we departed; our bones were rotten, and our return to the
World shall bring upon us only misery; this second sound of the Trumpet is a
sign of the wrath of God; then shall they be out of their Sepulchers, revived
upon the Earth. Have thou learned the History of Moses, and how God his Lord
called him in the Holy Valley, called Toi, and how he said, Go toward Pharaoh,
he is seduced from the right way, and is in a great error; say unto him, I
called thee to the way of Salvation, I will purify and guide thee into the way
of the Law of God, to the end thou may have his fear before thine eyes. Moses
made Pharaoh to see one of his great Miracles, nevertheless he contemned Moses,
disobeyed him, and departed from the right way; he caused his People to
assemble, and made Proclamation, that he was their God, but God rigorously
chastised him, because of his Blasphemies; this is an example of his
Omnipotency to them that are Righteous. Oh ye wicked! were ye more difficult to
create than Heaven? God has raised the roof thereof, and proportioned it; he
has made the Night obscure, and the day full of splendour; he has stretched
forth the Earth, has made Fountains to spring forth, to water the Plants, and
to give drink to Beasts; he has elevated and established the Mountains for
you, and for your Flocks. Men shall call to mind the good and the evil that
they have done, at the second sound of the Trumpet, and Hell shall appear open
before their eyes. The wicked, that have followed their own appetites on Earth,
shall be precipitated into Hell, and such as have had the fear of God before
their eyes, and have subdued their passions in this World, shall go into
Paradise. The wicked will ask of thee, when the Day of Judgment shall be? None
knows it but thy lord: Thou art not sent but to preach the pains of Hell to
them that fear that day, as if they saw it present before their eyes; they
shall imagine that they have not remained in the Tomb but from Evening until
Morning, when they rise again.

CHAP. LXXX. The Chapter of the Blind, containing Forty two Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. The Prophet frowned, had a surly
countenance, and withdrew himself when the blind came toward him. He will not
tell thee, if he will believe in God, and if he will profess thy preaching;
depart thou from him that shall depart from the Law of God, thou art obliged
only to preach to him, and not to make him to believe; but forsake not them
that shall come to see thee to be instructed, and shall fear God. The Alcoran
is sent for the instruction of men; it was copied upon the Book that is kept in
Heaven, to which Honor and praise is due eternally. Wherefore is man impious?
(...) because he is created of a little Water, reta^d in t^ womb of his Mother,
until the tim^ (...) And because he found the way to come forth? Is it for that
God caused him to dye, and to revive when it seems good to him? He performs
not what God commands, neither considers the good things that nourish him:
We have sent rain, we opened the treasures of the earth, we have made all sorts
of grain to spring forth; Blites, Olives, Dates, Gardens, and fields full of
Fruits, and herbs to nourish you, and your flocks. When the Angel shall sound
the Trumpet the second time, Man shall fly his brother, his mother, wife, and
children; every one shall take thought for himself; that day shall the wicked
have countenances covered with affliction; the countenance of the good shall be
joyful, and such as have sought the way between faith and impiety, shall have
their countenance covered with earth, and dust.

CHAP. LXXXI. The Chapter of Roundness, containing Twenty nine Verses, written
at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. When the Roundness of the Sun shall
appear, the Stars fall, the Mountains walk, the Camel be without burden, and
without keeper; when (...) beast shall be gathered together, the Sea (...) with
fire, Souls return into Bodies, the ^
^ter demand why they put her to death* (...) the book of good and evil shall
open, when ^ven shall cast off its ornaments, the fire of (...) appear, and
Paradise be opened; then shall (...) know the good and the evil that they have
^mitted. I swear by the Planets, by the (...) of night, and by the brightness
of day, that the words of the Alcoran are the words of the Prophet, beloved of
God, powerful with his divine Majesty; ye ought to obey him, he is a faithful
observer of what is commanded him, he is not possessed of the Devil, as ye have
imagined, he has seen the Angel clearly, and without riddle, and is not
perplexed for what is to come; the words of the Alcoran are not the words of
the Devil; on whatsoever side ye turn you, it is only for the instruction of
men, and such among you, as will follow the right way, but ye shall have no
inclination to follow it, if it please God, the Lord of the Universe.

CHAP. LXXXII. The Chapter of the opening of Heaven, containing seventeen
Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. The souls shall know the good and
the evil that they have done, when the heavens shall open, the stars fall, the
seas be gathered together, and the sepulchers be opened. O man, what makes
thee so proud, as to rise against God, who has created thee, who has formed
and proportioned thee after what manner he pleased? O ye wicked! ye will not
believe the day of Judgment: there are Angels that observe your actions, and
are obedient to God. The just shall go into Paradise, and the unjust be
precipitated into the fire of hell, whence they shall never return. I will not
tell when the day of Judgment shall be; that day none shall be able to succor
his neighbor, and God alone shall command.

CHAP. LXXXIII. The Chapter of Them that weigh with false weights, containing
Thirty six Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. They that weigh with false weights,
and measure with false measures, believe not to rise again, at the day when all
the World shall appear before God to be judged: Certainly the book wherein the
sins of the wicked are written, is kept in hell. Misery shall be upon Infidels
at the day of Judgment; none doubts the coming of this day but the wicked:
when they hear the Commandments of God preached, they say, that it is but an
old fable, impiety retains them in this error, and induces them to abandon
the Law of his divine Majesty, but they shall be cast headlong into the flames
of hell. It shall be said unto them, Behold the punishment which ye would not
believe. The book wherein the good works of the righteous are written, is
reserved in heaven; the Angels are witnesses, how the just shall enjoy the
delights of Paradise, they shall see the immense graces of God, reposed on
delicious beds, their countenance shall be covered with joy and content; they
shall drink of purified wine, most savory, that shall have the odor of Musk,
preserved in bottles that none but themselves shall open, and it shall be mixed
with the water of the fountain of Paradise, where the Cherubins do drink. The
Infidels deride the true believers that would instruct them, nevertheless when
they return to their companions, they admire their doctrine, and say, when they
see them, behold the seduced, but they are not sent to be their tutors. The
Infidels that shall be converted, and believe in the day of Judgment, shall go
into Paradise, they shall enjoy the grace of God, they shall behold the
grievous torments of the damned, that shall be punished after their demerits,
and shall find in the other world what they have done on earth.

CHAP. LXXXIV. The Chapter of the Cleft, containing Twenty five Verses, written
at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. The day of Judgment shall appear,
when the heaven shall cleave asunder, and the earth cast men out of their
sepulchers by the commandment of God. O man! thou go daily toward death,
and shall find in the end the good and evil that thou shall have done: he to
whom shall be given the book of account of his actions in the right hand, shall
be blessed, he shall go with his companions into Paradise, where he shall enjoy
eternal felicity: He to whom shall be given the account of his actions in the
left hand, shall be damned, he shall be cast headlong into the fire of hell,
because of the unlawful pleasures that he has taken in the world, and for that
he believed not in the Resurrection: God beholds all that he does, and
keeps account. I swear by the redness that appears in the Air when the Sun
sets, by the obscurity of the night, and the brightness of the Moon, That
you all shall change being and posture, and shall revive after your death.
Wherefore is it that the wicked believe not in God? why do they not humble
themselves when they hear the Alcoran read? They blaspheme against God, but he
knows all their actions; declare to them that they shall be chastised, and that
such as believe in his Unity and do good works, shall receive an infinite
reward.

CHAP. LXXXV. The Chapter of Signs Celestial, containing twenty Verses, written
at Mecca.
Many Mohammedan Doctors entitle this, The Chapter of Castles.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. It swear by heaven, adorned with
signs, and by the day of Judgment, by the Angels and men, that they who have
made pits filled with fire to burn the true believers, shall be witness of
their own malice, and shall avou^ that the fire burned themselves, to make them
know the unity of God, and the truth of his Law. God is Omnipotent, and always
victorious, he is the King of the heavens and earth, he beholds all. They
that torment true believers, and shall not repent, shall be damned, they shall
burn eternally in the fire of hell; and such as shall believe in God, and do
good works; shall dwell in pleasant gardens, wherein flow many rivers, where
they shall for ever enjoy supreme felicity. The wrath of God is strong, he
makes his creatures to die, and rise again when he pleases; he is merciful
toward them that repent of their sins, and loves them that serve him. He has
created his throne, to which praise is due eternally; he raises up whom he
lists; and nothing is to him impossible. Have thou heard the History of the
people of Pharaoh and Temod? God shall chastise in like manner them that shall
not believe in his Law, he knows them all. Certainly the precious Alcoran is
written in the book that is reserved in heaven.

CHAP. LXXXVI. The Chapter of the Star, or of the North Star, containing
seventeen Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by Heaven, and the Star
that teaches men the way. I will not tell thee by what star; by the star full
of brightness; that every person has a guardian (which observes the good and
the evil that it acts;) Does not man consider of what he is created? he is
made of a little sprinkled water that issues out of the body of man and woman?
God shall make him to rise again at the day of Judgment, and none shall be able
to protect or defend him from the wrath of his divine Majesty. I swear by
heaven that returns the rain, by the earth that opens it self, and
receives it, to produce its fruits, that the Alcoran distinguishes good from
evil, and that it was not sent in vain. The unbelievers conspire against the
Prophet, but God shall turn their conspiracy against them, and they shall not
know it. Be thou patient, and awhile endure the Infidels.

CHAP. LXXXVII. The Chapter of the High and Mighty, containing seventeen
Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Exalt the name of thy Lord, high
and mighty; who has proportioned all that he has created; he ordains what
he lists, and guides into the right way them that are pleasing to him; he
causes herbs to spring out of the earth, creates them green, renders them
dry, and alters them as to him seems good. I will read to thee the Alcoran;
forget nothing of what thou shall read, but that which God shall will thee to
forget; he knows whatsoever is kept secret in the world, and whatsoever is
made manifest. I will instruct thee in his Law; preach the Alcoran, it shall be
profitable to him that shall have the fear of God before his eyes: such as
shall despise it, shall be miserable, they shall be precipitated into the fire
of hell, where they shall not be able, either to live, or die; and he that
shall embrace the Law of God, and shall be mindful of his name, shall be
blessed. Pray to God at the time appointed. Certainly the righteous shall be
heirs of the good things of the earth, and those of heaven that are exceeding
great, and eternal* this is written in the ancient books of Abraham and Moses.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. The Chapter of the Covering, containing twenty six verses,
written at Mecca.
Gelaldin intituleth this, The Chapter of Judgment, because that day the damned
shall be covered with fire and fear. See Exteri.

IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Have thou heard mention of the
covering? That day shall the countenance of the wicked be covered with
affliction, they shall enter into fire that is extremely hot; they shall drink
of boiling water, they shall eat nothing but briars and thorns; they shall be
extremely lean, and famine shall not deliver them from an infinite number of
other miseries. That day shall the good be filled with content, they shall be
recompensed or their labors; in Paradise they shall hear nothing spoken that
may displease them; they shall see fountains flow, lying upon high beds, they
shall drink in fair glasses, fixed on diamonds, upon pillows well disposed, and
upon pallets well adorned; will not the wicked consider the Miracle of the
she-Camel? How it was created? How Heaven was elevated? How the Mountains were
disposed, how the Earth was extended? Preach to the wicked the pains of Hell,
thou art sent to preach to them, and not to constrain them. God will chastise
with his great chastisement him that shall abandon his Law, and traduce the
Alcoran; all men shall be one day assembled before his Divine Majesty, to give
account of their actions.

CHAP. LXXXIX. The Chapter of the Morning, containing Thirty Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. I See Kitab el tenoir. Ye shall
there see the exposition of this passage.
swear by the Morning, by the tenth Night of the Month, by even and odd, and by
the coming of Night, That the wicked shall be chastised. Is there any thing in
consideration of this Oath, that can move men to fly uncleanness? Considerest
thou not how God entreated Aad the Son of Arem, that dwelt in Pavillions
supported by Columns so big, that there were none like to them in his Country?
Know thou not how he used Temod, who hewed Stones and Rocks to inhabit the
Valley? Know thou not how he entreated Pharaoh, who pierced with Pins the
feet and hands of such as he gave up to punishment? Know thou not how he
entreats them that heretofore erred from the right way in their own
Countries, and that increased their pollution? He poured upon them diverse
torments; he observes all that men do; he gives store of goods to them that
he does not try, and takes them away from such as he proves. The wicked will
not give Honor to Orphans, they will not abstain from eating the Bread of the
Poor; they shall give an account, they too much affect riches; when the. Earth
shall tremble, and shall over throw all the buildings, when the Angels shall
descend in order, by the command of thy Lord, then shall Hell be open to the
wicked, they shall call to mind what was preached to them in the World, and
say, Why did not I observe the Commandments of God during my life? They shall
be punished more than ever any has been, and shall be more straightly bound than
ever any has been bound. It shall be said to the blessed, O thou Soul! that
have observed with courage, and without fear the Commandments of God, return to
thy Lord with content, enter into the Society of the blessed, enter into
Paradise.

CHAP. XC. The Chapter of the City, containing Twenty Verses, written at Mecca.
Many have entitled this, The Chapter of Night.

IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Mecca.
I swear by that City which is permitted thee to conquer; I swear by the Father
and the Child, that we created man in misery; thinks he that there is none
stronger than he? He says, That he has expended great wealth; does he think
that none He decliams against Corets. See Gelaldin.
has seen what he has done? Have we not given him two eyes, a tongue, two
lips? Have we not given him to see the way of good and of evil? He shall be
severely chastised, but I will not tell thee with what kind of chastisement.
Wherefore does he not deliver Slaves? Wherefore does he not give to eat to them
that are hungry, to Orphans, and his Kindred that are in necessity, and to the
poor? Patience and Charity are recommended among True believers, they shall be
seated at the right hand; and such as impugn the Mysteries of our Law, shall be
at the left hand, they shall be shut up in the Fire of Hell.

CHAP. XCI. The Chapter of the Sun, containging Fifteen Verses, writteen at
Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the Sun and his light,
by the Moon and her splendor, by the Fire and its elevation, by the Night and
its obscurity, by Heaven and the Stars thereof, by the Earth, and its plains,
by the creation of the Soul, by the knowledge of Virtue and Vice, That he that
shall be purified from his sins, shall be most happy, and that he who defiles
himself with Vice, shall be most miserable. The People of Temod traduced their
Prophet, because of their obstinacy; but certainly they were chastised. The
Apostle and Prophet of God said unto them, Behold the Camel of God, suffer it
to drink; they derided him, and slew that Camel. God severely punished them, he
spared not his chastisement against them.

CHAP. XCII. The Chapter of Night, containing Twenty Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the obscurity of Night,
by the brightness of Day, by the creation of man and woman, That your actions
are very different. He that shall yield to God the obedience that is due to
him, and believes in his Unity, shall go into Paradise; and whosoever shall
not praise his Divine Majesty, and will not be converted, shall go into hell,
his riches shall not save him, and he shall be cast headlong into eternal
flames. It is we that guide the people, we dispose the beginning and end of
every thing; I preach to you the torments of hell, none shall enter there, but
the wretches that have blasphemed, and departed far from the way of salvation*
he that has the fear of God before his eyes, and gives alms, shall be
delivered from the fire of hell, every one shall be recompensed for what he
has done for the love of God; he shall be satisfied and contented.

CHAP. XCIII. The Chapter of the Sun rising, containing ten Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. I Mahomet complains to the Angel
Gabriel, because he so long had refrained to visit him.
swear by the brightness of the rising of the Sun, and by the darkness of
Night, That thy Lord has not forsaken thee. He does not hate thee, his delay
shall be to thee advantage, and in the end thou shall be content; Did he not
well lodge thee, when thou were an Orphan? Did he not well guide thee, when
thou were seduced? Did not he enrich thee, when thou were poor? Do no injury to
Orphans, devour not the poor, and recount the graces that God has conferred on
thee.

CHAP. XCIV. The Chapter of Joy, containing Eight Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Have not I rejoiced thine heart?
have not we delivered thee from the burden that was heavy on thy shoulders? we
have raised thy name and reputation, affliction is followed of content; when
thou shall have finished thy prayers, labor, and love thy Lord.

CHAP. XCV. The Chapter of the Fig, containing eight Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful* I swear by the Figs and Olives, by
Mount Sinai, and by the safety and freedom that is in this City [of Mecca] that
we created man with proportion, afterward we rendered him contemptible, except
the true believers that do good works; they shall receive an infinite reward.
After this, (O wicked man) what makes thee to blaspheme against the Faith? is
not God the Judge of Judges*

CHAP. XCVI. The Chapter of Blood congealed, containing seventeen Verses,
written at Mecca.
Bedaoi and Gelaldin call this, The Chapter of Reading

IN the name of God, gracious and mercifu^ Read the Alcoran, and begin through
the name of God, who created all, who made man of a little congealed blood.
Read the Alcoran and exalt the glory of thy Lord, who has instructed man in
the Scriptures, who taught him wha^ he knew not; nevertheless, he is in a great
error^ he will not consider that he shall return before God. Have thou
considered him that would have hindered one of the servants of God to make his
prayers? have thou understood if he were in the way of salvation? have thou
seen if he blasphemed? if he has abandoned the faith? knows he not that God
forsakes him? If he desist not, h^ shall be dragged by the hair into the fire
of hell with the wicked; he shall quit the place where they assemble, to
dispute against the faith, and the devils shall cast cast them headlong into
flames eternal. Disobey not the commandments of God* persevere in thy prayers,
worship God always obedience to his commandments shall draw the^ near to his
divine Majesty.

CHAP. XCVII. The Chapter of Glory or Power, containing five Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the name of God gracious and merciful. We sent the Alcoran in the night of
Glory and Power. I have not taught thee the graces of this night of glory and
virtue; The prayers and good works that are done that night, have more of merit
and efficacy, than those that have been performed in a thousand months. The
Angels descended that night to the earth, thorough the permission of their
Lord, and salute the true believers until the dawning of the day.

CHAP. XCVIII. The Chapter of Instruction, containing eight Verses, written at
Medina.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. They that understand the Scripture,
and believe in many gods, will not relinquish their idolatry* until they have
heard the instruction of the Prophet of God; he shall read unto them a book
clean and pure, wherein are written the precepts of the right way. They that
know the Scripture, are not divided, until they have learned this instruction.
It commands to worship one only God, to make their prayers at the time
appointed, and to pay tithes; this is the right way. The unbelievers that know
the Scriptures, and adore many Gods, shall remain eternally in the fire of
hell, and shall be most miserable. They that believe in one God, and perform
good works, shall be most happy, they shall be recompensed of their Lord in the
garden of Eden, wherein flow many rivers, where they shall dwell eternally. God
shall be satisfied with their obedience, and shall give them his blessing,
prepared for them that fear him.

CHAP. XCIX. The Chapter of the Earthquake, containing eight Verses, written at
Medina.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. when the earth shall tremble, and
shall cast bodies out of their sepulchers, man shall demand what it will do;
they shall tell him news, to wit, that God has commanded it to do so. That day
shall men come out of sepulchers from diverse places, and shall see the good and
the evil that they have done; he that has committed evil, of the weight of an
atome, shall be chastised; and he that shall have done good, of the weight of
an atome, shall be rewarded.

CHAP. C. The Chapter of Horses, containing eleven Verses, written at Mecca and
Medina.
Some Arabians have called this, The Chapter (...) Return, or of them that
return.

IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. I swear by the Horses, and the
noise that they make with their feet, when they return to war, and by the fire
which they make to arise, when they strike their feet against stones, that run
lightly through jealousy, and raise the dust in the midst of enemies, That man
is ungrateful for the graces of his Lord, he himself is witness of his
ingratitude, and too much affects the riches of the Earth; knows he not
that God will make all the world to revive? that he wlll bring to light
whatsoever is most secret in the hearts of men, and that he knows all that
they have done?

CHAP. CI. The Chapter of Affliction, containing eleven Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the Name of God gracious and merciful. When the extreme affliction shall
appear, I will not tell thee in what time this shall be, then shall all men be
assembled, stretched out like Quilts, and the mountains shall be like carded
wool. Such whose balance shall be weighty with good works, shall go into
Paradise; and they whose balance shall be light of good works, shall go into
hell, they shall go into a fire so hot, that I am not able to express the heat.

CHAP. CII. The Chapter of Abundance, containing eight Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Certainly all your care, even to
the grave, is in the abundance of your wealth; but ye shall hereafter learn, ye
shall hereafter learn the truth; If ye had knowledge, ye would meditate on the
torments of hell; you shall see one day, that they are indubitable, then shall
ye ask where is Paradise?

CHAP. CIII. The Chapter of the Evening.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. It is an hour appointed to the
Mahometans to pray.
I swear by the hour of the Evening, That men are inclined to their
destruction, except such as believe in God, that do good works, and have in
esteem truth and perseverance.

CHAP. CIV. The Chapter of Persecution, containing seven Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Misery is upon him that persecuteth
his Neighbor; Persecution has its Counter-Persecution. He that heapeth up
treasures, and is busied to count them, thinks they will make him immortal,
but they shall precipitate him into his misery; I will not tell thee into what
misery, but the fire of hell is always kindled to burn the heart of the wicked;
they shall be overwhelmed in flames, and bound to great pillars.

CHAP. CV. The Chapter of Elephants, containing five Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the name of God, gracious and merciful. Considerest thou not how thy Lord
entreated them that came mounted upon Elephants, to ruin the Temple of Mecca?
Was not their Conspiracy their own destructiom? God sent against them flying
Troops, that threw upon them Stones, whereon were imprinted their names; he
made them like to Corn sown in Fields, devoured by Beasts.

CHAP. CVI. The Chapter of Coreis, containing four Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Coreis had no humanity for them;
the People come every Winter, and every Summer, to worship the God of the
Temple of Mecca, which nourishes and delivers them from famine and fear.

CHAP. CVII. The Chapter of the Law, containing seven Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Saw thou him that blasphemed
against the Law? He it is that devoureth the substance of Orphans, and the
bread of the Poor: Misery is upon them that are not attentive to their Prayers,
that are Hypocrites, and hinder men to do well.

CHAP. CVIII. The Chapter of Affluence, containing three Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. We have given thee a great
Affluence of our Graces. Pray to thy Lord, lift up thine hands; he that hates
thee, shall be accursed.

CHAP. CIX. The Chapter of Infidels, containing six Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Oh Infidels, Idolaters! I worship
not what ye worship, and ye worship not what I worship; I will not worship that
which ye worship, and ye will not worship that which I worship; you observe
your Law, and I mine.

CHAP. CX. The Chapter of Protection, containing four Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. A great number of People embrace
the Law of God, when he protecteth the true Believers, and gives them victory.
Exalt his Glory, and implore pardon of him, he is most merciful.

CHAP. CXI. The Chapter of the Cord of Palm, containing eleven Verses, written
at Mecca.
Galaldin entituleth this, The Chapter of Loss.

IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. The Wife of Ablheb did cast stones
in Mahomets way, in contempt. See Bedaoi.
Ablheb lost his hand; God chastised him, his Riches shall not save him, he
shall burn in eternal Flames, with his Wife that carries Wood upon her Neck,
bound with a Cord of Palm.

CHAP. CXII. The Chapter of Salvation, containing four Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Say unto unbelievers, God is
eternal, he neither begets, nor is begotten, and has no companion*

CHAP. CXIII. The Chapter of Separation, containing five Verses, written at
Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Say unto them, God, who has
separated light from darkness, shall defend me from all the evils that he has
created, from danger, darkness, from them that blow against the knot of the
string, from Sorcerers, and the Envious.

CHAP. CXIV. The Chapter of the People, containing six Verses, written at Mecca.
IN the Name of God, gracious and merciful. Say unto them, I will beware of the
temptations of the Devil, and the malice of the people, through the assistance
of the Lord, and King of the people.

FINIS.

