That neither TEMPORALLITIE^ Nor TITHES Is due to the Bishops, Prelates nor
Clergy, by a Gospel Rule.

AND That Kings, Princes and Lords Temporal, may j^^^ly take the Temporallities
and Tithes from them, and dispose of the^ the defense and benefit of the
Kingdom, and the relief of the Poor.

PROVED By the Laws and practice of twenty Kings of Judah, England, and France
as also by the testimonies of the Universities of Oxford and Prague, fifty four
o^ Nobles of Bohemia and Morania, two hundred and fifty years agone, and al^
one hundred and twenty Authors beside.

Together with some directions how Gospel Ministers ought to have maintenance,
according to the Gospel rule, and institutions of Jesus Christ.

By E. K.

Thou O King art a King of Kings, for the God of Heaven has given thee a Kin^
of Power and Strength, and glory and wheresoever the Children of Men dwell, the
(...) the Field, and the Fowls of the Heaven has he given into thine hand, and
has man ruler over them all, Dan. 2.37, 38. And of the Children of Issachar
which were Men that had understanding of the tim^ know what Israel ought to do,
the heads of them were two hundred, and all their bre^ were at their command, 1 Chronicles. 12.32. Arise therefore and be doing and the Lord be with thee, and David
commanded a^ Princes to help the King, 1. Chron. 22.16, 17. Arise for this
matter belongs unto thee, we also will be with thee, be of good c^ and do it,
Ezra, 10.4. Printed in the Year 1672.

(...) mentioned in this book, with their practices and examples as follows.
^olomon ^osiash Hezekiah Ahaz Edmond Edgar ^nry 2. ^ward 3. ^lliam ^nry 4.
^chard 2. ^nry 8. ^lus Magnus ^arles 6. ^lip ^mp. Lodovicu ^chadnezzar ^ation
^nius. ^0 Kings ^estimony of the ^versities of Ox^ and Prague. ^estimony of 54
^he Nobles of ^mia and Moravia ^stin 1 ^alamus 2 ^rose 3 ^m 4 ^ard 5 ^bius 6
^re 7 ^ughton 8 ^osthead 9 (...) Gregory 10 ^pplication to K. ^ry 8. 11 (...)
Prophecy of ^degard. 12 (...) Leo 13 (...) Canterbury 14 (...) Fox. 15 Sr.
Will. Negar^to 16 Lord Peter de Cugmeriis. 17 Prosper 18 Latemir 19 Eneus
Silvius 20 Julian Palmer 21 The Protestant Church at Paris. 22 Anne. du. Burg.
23 Loys. du. Faur. 24 Origin 25 Mr. Frith 26 Paulinus 27 James his Deacon 28
Ammonius 29 B. Adaccus 30 Mr. Elmer 31 Erasmus 32 Jasper Bruschio 33 Clemant 34
Jo. Segovius 35 Card. Aralatenses 36 B. of Burgen 37 Chrysostom 38 Polecronecon
39 Patriark of Alexandria 40 Austin Monk 41 Cutbard B. of Canterbury. 42 Petrus
Blesenses 43 Angelo Caraw. 44 Rich. B. of Cant. 45 Simon Fish. 46 Pope Innocent
47 The testimony of 21 Bish. 8 arch Deac. 17. Doc. of Cannon and civil Law. 48
Richard Armacanus 49 Cyprean 50 John Hus. 51 Mr. Tindal 52 Henry Stubbridg 53
Will. Prynne 54 Godfr. Goodman 55 Jo. Salsbury 56 Ex. Catal. Illyr 57 Alixander
Sabritius 58 The counterfeit of Lucefers Letter to the Prelate. 59 Lord Cobham
60 Will. Ocham 61 Armulphus 62 Hostenensis 63 Rich. Wimbleton 64 Will. Swinderby
65 Anselm 66 A Cannon of Africa. 67 Suetonius 68 Melancton 69 Ste. Gardner 70
Rich. Feverus 71 Rich. Lovingham 72 Huldrick 73 Mr. Rogers 74 Panormetanus 75
Walter Mill 76 Doc. Molius 77 Jo. C^^ydon 78 Rich. Turming 79 Selestudiensis 80
Ilyrico 81 Reynold Pecock Bish. 82 Io. Brothwick 83 The Tigurins at Zurick 84
Cornelius Bish. of Rome. 85 St. Lawrence 86 Will. Thorpe 87 Walter Brute 88
Mersilius 89 Nichol Herford 90 Phil. Ripingdon 91 John Ashton 92 Pope Alexander
and 310 Bishops. 93 Doctor Hall 94 Georg. Cassander 95 John VVicklife 96 The
Image of Abish 97 Roderick Mo^ch 98 Martin Bucer 99 John Hooper 100 Th.
VValsingam 101 A nameless Aut. 102 Clement next succ^ssor of St. Peter 103 Mr.
Mead 104 Volusianus 105 Dr. whitchcote 106 The 20 and 21 Articles of Church of
England. 107 Norfolk, and Suffolk men's supplications. 108 Bish. Nilus 109 John
Gerson 110 Bartil 111 Henenius Modesteinus. 112 Mr. Hooker 113 Dr. Downam 114
Bilson 115 Saravia 116 Holinshead 117 Arch Bishop of St. Andrews 118 Bish. of
Duncel 119 Bish of Orkneys 120 Mr. Perkins 121
The Epistle Dedicatory TO THE KINGS Most excellent MAJESTY.
May it please your Majesty.
Augu^
ST. Augustine in an Epistle to Cassulamus says, that he which for fear of any
power hides the truth which (...) learned, Chrysostom
provokes the Wrath of God to come (...) and Chrysostom says, he is not only
a Traitor to the^ (...) openly for truth teaches a lie, but he also which does
(...); show forth that truth which he knows, the considerat^ (...) these
sentences so prevailed with me, that I durst not be such a Traitor neither to
God nor to your Majesty, as to conceal what I have learned, which as I conceive
may tend to the glory of God, in the exaltation of the truth of the Gospel of
Christ, and to the honor of your Majesty, and the benefit of your Majesty's
Kingdom, both in Church and Commonwealth, whereby your Majesty may be supplied
with Money for the necessary charges of the Kingdom, and the relief of the
Poor, and easing your Subjects something in their Taxations, by turning the
stream into the right Channel, by taking the temporallities from the Prelates,
etc. into your Majesty's hands again, they being your own Right, belonging
formerly to your Predecessors, and the conditions now failing for which they
were given, as will appear hereafter in this discourse God willing.

But perhaps it will be objected that it is sacrilege to take the
temporallities, etc. from the Church, I answer if it be granted to be
sacralidge to take from the Church, yet I hope upon trial, it will appear that
the Prelates are not the Church, and that the Prelates are sacralidg ous
persons, in detaining and converting the temporallities to their own private
uses, which was given to the Church, and the Poor, and other pious uses, the
Prelates being only Stewards thereof, or Overseers for the use of the Church
and the Poor, but have proved unfaithful Stewards.

Now that the Prelates are not the Church will thus appear, when the Church of
Anteoch sent Paul and Barnabas, etc. as their Messengers to the Council at
Jerusalem, the Text says Acts 15.4. When they came to Jerusalem The ^urch ^ot
the ^elates ^t the ^ngre^ ^ons of ^ievers.
they were received of the Church, that is of the Church of believers, and of
the Apostles and Elders, hence we see that the Apostles and Elders are not
called the Church, they were but particular Church members with other believ
rs, and according to th^s the nineteenth Article of the Church of England,
describes a visible Church of Christ, to be a congregation of faithful m n,
etc. also Paul admonished the Elders of Ephesus to feed the Church of God, that
is the believing Christians. Act. 20.28.

^ug stin St. Augustine says of himself and all other Prelates in the 23
question and 7. If we possess any thing privately, but that which does suffice
us, it is not ours but the goods of the Poor, whose stewards we are, except we
challenge to our selves a property by some damnable usurpation, the gl^ss upon
that part of the question says, that Prelates are but only Stewards of the
Church goods, and not Lords thereof.

^mbrose And St. Ambrose upon Luke 16.2. Give an account of thy Stewardship,
etc. hereby says he, We learn that Prelates are not Lords, but Steward or
Bailliffs of others men's substance.

^ierom. And St. Hierom in an Epistle, quest. 16. and 2. chap. Quisquid, says
whatsoever the Clergy has, it is the goods of the Poor, and writing unto
Nepolianus he says, how can they be of the Clergy, who are commanded to
contemn and despise their own substance, for to take away from a Friend it is
theft, but to deceive the Church and take away that which should be given to
the Poor, it is sacralidge.

^arnard. And St. Barnard upon these words, Simon Peter said unto Jesus, etc.
Truly said he the goods of the Church are the patrimony of the Poor, and
whatsoever thing the Ministers and Stewards thereof, not Lords or Possessors
thereof, do take unto themselves more then sufficient for a competent living,
the same is taken away from the Poor, by a sacralidgious cruelty.

^usebeus Eusebeus in his Treatise upon the pilgrimage of St. Hierom says, If
thou do possessed garment or any other thing more then extreme necessity does
require, and do not help the needy, thou art a Thief, and a Robber, wherefore
dearly beloved Children let us be Stewards of temporallities and not possessors
thereof.

And Isidor in his Treatise de summo bono. chapter 24. Let the Bishop know that he
is the Servant of the people, and not Lords over them, a^ also in the 5. book
o^ Decrae^als. extra. ^e. donationibus, sub. atho^itate Alixandrii. Tartii.
Episcopi. Paritienses, he says, We believe that it is no^ unknown unto your
Brotherhood, that a Bishop and every other Prelate, is bu^ Stewards of the
Church goods, and not Lords thereof, both Lands and Tithes says he are pure
Alms, which after the necessity of the Clergy is satisfied, no^ according to
their pride and covetousness, but in comely ^cent manner, often the example of
Christ and his Apostles, the rest b^longe^ ^o the Poor, and thos^ that withhold
it from them, they are Thieves, Robbers, (...) Sacralidgious persons, says he.

William Wroughton Thus it is manifest by what is already said, besides what is
said here after, that Kings, and Princes, and Lords Temporal, by taking the
temporallities, etc. from the Prelates, and disposing of them for the use an^
benefit of the true Church the believing m mbers of Christ, and the poor and
the benefit and safety of the Kingdom, the uses for which they were first
given, they will in so doing be so far from committing sacraledge that they
will do a work pleasing and acceptable both to God and all good men, to their
everlasting honor, by putting a stop to the pride, and wanto^ and luxurious
riotous lives of some, which is occasioned by the uperfluity of worldly wealth
and riches, which they wrongfully possess and detain from the right owners
thereof, having forsaken the right way, and followed the way of Baalim, who
loved the wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.15 By with holding good from them
to whom it is due, Pro. 3.27. and as William Wroughton writ to King Henry the
eight, so long as ye maintain Antich^ist, the Popes Knights, that is Bishops in
such inordinate riches, you shall never says he banish that monstrous beas^
the Pope out of England.

When we say that such and such Lands were given to the Church, w^ cannot
imagine that they were given to such a building of lime and stone and timber,
nor to such a parish, and so to him that should usurp authority of Rule and
Government there from age to age, whether he be good o^ bad, holy or profane,
for such are not to be accounted the Church, no^ so much as particular members
of the true Church, which is the m^st^ca^ body of Christ, except they believe,
and all that do believe truly without hypocrisy, rich and poor they are
interested in the Church Lands and Goods, all the poor in general are objects
of Charity, to do good unto all but especially to such as are of the huoshold
of Faith, Gal. 6.10.

In the time of the Law when Tithes was paid by a divine institution unto the
Levites, for their service in the Tabernacle and Temple, because ^hey had no
inheritance of temporal Land among their Brethren, yet even ^hen the strangers,
fatherless and widows, had an interest in the Tithes ^s you may see in Deuteronomy.
14.28, 29. and Chap. 26.12, 13 and since that service ceased for which tithes
were paid, there is no new institution in ^he Gospel for the payment of tithes,
and yet our Prelates and Priests as ^hey will be called, will have both
temporal Lands and tithes, and keep ^ll to themselves, neither widows nor
fatherless have any thing, and therefore it can be no sacralidge but a work of
Charity, for Kings and Princes, and Lords Temporal to take the temporallities
from them for ^he benefit of the Kingdom, and tithes also, or at least to cause
them to ^llow some part thereof unto the poor.

The with holding of tithes, etc. From such to whom they are due, as to ^he
beleiving Church, the poor, the Fatherless and widows, God calls ^t a Robbing
of him in tithes and offerings, Mal. 3.8, 9. For Christ says ^hatsoever good
or evil is done to one of the least of those little ones that be^ieve on him,
it is taken as done to himself, Mat. 25.40, and 45. yea even those of the
Clergy who are not true believers, they have no right nor ti^le from God to the
Church goods, and God will charge them as having ^he spoil of the poor in their
Houses, Isaiah 3.14.

Suppose the Prelates should plead for themselves that temporallities and
tithes have been settled upon them by many Acts of Parliament, to that it may be
answered, that no Act of Parliament on Earth can make ^oid the Law of God
inacted in Heaven, viz. That when tithes were said by a divine institution, yet
the Stranger, Fatherless and Widows, ^ad by divine appointment a right and
interest in them, how then dare ^y now receive tithes, not by divine, but by
humain institution, and yet ^ye no part thereof unto the poor, the Stranger,
Fatherless nor Widow, ^e may rationably imagine that it was because of the
hardness of the ^arts of Prelates and Priests, in keeping that to themselves
which belong^d to the poor, which caused that Noble King Carrolous Magnus to
have it ^ecreed in a counsel, that in wealthy places two parts of the Church
^ods should be given to the poor, and the third part to the Clergy, and (...)
poorer places that there should be an equal division between the poor ^d the
Clergy, and if by the covetous unsatiable desires of the Prelates ^d Clergy,
they have gotten the Church Lands and tithes settled upon them by many Acts of
Parliament, yet another Parliament, upon better information, and better
consideration, of the Kingdoms necessity and daily charge and the necessity of
the poor, and the unlawful spending of the Church goods, by them which have no
right unto them, but spend them quite contrary to the intent and meaning of the
Donors, why may not the King, Princes, and Lords temporal, take again into
their hands the Church goods which was given by their Predecessors, from them
which so sacreligiously abuse and usurp them, and employ them for the benefit
of the Church and Kingdom and the relief of the poor.

If the King commit a power into any man's hand, and find that he or they do
abuse that power, he may not only lawfully, but he ought to take that power
from them again, the whole Popish Clergy of Bishops, Prelates, Abbots, Priors,
and Monks in England, had once their privileges and temporalities settled upon
them by act of Parliament, and yet the King and Council seeing the
inconvenience thereof, by another Parliament took those privileges,
temporallities and tithes from them, and so may this or another Parliament do
by our Prelates for the benefit of the Church and Kingdom, and the relief of
the poor.

For Bishops and Prelates are useless in the Church of Christ because they are
none of those Church Officers which Christ gave to the Church at his assention,
Ephe. 5.11. he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of
the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the
unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, their is a^ed in 1
Co. 12.28. helps that is Deacons to minister to the poor, and goverments that
is ruling Elders, now ruling Elders are inferior to teaching Elders, as Paul
says, 1 Ti. 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well b^ counted worthy of double
honor, especially they who labor in the word and doctrine, they who labor in
the word and doctrine, they especially are worthy of double honor rather then
the ruling Elders, in Paul's judgment, and he had the Spirit of God to teach
him, now if Christ who is the alone Lawgiver to his Church, saw these Church
Officers sufficient for these four ends for which he ordained them, as first
for the perfecting of the the Saints. 2ly. For the work of the ministry. 3ly.
For the edifying o^ the Church, which is the body of Christ. 4ly. For the time,
till we al^ come in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God Then all other pretended Church Officers, are superfluous and useless
besides St. Paul says that he shuned not to declare unto the Church, the whole
counsel of God, and that he kept nothing back that was profitable for the
Church, but taught them publicly and from House to House; Acts. 20.20.27. And
yet in all his Epistles he has not made mention of any Lord Primot or
Metropolitant, or Prelate, or the like as any of Christ's Church officers, or of
their dignities, or jurisdictions as being profitable to the Church, but only
those Church Officers mentioned above in Ephesians. 4.11.12. and 1 Cor. 12.28.
Therefore all other are strange Creatures, which neither Christ nor Paul, nor
the Scriptures of the New Testament makes any mention off, unless those that
Paul speaks of verse 29. that after his departure grievous Wolves would enter
not sparing the Flock, yea the Papists themselves say that there is but three
sacred orders in the Church, all the rest by their own confession is of human
devising

Again as Bishops and Prelates are useless in the Church, so also they are
usurpers of the Kings royal prerogatives, in making out their prossess,
sitations, suspentions, sensors, and excommunications and the li^e in their own
names, and by making, Printing, and publishing in their own Names, New
Visitation Oaths, Articles, Injunctions, Cannons, Rites, and Ceremonies, and
enforcing them upon Ministers, Scoolmasters, Churchwardens, and others, and
have excommunicated, suspended, Silenced, fined, imprisoned, and persecuted,
his Majesty's faithful Subjects, for not submitting to their usurped power, as
though they were Kings and Governors, both of Church and State, contrary to
several Statutes and to Magna Charta and the Petition of right, as Mr. Prinne
says in his Book of the Exorbitances, Treasons, Seditions, and Conspirecies of
Bishops, etc.

Your Majesty's most humble and obedient Subject and Servant, E. K.

The General and Unanimous consent of Ancient and Modern Writers, against
Prelates and Priests, their possessing of Temporalities and Tithes.
HIstories do relate, that when Bishops began to be possessed of Temporal
Lands, then an Angel was heard to cry in the A^re, Woe, VVoe, VVoe, This day is
Poison begun to come into the Church: and so it proved, for many striving for
Lordship and Dominion, and could not prevail, turned Heretics in malice to be
revenged on them that were preferred before them; as Donatus, who because
Cecilianus was preferred before him to the Bishopric of Carthage, Donatus
turned Heretic, from whom his followers took the name of Donatists; and he
accused Cecilianus, and all the Bishops that Ordained him to be Traditories.
This VVoe and Poison of Prelates possessing of Temporalities has made the
Possessors thereof in all Ages to malign and hate even unto death, all sorts
and degrees of men that have spoken against their worldly gain and profits, and
admonishes them to follow the Example of Christ and his Apostles and the
Priests of the Levitical Law, who had no Possessions of Temporal Lands: Yea,
the Prelates have manifestly declared their malice against such even after
death, as the Council of Constance who condemned John Wickliffe and his 45.
Articles, and by a Decree caused his bones to be dug up and burnt one and
forty yeas after he was dead, which Condemnation the University of Prague would
not receive, but defended them by Arguments from Scripture and Reason, which
was about the year 1418. I shall mention two or three of the Articles, and some
few of the Universities Arguments in defense of them.

The ARTICLES.
Item, Kings, Princes, and Lords Temporal may at their own will and pleasure
take away the temporal goods from the Clergy if they do offend, and therein
continue.

Item, It is against the Scripture, that Ecclesiastical Ministers should have
any temporal Possessions.

Item, That Tenths are pure Alms; and that the Parishio ner may for the offense
of their Ministers, deteyn and keep them back, and bestow them upon others at
their own will and pleasure, etc.

That Kings and Lords Temporal may take Temporalities from Prelates, the
Universitie proves thus: Kings in the Old Testament took temporal goods from
the Clergy, etc. Therefore Kings of the New Testament may do the like, 1 Kings
2.

1 Solomon. Solomon deposed Abiather the High Priest because he took part with
Adonijah, and set up Zadock the Priest in his room, and this (say they) was a
greater matter then to take away temporalities, for Abiather was put both from
his Priesthood, and from his Maintenance.

2 Nebuchadnezzer. Also Nebuchadnezzer had power given him of God to lead away
the Children of Israel, with the Priests and Levites, into the Captivity of
Babylon. Hasael King of Syria came against Jerusalem. 2 Kings 12.17, 18. and

3 King Jehoash. Jehoash of whom the Scripture witnesses that he did that
which was right in the sight of the Lord all his days, and yet for the safety
of his Kingdom, without taxing his Subjects, he took all the hallowed things
that Jehosaphat, and Jehoram, and Ahaziah* his Fathers, Kings of Judah had
dedicated, and his own hallowed things, and all the Gold that was found in the
Treasury of the house of the Lord, and in the Kings house, and sent it to
Hazael King of Syria, and he went away from Jerusalem: And this was much more
then the taking away of the usurped Temporalities of the Prelates to defray the
Kingdoms Charge, and to relieve the Poor to whom it is due, as is showed in the
Epistle.

4 Hezekiah. Again, It is said of the good King Hezekiah, 2 Kings 18.3. that he
did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that David
his Father did: he put down Idolatry, as in verse 4. so that after him was none
like him among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that were before him, for he
trusted in the Lord and clave to the Lord, and departed not from following him,
but kept his Commandments, and the Lord was with him, and he prospered, etc.
as in verse 5, 6, 7. And when Senache^^b (...) ^f Assyria came up against
Judah, Hezekiah gave him all the Silver that was found in the house of the
Lord, and in the Treasuries of the Kings house, and he cut off the Gold from
the doors of the house of the Lord, and from the Pillars which were overlaid
with Gold and gave it to the King of Assyria, as verse 15, 16. Any one of these
things done by King Jehoash, and King Hezekiah was much more than for our King
and Nobles to take the usurped Temporalities from the Prelates and Priests to
defray the Kingdoms charges, and to relieve the poor; and yet this was not
counted Sacrilege in these Religious Kings in taking the Church goods for
public uses, for they are not reproved, but commended for doing that which was
right in sight of the Lord.

5 Ahaz. Also in 2 Kings 16.8. when Rezin King of Syria, and Pekah son of
Remaliah King of Israel came up against Ahaz King of Judah to Jerusalem, Ahaz
took the Silver and the Gold that was found in the house of the Lord and in the
Treasuries of the Kings house, and sent it as a present to the King of Assyria
to come and help him, etc. We do not read that any of these good Kings of Judah
laid any Tax upon their Subjects, though it was Lawful for them so to do, but
in the first place, for to defray the Kingdoms charges, to secure themselves
and their Subjects they took the goods of the Church; much more may our Kings
and Nobles take the Temporalities and Tithes for the Kingdoms use, because the
Temporalities was their Predecessors, and those that now have them, hold them
by usurpation, the conditions for which they were given being broken: And
Tithes are pure Alms, or as it were a free will offering of the people, not
paid now under the Gospel by any Divine Institution: Therefore the King may at
his pleasure have the profits brought into his Treasuries for the public
benefit of the Kingdom.

6 In Mat. 12.1, 2, 3. the Disciples on the Sabbath being an hungered, plucked
ears of Corn and eat them, the Pharisees rebuked them, but Christ answered them;
have ye not read what David did when he was an hungered and they that were with
him, how he entered into the house of the Lord, and did eat the Shewbread
which was not lawful for him to eat, nor they that were with him, but for the
Priests only, and yet Christ did not count this Sacrilege, whereby it does
appear that it is lawful in time of necessity to use any thing, be it never so
much consecrated. Therefore if need require, the King and Lords temporal may
take the Prelates Temporalities, Gleab Lands and Tithes from them.

7 Titus Vespatian. Titus and Vespasian, secular Princes, had power given them
of God twenty four years after the Lords Ascension, to take away Church goods
from the Priests that had offended against the Lords holy one, and it seems
unto many, they did, and might worthily do the same according to Gods good will
and pleasure: And forasmuch as our Priests may transgress and offend as much,
and rather more against the Lords Anointed; It follows that by the pleasure
of God, our secular Lords may likewise punish our Priests and Prelates offenses
by taking their Temporalities, etc. from them.

8 Ambrose. Our Savior being King of Kings, and High-Bishop with his Disciples
did pay Tribute unto Caesar: Whereby he gave Example to all Priests and
Prelates to pay Tribute unto their Kings. Ambrose in his fourth book on Luke 5.
says, If the Son of God pay Tribute, who art thou, that think thou ought
not to pay? If thou will not be in danger of Caesar, possess not those things
that are Caesar's, for if thou have Riches thou art in danger of Caesar. In his
eleventh Question. Magnum quidem; If thou will owe nothing to the King, forsake
all Earthly things and follow Christ? If then all Ecclesiastical Ministers
having Riches, ought to be in subjection to Kings, and pay them Tribute; it
follows; that Kings may lawfully, by the Authority given them of God, take
away their Temporalities, as in Dan. 2.37, 38. The God of Heaven has given
thee a Kingdom, Power, and Strength, and Glory; and wheresoever the Children of
men dwell, that is as far as any Kings Empire or Dominion does extend, the
Beasts of the Field, and the Fowls of the Heaven has he given into thine hand;
and has made thee Ruler over them all; and if so, then the abused and usurped
Temporalities in the Clergies hands, are given of God into the Kings hand, and
he may lawyfully take possession of them, and employ the Rents thereof for the
defense of his Subjects and Kingdoms, and the relief of the Poor, which was the
end for which they were given by our King and Nobles Predecessors.

9 Again, St. Ambrose alleges in the eleventh question, that all things are
under the power of the Emperor, and if the Emperor require Tribute, we do not
deny, that the Lands of the Church shall pay Tribute: If the Emperor have need
of Church Lands, he has power to challenge them, let him take them if he will,
thus (say they) Ambrose expressly declares that Secular Lords have power at
their pleasure to take away the Lands of the Church, and so consequently they
have power to take away Temporal goods from Ecclesiastical Ministers, as
Tithes, etc.

10 Augustine. St. Augustine, in 33. quest. 7. si de rebus, he says, that
Secular Lords may lawfully take away temporal goods from Heretics, and for so
much as it is a Case greatly poseable, that many of the Clergy are users of
Simony, and thereby Heretics; Therefore Secular Lords may lawfully take away
their Temporalities from them. The word of the Lord to all wicked men is; That
the Kingdom of God shall be taken from them, and given to a Nation bringing
forth the fruits thereof. By Kingdom of God in this Text, Mat. 21.43. is meant
the priveledges of the visible Church, which shall be taken from wicked men.
Robert Grosthead.
And here it were fit to consider of Robert Grosttheads, the Bishop of Lincoln
who dyed in the year 1253. his definition of Heresy; viz. That Heresy is a
Sentence taken and chosen of man's own brain, contrary to holy Scripture, openly
maintained and stiffly defended: Now consider, whether none of our Prelates do
maintan no Canons nor Ceremonies nor Opinions contrary to holy Scripture, nor
contrary to the 19, 20, nor 21. Articles of the Church of England, and so stand
guilty of Heresy by this definition of Heresy of Robert Grosthead -- If any
object that it is a desiring of other men's goods; St. Austine answers, That by
the same rule the seven Nations that did abuse the Land of promise, and were
cast out by the power of God, they might have objected the same to the Children
of Israel; We says Augustine, do not desire other men's goods, for they are
ours by the Commandment of him by whom all things were made, by like evidence
the Clergy having offended, their temporal goods are made the goods of others;
that is lawfully possessed, says he, in the 14. quest. 4. which is justly
possessed, and that is justly possessed which is well possessed; ergo, all that
is evilly possessed is another man's, and he does ill possess it which does evil
use it, and for the evil using of it, it has been proved in the Epistle that
Prelates are unfaithful Stewards, and have converted to their own uses for
Coaches, and Horses, and Riotous living, that which belongs to the poor;
besides no Clergyman has any right to Temporalities by any Institution of
Christ, and therefore both evilly possessed and evilly used by them.

If then says he the Clergy do abuse the temporal goods, as it has been
proved they do, the temporal Lords may at their pleasure according to the rule
of Charity take the temporal goods from the Clergy, for they do not justly
possess them; for besides the right that temporal Lords have to temporal lands,
as belonging formerly to their Predecessors, and the conditions not performed
nor which they were given, which was to the Church and to the Poor. Temporal
Magistrates are Gods Ministers and Revengers, to execute wrath upon them that
do evil, attending continually upon this very thing, Romans 13.4.6. which if they
neglect they make themselves guilty of the Prelates sins; for the University
quotes Gregory, writing to the French King, That he which may correct any sin,
and neglect the same, without doubt he makes himself partaker of the sin and
offense. And John Wickliffe says in the thirteenth Article; That it is not
only lawful for Lords Temporal to take away goods of fortune from Churchmen
sinning usually; But also they are bound so to do under pain of Eternal
Damnation.

11 Gregory. St. Gregory in his 7th book, chap. 9. writing to the French Queen,
says, Forasmuch, as wicked Priests are the cause of the ruin of the people;
for who shall make intercession for the sins of the People, if the Priests that
should do it have committed greater offenses themselves, which in your Dominion
live wickedly; therefore, that the offenses of a few bring not destruction upon
many, we ought to seek a remedy. And a little after, to the King he said, Yet
once again we move you to command a Synod, and cause all the carnal vices of
Priests, and Wickedness and Simony of Bishops to be removed, and that you do
not suffer them to possess any more substance than Gods commandment does allow,
and that is neither Temporalities nor Tyths that the Gospel commandments does
allow; Mat. 10.9, 10.
for when Christ sent his Disciples to preach, he commanded they should provide
neither Gold nor Silver, nor Brass in their Purses, nor Script for their
Journey, neither two Coats, nor Shoes, nor staves, for the Workman is worthy
of his meat. But how contrary to this Command of Christ are our Bishops and
Prelates in these days, and yet in words they pretend to succeed the Apostles
in place and power; But the Apostles had not hundreds nor thousands of Gold and
silver by the year; they had not Shoos for their Journey, but ours have Shoos
and Boots, and Coaches and Horses, and multitudes of Attendants: Is this to
obey the Commandment of Christ? and to imitate Christ and his Apostles? Foxes
have holes, Mat. 8.20.
and the Birds of the Air have nests, but the Son of Man, which was also the
Son of God, has not whereon to lay his head. But our Prelates have their
stately Palaces, and great Houses. Our Savior says, Mat. 12. He that is not
with me is against me; and that the Tree is known by h^s fruit. and in Mat.
7.15, 16. Christ bids us to beware of False Prophets, and teaches us how we
shall know them, he says they come in sheeps clothing, they pretend to be
sheep, but inwardly they are Ravening Wolves, ye shall know them by their
fruits. I name no man, but leave the people of God to judge by the fruits, by
the fruits of men's lives to judge who they are, and one mark to know them by
will be, There is no man will be so angry at what I write as they, for by their
fruits you may know them; for every one that does evil hates the light, he is
loath to be brought to trial by the light of Gods word lest his deeds should be
reproved or discovered, John 3.20.

12 John Wickliffe. But if upon trial it be found that Clergy men walk so
contrary to the Rules and Commandments of Christ, which they ought to obey, and
to imitate Christ and his Apostles in their preaching and living, then, as John
Wickliffe says, may Kings and Lords Temporal, both lawfully, and
meritoriously take away their Temporalities from them, which they abuse with
such excess of riot: the Law of nature does license all such as have the
government of Kingdoms, to correct the abuses of the Temporalities, which would
be the chief of the ruin and destruction of their Kingdoms: Whether the
Temporal Lords, or any other had endowed the Church with those Temporalities or
not, it is lawful for them to take away the Temporalities so abused, as it were
by way of Physic to withstand and put a stop to sins, says the University,
for so much as they are not endowed but with Conditions, the which Conditions
are broken and the Title of the Gift lost, and they that gave the Alms or their
Successors ought to correct the offenses; for as in a just War it is lawful to
take away the goods of the outward Enemies, so also it is lawful to take away
the goods of the Clergy, being the inward Enemy by their evil Example, they not
walking according to the Rules of Christ, for inward Enemies are more hurtful
than outward, and it is said in the 12th Article, That there is no greater
Heretic nor Antichrist than those Clerks which teach that it is lawful for
Priests, now under the Law of Grace, to be endowed with Temporal Possessions,
and if there be any Heretics, Apostates, or Blasphemers these Clerks be such.

A Supplication to K. Hen. 8. If it were thought unmeet by the Apostles that
they should leave the word of God and serve Tables, Acts 6.2. which yet was a
work of mercy to serve the Poor, can any man be so ignorant as to think it meet
and fit that the Prelates should leave the word of God to deal in Temporal
matters, to keep Courts, to set Leases, and receive Rents, and keep books of
Accounts, and Rent-Rols, etc.? the Apostles did no such things, therefore they
cannot be the Successors of the Apostles. It was said in a Supplication to King
Henry the eighth, about the year 1544. That the only infection and pestilent
poison of the Prelates, is their great Lordships and Dominion which has
fashioned them with proud Countenances and worldly behavior, more like Heathen
Princes than Christ and his Apostles, and Christ said to his Apostles, the
Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion, etc. but it shall not be so among
you, Mat. 20.26. For Bishops so love their worldly honor, that they will not
preach the Truth for displeasing of men, lest they lose their great
Possessions, Riches, and worldly Offices, which is the cause of their sins;
Thus this pestilent poison of worldy riches being taken from them, the word of
God shall flourish, faith shall be increased, and sin decreased, and true
obedience shall be observed, with all humble obedience to your Majesty.

13 It is lawful for the Clergy by their power to take away the Sacrament from
the Laity customably offending: It is by the like reason lawful for the Secular
power to take away the Temporalities from the Clergy, they offending customably
in not performing the conditions for which the Temporalities were given,
besides other offenses, for, say they, the true and easiest way for directing
the Clergy unto Conformity to the life of Christ and his Apostles, and most
profitable for the Laity, the Church, is, that the Clergy should not be
suffered to live contrary unto Christ's Institutions; to which I shall add,
that the Clergy who make such a bussling about Conformity, are themselves the
greatest, and most obstinate Non-conformists in the world, The Prelates are the
greatest Non-conformists.
to the Gospel Commandments and Institution of Christ; for Christ has not
Instituted that any Gospel Minister should have any Temporalities or Tithes,
nor to live in such glorious Pomp and State in the world, nor to have such
Dignities, nor exercise such Jurisdictions, etc. Therefore it belongs to
Christian Magistrates to take those Superfluities from them, which occasion
their sinful revolt and disobedience to the Laws of Christ, for by the
abundance of Temporalities (say they) the Worm, or Serpent of Pride is sprang
up, whereupon unsatiable desire and lust is inflamed, and thereby proceeds
all kind of Gluttony and Leachery: but the Temporalities being taken away,
every one of these sins will either utterly be taken away, or at the least
diminished by the contrary virtue induced and brought in.

The Prophecy of Hildegardis. This that is said of taking away the
Temporalities from the Clergy seems to be prophesied of by Hildegardis the
Virgin, whieh Prophecy was approved of in the Council of Trevers by many
Bishops of France, Italy, and Almain, St. Bernard being there present, she
spoke on this manner; The Kings, and other Rulers of the World, being stirred
up by the just Judgment of God, shall set themselves against them and run upon
them, saying; We will not have these men to rule over us with their rich Houses
and great Possessions, and other worldly Riches, over which we are ordained to
be Lords and Rulers; wherefore let us take away from them* that which they do
not justly, but wrongfully possess, etc. for the Spirituality should not
possess more then necessity does require, that where there is more, it should
be taken away* and given to the needy. This spoke that Virgin Prophetess,
plainly foreshewing the taking away the Temporalities from the Clergy by the
secular Power.

14 Gregory. St. Gregory writ to the Emperor Mauritius when he persecuted him,
I do believe (says he) that you please God the better in so persecuting me
which have been so evil a servant unto him. And Pope Leo Pope Leo.
submitted himself unto Lodovicus the Emperor, as in 2. quest. 7. If we have
done any thing incompetently, or that we have not observed the upright path and
way of Equity amongst Subjects, we will amend the same, either by your own
judgment, or by the advice and judgment of those which you shall appoint for
that purpose; for if we which ought to correct and punish other men's faults, do
commit more grievous our selves, we are not then the Disciples of the Truth,
but (as with sorrow we speak it) we shall be above all others the Masters of
Error. Thus much concerning the Arguments of the University of Prague.


And to confirm the Writings and Opinion of John Wickliffe, the Vice Chancellor
of the University of Oxford, with the whole Congregation of the Masters, with
one consent gave this Testimony of him, and said; The Testimony of the
University of Oxford in behalf of John Wickliffe.
For the special good will and care which we bear unto John Wickliffe, sometime
Child of this University, and Professor of Divinity, moving and stirring our
minds as his manners and conditions, required no less, with one mind voice and
testimony we do witness, all his conditions and doings throughout his whole
life, to have been most sincere and commendable, whose honest manners and
conditions, profoundness of Learning, and most redolent Renown and Fame, we
desire the more earnestly to be notified and known unto all the Faithful, for
that we understand the maturity and ripeness of his Conversation, his diligent
Labors and Travels to tend to the praise of God, the help and safeguard of
others, and the profit of the Church: Wherefore we -- signify unto you by
these Presents; That his Conversation from his youth upward unto the time of
his death, was so praise worthy and honest, that never at any time was there
any note or spot of suspicion noised of him, but in his Answering, Reading,
Preaching, and Determining, he behaved himself laudably, and as a stout and
valiant Champion of the Faith, vanquishing by the force of the Scriptures, all
such who by their wilful beggary blasphemed and slandered Christ's Religion
neither was this said Doctor Convict of any Heresy, God forbid that our
Prelates should have condemned a man of such honesty for a Heretic, who
amongst all the rest of the University had written in Logic, Philosophy,
Divinity, Morality and the Speculative Art without Peer, the knowledge of which
all and singular things we do desire to testify and deliver forth, to the
intent that the Fame and Renown of this said Doctor may be the more evident,
and had in reputation amongst them unto whose hands these present Letters
testimonial shall come. Here is to be seen that this University of Oxford did
also maintain the truth of Doctor John Wickliffe's Articles, That Kings,
Princes, and Lords Temporal may lawfully take away Temporalities and Tithes
from the Clergy.

In witness whereof we have caused our Letters Testimonial to be Sealed with
our common Seal, Dated at Oxford in our Congregation-House the 5th day of
October in the Year 1406.


Edmond King of England. King Edmond of England about the Year 940. made a Law
that every man should pay Tithes, for Churches Fees, and Alms Fees: Thus here
you see that Tithes were then given as well for the relief of the Poor as the
Church. He made a Law also, that every Bishop should of his own proper charge
see that Churches were repaired.

Bishop of Canterbury. About the same time the Bishop of Canterbury in a Letter
to the Prelates and Clergy said, If it were, or could be so, that all the
Riches of the World were laid before me, so that I were Emperor and had all
things universally under my subjection, all these things would I gladly give,
and offer my self willingly for the health of Souls. And thus he exhorted the
Clergy to their duty, lest the Lord should say of them, The Shepherds fed
themselves but did not feed my flock, they have reigned but not by me, they
have made themselves Princes of my flock, and I knew it not, that is, he knew
it not so as to approve of their doings, But where is there a Prelate now that
has such a zeal for the good of Souls.

King Edgar. King Edgar, in an Oration to the Clergy, about the year 959. What
negligence, says he, is in Gods Service, I will speak with sorrow, they be
Riotous in Banquetring, in Chambring and Drunkenness; And now, says he, the
Clerks houses are thought to be Stews of Harlots, Thus the Goods of Kings and
Alms of Princes is misspent, have our Fathers spent their Treasury for this
purpose? Have the Kings liberalities in giving Lands and Possessions been for
this intent, that Clerks Harlots should be decked with the same? And for
riotous feasts, Hauks and Hounds, and other Toys to consume it? Soldiers cry
out, the people grudge but ye regard not, etc.

King Hen. 2d. Among other ancient Laws of England, in the reign of King Henry
the second, this was one, That if any Clergy man did hold any Lay Fee in his
hands, he should therefore do the Kings service that belonged thereunto, as
upon Juries, Assizes of Lands and Judgments, and that no Lands should be given
to the Church, nor to any House of Religion without the Kings License: And that
the Peter Pence which was used to be gathered for the Pope, should be paid to
the King, and that all the Possessions, Goods and Chattels of such as favored
the Pope or Thomas a Becket, to be Seized and Confiscate to the King: And that
all such of the Clergy as were absent from their Charge, out of the Realm, and
had Rents and Profits in the Land, and did not repair home in three months,
their Rents and Goods to return to the King, etc. If it were lawful for the
King then in the time of Popery to seize upon the Rents, Profits, and
Possessions of the Pope, Cardinal and others, it is much more lawful now for
our King and Nobles to cize upon such Goodss and Possessions as were given by
Papists in the time of Popery, and are now wrongfully possessed and abusively
used by others:

King Edward 3. In a Parliament holden the twentieth year of the reign of King
Edward the third; It was propounded that all Alien Monks should depart England,
whose Livings the King took into his hands. It was also concluded by the
Parliament; That the Livings of all others, Strangers and Cardinals during
their lives, the profits should be brought into the Kings hand. The Commons
also denied to pay any payments to Cardinals in France, etc. besides the King
took order by two of his Clergy ( viz.) John Stocks, and John Norton, to take
into their hands all the Temporalities of all the Deanaries, Prebends,
Dignities and Benefices being then vacant in England and to answer the profits
thereof unto the King.

King William Rufus. King William Rufus took certain Lands and Possessions from
Canterbury and disposed of them to secular uses.

King Henry 4. In the eighth year of the reign of King Henry the fourth, it was
petitioned to the Parliament, That the King might enjoy half the profits of
every Parsons Benefice who was not resident thereon: But in the eleventh year
of his reign the Commons put up a Bill unto the King to take the Temporal Lands
from the Clegie men's hands or Possessions; in which Bill it was declared that
the Temporalities disorderly wasted by men of the Clergy, might suffice to find
to the King with maintenance 15. Earls, 1500. Knights. 6200. Esquires, and
100. Alms houses: To every Earl, 3000. Mark a year, to every Knight, 100. Mark
and four plough lands, and to every Esquire 40 Mark a year and two plough
lands, and to every Alms house, 100. Mark a year: which lands is now (no
doubt) worth double, if not treble to what they were then: For I have credibly
informed by a Yorkshire Esquire, That when his Majesty was restored to the
Crown, one Bishopric, that is the Bishopric of Durham, If it had been set
upon the rack rent, it was worth above fifty thousand pounds a year. This story
above, you may read in Mr, Fox his Acts and monuments of the Church in the
story of King Hen. 4.

King Henry 8. It is there also to be seen in the History of King Hen. 8. That
the King did enjoin every Vicar, Clerk, or Beneficed man that had one hundred
pounds a year, that he should find a Scholar at the University, and he that had
two hundred pounds a year should find two Scholars at the University: Also in
his reign it was complained of by the Commons against the Prelates and Clergy
for their cruel proceeding Ex Officio, And for the remedy it was enacted; That
whosoever did, or speak any thing against either their usurped power or their
Laws, Decrees, or Constitutions, which is not grounded upon the Holy Scripture,
they should therefore stand in no danger, nor be impeached.

King Richard 2. King Richard the second, propounded to John Wickliffe, Whether
the Kingdom of England might lawfully detain the Treasure of the Kingdom from
the Pope, He demanded the Church goods under pain of Censure -- Mr. Wickliffe
setting a part the Common Laws of England and the Civi^ Law; It rests (says
he) to prove the affirmitive part by the Principles of Chists Law thus, Every
natural body has power given of God to resist against the contrary, and to
preserve it self in due estate; inasmuch as Bodies without life are endued with
such a kind of power, as hardness to resist those things that would break it,
and coldness to withstand heat that would dissolve it, forasmuch then as the
Kingdom of England, after the manner of phrase of Scripture ought to be one
Body, of which the King is head, and the Commonalty are the members thereof. It
seems the same Kingdom head and members, has such power given to them of
God, and so much the more apparent, by how much the same body is more precious
unto God, adorned with virtue and knowledge; for so much then, as there is no
power given of God unto any Creature for any end or purpose, but that he may
lawfully use the same to that end and purpose. It follows, That our Kingdom
may lawfully keep back and detain their Treasure of Temporalities and Tithes,
etc. for the defense of it self in what case soever necessity does require the
same.

Secondly, the same is proved by the Law of the Gospel, for the Pope cannot
challenge the Treasure of this Kingdom (no more can the Prelates challenge
Temporalities or Tithes) but under the title of Alms, and consequently under
the pretense of works of mercy, according to the rule of Charity. But in the
case aforesaid the title of Alms ought utterly to cease; ergo, the right title
of challenging the Treasure of this Kingdom ought to cease also in the
presupposed necessity, and the Prelates and Clergy challenging Temporalities
and Tithes ought to cease also by the same reason: Forasmuch as all Charity,
has its beginning of it self; it were no work of Charity, but of mere madness,
to send away the Treasure of the Realm unto other Nations, whereby the Realm it
self may fall into ruin, under the pretense of such a Charity: and is it not
as much madness to suffer so many idle Drones to usurp the Kingdoms, the
Churches, and the Poors goods, of temporalities and tithes, to spend on
Coaches, and Horses, Hawks, Dogs, and Hounds? (I will not say Whores, Taverns,
Cards and Dice;) Why should not such unfaithful Stewards give an account of
their Stewardship?

It appears also (says he) by this, That Christ, the Head of the Church. whom
all Prelates and Priests ought to follow, he lived by the Alms of devout women,
as in Luke 8.2, 3. he hungered, and thirsted, was a stranger, and sustained many
other miseries, not only in his members, but also in his own body; He was poor,
that ye through his poverty might be rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. Wherefore, in the first
endowing of the Church with Alms, whatsoever he were of the Clergy that had any
temporal possessions, he had the same by way of Alms; as several Writings and
Chronicles do witness: For, (says he) the Temporal Lords have power to take
away their Alms, when they see their Alms abused to riot and excess by some,
and others, who are interested therein, suffer penury and want, by the Prelates
and Clergy their unfaithfulness in their Stewardships.

Carolus Magnus. Carolus Magnus, that famous French King, had decreed in a
Council, that only the Canonical Books of Scripture should be read in Churches;
and commanded the Bishops, that they should not suffer any other to be read,
nor Preach themselves any thing that did not agree with the word of God. And
besides, he ordered the goods given to the Church. to be disposed of so, That
in wealthy places, two parts of the Church goods should be given to the poor,
and the third part to the Clergy: and that in poorer places, there should be an
equal division between the poor and the Clergy. The good Lord, if it be his
good will and pleasure, put it into the hearts of all Christian Kings and
Princes to do the like.

Isidor. Mr. Fox says, that Isidor has these words, Let Temporal Kings know,
that they must give an account to God for the Church, which they have at the
hands of God to govern; and if so, then it lies as a duty incumbent upon them,
so that to free themselves from the guilt of other men's sins, there is an
absolute necessity, That seeing the Church goods are abused, and not disposed
of as they ought to be, as it is proved above; Therefore Kings and Nobles may
not only lawfully, but are bound in duty to God, to take care to have such
abuses reformed.

Charles the sixth. Charles the sixth, the French King, made a Law, That the
fruits and rents of Benefices, and other Pensions, and Bishops goods, that
departed from their charges, should be brought in to the Kings use.

King Philip. About the year 1303. King Philip of France summoned a Parliament,
where all the Bishops were required within eight days after notice given, to
appear, or else all their Temporal goods should be seized into the Kings hand.
By this it appears, That upon their disobedience the King might take their
Temporalities from them, if he so pleased. In which Parliament it was declared
by Sir Will. Negareta:
Sir William Negareta, in behalf of the King, That for his Oaths sake, that he
made for defense of the Church, and because the King was the Patron of the
Church; Therefore he was bound not only to defend the Church (observe this
well) he was bound not only to defend the Church, but to call in the goods of
the Church, which was wasted by the Pope and Prelates means: And four years
after, the Lord Peter de Cugneriis, in a Parliament, Lord Peter de Cugneriis.
exhibited 65 Articles in the Kings behalf, against the Bishops and Prelates of
France, and the misdemeanors of them and their Officers and Courts.

Mr. Fox. Such goods as were given to the Church by our Ancestors (says Mr.
Fox) was neither so given, nor so taken, as to serve the private use of Church
men, but to serve the public use of the poor and needy; as is to be seen by
the Canonical Institution of the Emperor Lodovicus Pius, set forth in the year
830. in these words; Lodovicus Pius.
The goods of the Church be the Vows and bequests of the faithful, to ransom
such as be in captivity or prison, and the Patrimony to succor them with
Hospitality that be needy, etc. Whereas now the Hospitality that is used, is to
feast such as need not, such as are able to feast the Prelates again: and the
poor and needy, if they get any thing, it is such scraps as they give to their
Hounds and Spanniels.

Prosper. To this purpose is the testimony of Prosper; Good men (says he) took
the goods of the Church, not as their own, but to distribute them, as
bequeathed to the poor; For whatsoever (says he) the Church has, it has in
common with such as have nothing, etc.

The Testimony of 54. of the Nobles of Bohemia and Moravia. There was four and
fifty of the Nobles of Bohemia and Moravia, Confederate together, who in an
Exhortation to Kings and Princes to stir them up to the Zeal of the Gospel;
they said, That the Devil as he tempted Christ, by showing him all the Kingdoms
of the World and the glory thereof (but did not prevail) But the Devil has
prevailed and deceived the Pope and all Prelates and Priest, with the Riches of
the World and worldly power; and they stir up Kings and Princes to make War
against us, not that the Christian faith should thereby be defended, but for
fear their secret vices and heresies should be discovered: Whereby for reward
they pretend that they have power by Prayers and Masses to deliver Souls out of
Purgatory: Thus they become Merchants of Prayers and Masses for money, and
every one that takes rewards to Redeem Souls out of Purgatory, do therewithal
cast their own Souls down to Hell, and they that give any thing to that end, do
altogether lose their gift, and with such divellish subtilties as these, the
Pope with all his Prelates and Priests, have deceived, spoiled and
disinherited, Kings, Princes, Lords and Knights, and good Householders and many
others, of their lawful Inheritances, because their Ancestors and Progenitors
gave their Lands to Colleges, Monasteries and Churches, that they might make
Memorials of them, and to sing Prayers and Masses for their Souls, that they
might be redeemed out of Purgatory: and with such ill gotten goods the Bishops,
and Prelates, and the rest of the Clergy are made so rich, that so long as
they have such Goods and Lands, they will never teach you the true foundation
of true Religion, which is against their holding or enjoying such temporal
Estates. So that now, except our Prelates could prove that there is a
Purgatory, and that for the Lands they hold, they both have done, and can
deliver Souls out of Purgatory, what claim or title can they, lay to those
Lands that were given upon that account, or what reason can they show why the
King and Temporal Lords may not lawfully take their own again for the uses
formerly named?

Now therefore say they, Ye Nobles, Kings, Princes, Lords and all ye Commonalty
rich and poor, if you have been a sleep, yet now awake, and behold the subtilty
of the Devil, how he has blinded the Prelates for Lucre sake, and take again
that which is yours and not theirs; and they also receive Tithes, and say, that
men are bound to give them, and yet cannot prove, that Christ, the Apostles or
the seventy Disciples received any, but their Example Prelates will not follow:
They say by Prayers and Masses, they can redeem souls out of Purgatory, and yet
by all their Prayers and Masses, they cannot redeem a man out of an Earthly
Prison

Having hitherto showed the Opinion and Practice of twenty Kings, and of the
Universities of Prague and Oxford, and of fifty four of the Nobles of Bohemia
and Moravia; I shall now produce other Authors.
Mr: Latimer. MR. Latimer, in a Letter to King Henry the eighth against the
Bishops* who pretend to be guides and leaders of others (says he) and yet will
neither preach the Truth themselves as they are bound to do, nor suffer others
that would do it, to whom is due that Woe pronounced, Mat. 23.13. for they will
not only (says he) debar the word of God from men, but also by their subtle
Wileness the instruct, move, and provoke, in a manner all Kings in Christendom,
to aid succor, and help them in their mischiefs, and especially in this your
Realm as far as in them lies, they blind the Kings liege people with their
Laws and Customs and Ceremonies, in stead of teaching them the word of God,
Therefore he exhorts his Majesty above all things to consider the life and
proceedings of Christ and his Apostles, and to compare these men's doings with
theirs, and always to have in his mind this golden rule, The Tree is known by
his fruit, for by this you may truly know and discern who are the true follows
ers of Christ and his Apostles, in preaching and living, and who are pretenders
only, for by their fruits you may know them, whether they imitate Christ and
his Apostles, in preaching, in poverty, and humility: Your Grace may consider
what craft the Spiritualty, as they will be called, imagine to break and
withstand the Acts made in your last Parliament against their Superfluities;
Whhrefore they that so do, your Grace may know them not to be the followers of
Christ, for Christ does not promise true and faithful Preachers worldly
promotion and dignity, but tribulation, John 16.33. for where the word of God
is truly preached, there is persecution.

Therefore pleases it your Grace to return to this golden rule, By their
fruits you shall know them, for where you see persecution, there is the Gospel
and there is the all Truth, and they that do persecute, are void of Grace, and
without Truth, they will not abide the light, because their deeds are evil,
John 3.20. the riches of the world has blinded the eyes of their hearts, that
they see not the clear light of the Scripture, though they babble of it never so
much: Wherefore good King (says he) seeing God has sent his servants, true
Ministers and Preachers of his word, set not these worldly men make your Grace
believe that their preaching will cause Insurrection, Heresy or Mischief, as
they imagine in their mad brains, lest God be avenged upon you and your Realm,
as he has ever been upon them who has withstood his word: My purpose is
(says he) for the love I have to God and the true alleagiance ^ow unto your
Grace, not to hide my Talent, but to chaffer with it that it may increase to
the pleasure of God, to exhort your Gace to avoid and beware of those
mischeivous Flatterers, and their abominable ways and Counsels; for there are
some, that for fear of losing their worldly worship and honor, will not be
convinced to leave their opinion: But let these men remember, that Paul as well
as they, both thought and called Truth Heresy, before his Conversion, but
after, he spent his strength and life to defend that which before he
persecuted, and I am sure (says he) Paul before his Conversion, was as holy
and perfect in the outward works of the Law, as any of these Bishops are now:
Wherefore, Gracious King, take heed of them, and do nothing pleasing in your
own sight without Gods word; remember your self, and pity your own Soul, and
think that the day is even at hand, when you shall give an account of your
Office; at which day, that you may stand steadfast, and have your Quietus est,
Sealed with the blood of Christ, is my daily prayer to him that suffered death
for our sins, to whom be all honor and praise for ever, Amen. Thus much of Mr.
Latimer his Letter to King Hen. 8.

Eneas Silvius. Eneas Silvius, before he was Pope, in a Letter to the Rector of
the University of Collin, he said, To a true Christian indeed nothing ought to
be more desired, than the sincerity and pureness of Faith given us of Christ be
kept of all men immaculate, and if at any time, any thing be attempted against
the true Doctrine of the Gospel, the people ought with one consent to provide
lawful remedy and every man to bring with him some water to quench the general
fire; neither must we fear (says he) how we be hated or envyed so we bring the
truth with us, we must resist every man to his face, whether he be Paul or
Peter, if he walk not directly to the rule of the Gospel -- This is part of
Eneas his Letter, which I think, with Mr. Latimer's Letter above, is sufficient
to justify my Innocence in what I have done in collecting of so many reverend
Authors, to show what their judgment and practice has been according to the
word of God, though it be not according to the practice of our Prelates now.

Julian Palmer. As all good works are wonderful, says Julian Palmer, so this
in particular, That God has in all ages stirred up some to bear witness to the
Truth against those Usurpers who have, and do rob and spoil both Kings and
Kingdoms, by unjust deteyning Lands and Possessions, etc. in their hands, to
which they have no right; and do buy false Glosses, Excommunications,
Imprisonments, Banishments, Scourging, Pilloring, Persecuting by open violence
and secret practices abuse the simple sheep of Christ, that do endeavor to
serve God, and to discover their false usurped ways, rather then they will
depart with their dishonest gain, and have their Kitchen cooled, their Coffers
emptied, or their Rents and Revenues abated.

The Protestant Church at Paris. The fourth of September 1558. Three or four
hundred Christians being assembled in Paris in France, to worship God in a
private meeting, they were seized upon, and some escaped and some were taken
and imprisoned; Who, wrote a Letter to the King, declaring out of diverse
Histories, what afflictions and calamities from time to time had befallen the
Enemies and hinderers of Gods worship, for their resisting the free passage of
the Gospel: Showing also, that when the King did by his Edict hinder the free
worship and service of God, then did God send War and other Calamities upon him
and his Kingdom: and when he ceased the execution of such Edicts, then he
prospered according to his own desires, as long as the true worship of God and
his Ordinances took place. And in the Primative Church, while Prelates and
Ministers were of small Wealth, and sought not their own profit, but the glory
of God and his Ordinances, so long the Truth prospered and prevailed; but since
the Pope and Prelates began to be Prince like, and to usurp Dominion over the
Emperor and Kings, they have turned the Scripture from the true sense, and
have attributed the service to themselves, which we ow unto God, framing a
worship according to their own fancy, for their private advantage to maintain
their usurped Dignities, Jurisdictions and Possessions: Wherefore your Majaesty
may with good and safe Conscience, seize upon all their Temporalities and
Benefices, and employ them to to their right use, which is, for your own
affairs, for the safety of the Kingdom, and the easement of your poor Subjects,
which alone bear the burden, and for the relief of the poor, whereas now there
is an infinite number in your Kingdom which occupy the greatest and chiefest
benefices which never deserved any part of them: And consider, that always
those Emperors and Kings have the best prospered, that embraced the true
Christian Faith, for the Kings Throne is established in Righteousness, Prove.
16.20. and 28.

Anne du Burg. Loys du Far. The true and only way, Sir, (say they) to remedy
and redress these grievances is, that you call a general Council in your
Kingdom, your self being the chief, in which, every thing tending to the
worship and service of God may be tried by the word of God, in which Council
men of parts and faithfulness to God should be heard for God, and those that
enjoy such Dignities and Possessions, be heard how they can prove their holding
them by the Scripture to be lawful, or else to part with them: And your
Majesty, or some whom you may appoint, not corrupted, nor interested to either
party, but indifferunt, may report to your Majesty the true sense of the
Scripture without partiality, and after, according to the example of David,
Solomon, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah and Josiah, you may remove out of the Church all
Idolatry, Superstition, Will Worship and humane Inventions, which is contrary
to holy Scripture, for God will not own any Plant in his Church that is not of
his own planting: Here was good Council if it had taken place, but mark what
followed; Anne du Burg, a Councellor at Law, Loys du Far, a Councellor also,
who did solicit and intercede in the behalf of those imprisoned Christians,
were both apprehended and cast into prison; the King in a rage threatening du
Burg, that he with his own eyes would see him burnt, but God prevented him, for
the same day that he so threatened, the King in his Justing and breaking their
Spears, the King received his Deaths wound, and it was reported, that the King
said he was stricken for casting the poor Christians wrongfully in prison, This
was Henry the second French King -- Origin says, Origin.
That Princes will not believe that others have fallen by such means until they
fall themselves.

And they said further, If the Emperor Antonius, a Pagan and an Idolator,
seeing himself wrapped with Wars, ceased the Persecution which was against the
Christians, and determined to hear their Causes and Reasons, how much more
ought you that bear the name of most Chistian King, to be careful and diligent
to cease the Persecution against poor Christians, for until you have heard and
lawfully debated our Reasons taken out of Scripture, how can your Majesty judge
us worthy of such punishments, for while we are governed by the word of God
neither Fire nor Sword, nor the cruelest torments can make us afraid.

Observe these Expressions.
Christians may learn good Instructions from some of the heathen; I will name
some Christian-like expressions of this Pagan Antonius, he wrote twelve Books,
in the first Book he said. Let it be thy incessant care as a Roman, as a man,
to perform whatsoever it is that thou art about with true and unfeigned
gravity, natural affection, freedom and justice, and go about every action as
thy last action, free from all vanity, all passionate and wilful aberration
from reason, and from all Hypocrisy and self-love: And in another place he
says; Whatsoever thou do affect, whatsoever thou do project so do, and so
project all as one, who for ought thou know may at this present depart out
of this Life: And as for Death, If there be any Gods, it is not grievous thing
to leave the Society of Men, the Gods will do thee no hurt; and if there be no
Gods to take care of the world, why should I desire to live in a world void of
Gods, and all divine Providence.

Again (says he) do nothing contrary to the Community, nor without due
examination, nor with reluctancie: Let thy God that is in thee, rule over thee,
and find by thee that he has to do with a man, a sociable man, a Roman, one
that has ordered his life, as expecting nothing but the Trumpet sounding a
Retreat out out of this life with all readiness: Again (says he) without
relation unto God, thou shall never perform aright any thing humane, nor any
thing divine without some respect to things humane.

Marcus Aurelius Antonius. If any body (says he) shall reprove me and make it
uppear unto me, that in any action or opinion of mine I do err, I will gladly
retract, for it is the Truth that I seek after, by which I am sure never any
man was hurt, and as sure that he is hurt that continues in any error of
ignorance whatsoever; one thing there is and that only that is worth our while
in this world and ought by us much to be esteemed, and that is according to
Righteousness meekly and and lovingly to converse with false and unrighteous
men. -- Thy life is almost at an end, so live henceforth as indifferent to the
world and all worldly objects, let them behold and see a man that is a man
indeed, living according to the true nature of a man, and if they cannot bear
with me, let them kill me, for better it were to dye then to live as they would
have me, for all worldly things are but as the smoke that vanishes away, or
indeed mere nothing -- Thus much of Marcus Aurelius Antonius his Christian-like
experssions. Mr. Frith.


Paulinus, and his Deacon. Mr. John Frith a Martyr, in his answer to the
Preface of Mr. Moor's Book page 116. says, That before the Church was endowed
with honors, there was none would be a Bishop but such as had a love and zeal
to the Flock, that he could be content to shed his blood for them, for in the
Primitive Church the first thirty Bishops of Rome, there was twenty of them or
more that suffered Martyrdom, but in Constantines time, and since that, they
enjoyed peace, and the Church was endowed with temporal possessions, They
(says Mr. Frith) that were worst both in learning and in their lives labored
most for such places, for such as were virtuous would not entangle themselves
with the vain Pride of this world.

Amonius cut of his own Ear rather then be a Bishop.
It is recorded in Hystories of Paulinus the first Bishop of York, and James
his Deacon, that they were so void of care for worldly things, and so free from
Coveteousness, that they refused possessions being proffered unto them.

Also about the year 383. Ammonius a holy Monk being at Rome, he was so little
taken with their great Pomp, and outward show of Holiness, that being
solicited to take a Bishopric, he fled out secretly and cut off his own Ear,
that he might by wanting a member, have a Canonical Impediment, not to be a
Bishop -- This Ammonius came forth of the Desert of Mount Nitria.

Aidanus gave his horse to a Beggar.
About the year 638. Oswald King of Northumberland, sent into Scotland for a
Bishop named Adanus, a Learned and pious man, and about the year 646. Oswie,
brother and successor of Oswald, because the Bishop should go no longer on
foot, as he was accustomed to do, the King gave him a Horse, bridle, saddle,
and trappings. But not long after, the Bishop riding abroad, and meeting a poor
man, who craved the Bishops charity, and he having nothing else to give,
lighted off his horse, and gave him to the Beggar, and went again on foot
himself, as he was accustomed to do. These examples do inform us, what manner
of persons Bishops were in those days, the first 600 years after Christ, in
poverty and humility imitating Christ and his Apostles: but Bishops in these
latter days do rather imitate Lucifer for Pride, Achan and Gehazi for
Covetousness, and Balaam, who loved the wages of iniquity, more like than
followers of Christ and his Apostles in Patience, Poverty, and Humility: By
their fruits you may know them, says our Savior.

Mr. Elmer. Mr. Elmer, in his Harbor for faithful Subjects, Come off, you
Bishops, says he; away with your superfluities; yield up your Thousands, be
content with hundreds, as they are in other Reformed Churches, where there be
as great Learned men as you are; Let your portion be Priest-like, and not
Prince-like; and let the Queen have the rest of your Temporalities to maintain
Wars, and build Schools, that every Parish may have a preaching Minister,
which will never be, except your Lands be bestowed upon many, which now does
but feed and fat one. When the lame man asked an Alms as Peter and John went
into the Temple, Peter answered, Silver and Gold have I none, and Paul was so
far from having a Lordship, that the labor of his own hands ministered to his
necessity. If the Apostles of Christ had no temporal possessions, why should
our Prelates have so great?

Erasmus. Of the unfaithfulness of Prelates, Erasmus in Epist. Apologetica,
makes mention of a Noble man, who purposed to see Jerusalem before his death;
wherefore he left his wife and family, his Lands and Lordships in trust with an
Archbishop to take care of them; but it so happened, the Nobleman died in his
journey, whereof, when the Archbishop knew, he seized into his hands all the
Noble man's Lordships, Castles, and Possessions; and not therewith content, he
laid siege to a Fort into which the Widow was fled for refuge, where she with
her child was slain; which story was not so long before Erasmus's time, but
that there were Nephews of that Noble man alive, to testify the truth. And
thus have the Prelates done; as touching their Temporalities, they have been
entrusted with them as Stewards for the Church of Believers, for those only
that believe, are the Church, and for the poor, and they have converted, or
rather perverted all to their own use, and to their abuse of all the temporal
possessions.

Jasper Bruschio. Jasper Bruschio, in Chronologia Monasteriorum Germany, makes
mention of a Monastery of Cisterian Monks in the borders of Suevia, about the
year 1130. which Monastery was endowed with large possessions and great
privileges by the Founders, upon this Condition, that they should receive with
free Hospitality, any strangers either horse or foot for one nights lodging,
but this hospitality did not long continue, through the subtilty of one Monk,
who took upon him to play the Devils part, rattling in chains, and making a
fearful noise where the strangers lay to fright them, by reason whereof no
traveller durst there abide. At length (as God would have it) one of the Earls
of the house of Montfort, a Benefactor to the same Abbey was there lodged, in
the Night the Monk did counterfeit to play the Devils part as before,
thundering, bouncing on boards, and rattling chains, but after after a while the
Earl took heart, and running for his sword, laid about him, and followed the
noise: so that the Monk that transformed himself into a Devil in jest, was
slain in good earnest.

Clement. John Segovius in the Council of Basil, declared, that it was the
saying of Clement, That he that lives rebelliously neglecting to do good, he
is rather a member of the Devil, than of Christ, and rather an Infidel than a
true believer; which saying he applied against Pope Eugenius. Now let all wise
and impartial men judge, whether the Prelates do not live in open Rebellion
against Christ himself, and against Christ in his members; for they neither
obey the words of Christ, who forbids Church Officers, Lordship and Dominion,
saying to his Apostles, It shall not be so among you, Mat. 22.25, 26. Neither
will they suffer the Servants of Christ to worship him according to his own
holy Institutions, but as far as in them lies, by Censures and
Excommunications, by imprisonment and banishment, etc. John Segovius.
they would compel men to worship God in Ceremonial ways of their own
devising, setting their Thresholds by Gods Threshold, and their Posts by Gods
Posts, and so defile the service of God, as in Ezekiel. 43.7, 8. in equalling
their own Canons and Institutions with the Canons and Institutions of the
Scriptures, or rather above them; so that by Clement, and John Segovius
Testimony, they by so doing are rather members of the Devil than of Christ, and
rather Infidels than true Believers, and if not Believers, then no members of
the Church, and so have no interest in the Temporalities and Tithes that was
given to the Church and for the relief of the Poor.

Cardinal Aralatenses. Isidor, in the book of the Councels, declares that in
an Epistle of Clement the successor of St. Peter, that he applied the saying of
Peter unto himself, which was this; If thou be occupied in worldly cares, thou
shall both deceive thy self, and those that hear thee; for so thou can not
distribute those things which pertain unto Salvation; and it is to be feared,
that our Prelates mind the things of this world more than the things of God:
For Cardinal Aralatenses said in the Council of Bassil, at this time (says he)
the more is the pity, it is hard to find a Prelate in the world which does not
prefer his Temporalities before his Spiritualities, with the love of which they
are so drawn, that they study more to please Princes, than to please God, and
confess God in corners, but Princes openly; and upon this account it was that
John Wickliffe and John Huss said, that Kings and Princes and Lords Temporal
are bound under the pain of Damnation, to take away the Temporalities from the
Prelates, to free themselves from the guilt of Prelates sins, that they fall
not in the same condition with them.

For it is most manifest, that Prelates act against the light of their own
Censciences; as Stephen Gardener the Bishop of Winchester upon his death bed;
the Bishop of Chichester came to him and began to comfort him with the promises
of free Institution in the blood of Christ; which the Bishop of Winchester
hearing said, What, my Lord, will you open that gap now, then farewell
altogether, to me, and to such other in my case you may speak of it, but if you
open that window unto the People, then farewell altogether. Thus it serves to
maintain their dignities by keeping the People in a blind Ceremonial way of
Superstitious worship, they had rather all the People should be damned in
Ignorance, than to make the Truth of the Gospel known unto them.

The Bishop of Burden and John Segonius both, in the Council Bassil said, That
the Popes greatest tirle is to be Servant to Gods Servant,, and so of all other
Prelates, and not to be Lords over Gods heritage. 2 Pet. 5, 3. It shall not be
so amongst you, Matthew. 20.26. for Christ came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, and so the Servant is not above his Lord, it is enough that the
Servant be as his Lord, and that is, to have no Temporalities, unless they will
declaim Christ's service, for as Bernard said to Pope Eugenius, they cannot have
both, Matthew. 10.25.

Bernard to Eugenius. St. Bernard declared in his second Book to Pope Eugenius
that he could not challenge any secular Dominion by right of Succession to
Peter, but be it so, that you challenge it by some other way or means, by right
of your Title Apostolical, you cannot challenge it, neither can Prelates as
pretending to be the Apostles Successors, for how (says he) could Peter give
that to you which he had not himself: Silver and Gold (says he) have I none,
but such as I have I give thee: that which he had says Bernard was care over
the Church, but he did not give you Lordship and Rule over Gods Heritage, but
behaving your self as example to the Flock; and that these words were spoken
not only in humility but in verity, mark what Christ says; The Kings of the
Gentiles exercise Dominion, but it shall not be so among you: here Lordship and
Dominion is forbidden to the Apostles, and dare thou usurp the same? If thou will be a Lord thou shall lose thy Apostleship, or if thou will be an Apostle
thou shall lose thy Lordship; for truly thou shall depart one of them; if thou will have both, then think thy self to be one of those that God complains of,
They have reigned but not by me, they are become Princes and I know it not, Hos.
8.4. Lordship and Rule is forbidden, Ministration and Service is commanded.

Chrysostom. Chrysostom, in Opere Imperfecto, says that a true Preacher ought
not to swerve from the word of God to the right hand or to the left, for they
that do either add or diminish, do endeavor to be wiser than Christ, as if
Christ had not in his word laid down sufficient rules both for the matter and
the manner of his own worship how he will be worshipped: Christ says his sheep
hear his voice, and a Stranger they will not follow, but flee from him, for
they know not the voice of a Stranger, John 10.4, 5. Now our Prelates do not
keep close to the word of God as Chysostom says, but teach us to worship God
by Ceremonies of Surplices, Crossings, Crouching and kneeling sometimes, and by
standing up other whiles, and the like, which is not the voice of Christ, that
the sheep of Christ do know, but the voice of Strangers which the sheep of
Christ know not, and therefore they flee from them: besides to require the
Servants of Christ to swear their Canonical obedience to such things, it is not
the voice of Christ, but the voice of Strangers to require the same, and those
that follow them cannot thereby prove themselves to be the sheep of Christ, but
rather the contrary, for the sheep of Christ do flee from Strangers.

Polecronicon. It is recorded by Polecronicon lib. 5. chap. 10. that about the
year 610. John Patriach of Alexandria, he was so merciful to the Poor and
Needy, that he counted them his Masters, and himself their Servant and Steward,
Patriarch of Alexandria.
in distributing the Church goods unto them; he was wont twice a week to sit
at his door all the day long, to take up matters and make Peace and Unity where
there was variances, nnd waiting all one day and no body came, he lamented,
that all that day he had done no good.

Pope Gregory his order to divide Church goods in 4 parts. About the year 600.
Austin the Monk, Bishop of Canterbury, sent to Pope Gregory, to know how the
Gifts and Oblations given to the Church ought to be divided; unto which Gregory
answered, That the manner of the Sea Apostolical, was to warn and charge all
such as were Ordained Bishops, that of all their Stipends, or what was given to
the Church, to divide it into four parts; one part to the Bishop for
Hospitality, another to the Clergy, and another to the Poor, and the fourth
part for the repairing of Churches: You must, says Gregory, observe this
Institution which was practiced by the first Fathers of the Primitive Church,
among whom there was not one that counted any thing his own of all that he did
possess. But can there be one Bishop now found in all the world that does so,
but what once they get possession of, they make all their own, right or wrong:
by this primitive Institution, as Gregory says, it appears that our Prelates
have broken the Condition for which goods were given to the Church, and
therefore our King and Nobles may justly take them again.

Cutbert Bishop of Canterbury. Also, about the year 747. Cutbert Bishop of
Canterbury ordered that once a year every Bishop should visit all the Parishes
in his Dioces, and that Priests should not have the disposing of Secular
matters, and that Alms should not be neglected, though at that time they were
Apostatised from the primitive Principles, there still remaining some tinctures
and smatterings of the primitive Institution concerning the Alms of the poor
out of the Church goods, that it was not altogether neglected and forgotten as
it is now.

For now, as Peter Blesensis Archdeacon of Bath, said in his Treatise
dedicated to the Bishop of Worcester, of the Institution of a Bishop, about the
year 1160. That certain Bishops abusive, ly call the Liberality and Alms of
Kings, etc. bestowed on them, Baronyes and Royalties, and themselves Barons, it
being an action of most shameful servitude, the Lord may justly say of them,
They have reigned but not by me, Hos. 8.4. but thou must know, thou have taken
upon thee the Office of a Shepherd, and not of a Barron; Let another dispatch
thy temporal affairs; for the mind consecrated to divine service ought to be
free from worldly employment: All the care of Prelates is to increase their
Rents, but the voice of Christ to Bishops is, If thou love me, feed my sheep;
not if thou love me, till thy Land, nor increase thy Rents, and build high
houses: no, thou art set over the Souls of men, and not over their Bodies as a
Baron or Temporal Lord, therefore thou mist not make thy self a Lord over them
but a Servant.

Angelo Cararo. Angelo Cararo, speaking to the Pope and Prelates, says it is
but reasonable that Princes should employ their Authority to make them leave
that base and vile Avarice that is among them, which is displeasing to the
whole world: but unless they go about it roundly in express terms, laying aside
all Civility, it will be difficult to bring it about; he says that the affairs
of the Chamber of Rome is such a Gulf, that it swallows up all one has, and
whence nothing can be redeemed no more than out of Hell. This Angelo Cararo was
a Venetian and had been at Rome, his Book was printed 5 or 6 years ago.

Richard, Archbishop of Canterbury, about the year 1231. complained to the
Pope, That Beneficed men within Orders had many Benefices joined with Cure of
Souls, and that they also took example of Bishops, and did intermedle with
secular matters: It may seem strange that in time of Popery complaint should be
made to the Pope against the Clergy for holding Plurality of Benefices, and now
men can swallow them down without straining at such Camels, without check of
conscience, yea, in some places a Bishopric is not thought sufficient without
a Commendum of some Parsonage of five or six hundred pounds a year joined to
it; and thus the goods of the Church and poor are wasted.

Simon Fish. In a Book Entitled The supplication of Beggars, written by Simon
Fish, and presented to King Hen. 8. therein it was declared, that Purgatory is
a thing invented by the Covetous Clergy, only to translate the Lands and
Temporal Estates of Kings, Princes, Lords, Knights, Esquires, etc, into their
own hands, for praying for them to deliver their souls out of Purgatory, for
what man is there in the world that is once deluded to believe that there is a
Purgatory, and to believe that the Masses and Prayers of the Prelates and
Clergy can deliver them out of that burning fire; but that, when he is dying,
and can hold his Estate no longer, that will not give one half, or a great part
thereof unto these Merchants of men's souls, rather than lie burning in these
tormenting flames for some thousands of years after death, as the Prelates
make them to believe they must; and by this way of Delusion, the Prelates have
gotten the best Lordships into their hands, to the value of well nigh half the
Kingdom? Why then should not the King, Princes, and Lords, etc. take again
that which is their own, which their Predecessors have been so cheated out of,
and the conditions failing for which they were given. And besides, their
Doctrine of Justification by works, made others to give Lands for the relief of
the poor, thinking thereby to be Justified, which Lands were delivered into the
Bishops and Prelates hands, in trust as stewards for the poor, supposing they
would be faithful stewards in distributing thereof; the which Lands the
Prelates have converted to their own use, and pretend a title thereunto, but it
is an usurped title: But what remedy is there to relieve us, your poor, blind,
sick, lame, and diseased Beads-men? to make more Hospitals? Nay truly, the more
the worse; for the fat of the whole Foundation hangs on the Prelates and
Clergies beards; for diverse of your Predecessors and Nobles have given Lands,
to have a certain sum of Money given yearly to the poor, whereof, for the
antiquity of the time the conditions are forgotten, so that they give not one
penny; they likewise gave them to have certain Masses said for them daily,
whereof they say never a one. If the Abbots of Westminster should sing every
day as many Masses as they are bound to do by the Founders, a thousand Monks
were too few: Wherefore, if your Grace will build a sure Hospital, never to
fail to relieve your poor Beads-men, then take from them all these things:
this, with much more to this purpose, was in that Supplication.

Pope Innocent. Pope Innocent 4th required that all Beneficed men in England
which were resident, should pay to the Pope a third part of their goods or
Profits, and Non-residents the one half, for three years together. And it is
most certain, that our King and Nobles within his Majesty's Dominions, have a
thousand times more right to receive these profits, than either Pope or
Prelate; for Popes and Prelates are Usurpers, their Predecessors having
possessed themselves thereof by deceitful Delusion; therefore our King and
Nobles may justly require their own Temporalities again, which their
Predecessors were so deluded of, the Prelates having been such unfaithful
Stewards, it is but just that the King, Princes, and Lords do require them to
give account of their Stewardship, that they may be no longer Stewards.

The testimony of 21 Bishops, 8 Archdeacons, and 17 Doctors. In the Year 1537.
or thereabout, Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, and Edmond Bishop of York and
to the number of one and twenty Bishops, and eight Archdeacons, and seventeen
Doctors of Divinity, and of the Common and Civil Law, they did all assert, and
sign with their hands to King Hen. the 8th. the which was ratified by the
Statute of the 32. of Hen. 8. That there is not in the New Testament any
mention made of the Calling, Jurisdiction, Lordliness, or secular employment of
Lord Bishops: But the New Testament speaks only of Deacons, and of Ministers,
alias Priests or Bishops; and of these two only, that is, Priests or Ministers,
and Deacons, the Scripture makes express mention: And that Christ did never
institute any distinction or difference, or pre-eminence of power, order, or
Jurisdiction among the Apostles themselves, but that they were all equal in
power, authority, and jurisdiction; and that there has been any difference
since, it is by the invention of men, and not by the institution of Jesus
Christ; and therefore no Bishop by the Law of God may take upon him any
Jurisdiction in secular Courts; for God did constitute Kings to defend the
Faith of Christ, and true Religion, and to cause Bishops or Ministers to
execute their Pastoral office truly and faithfully, or for neglect thereof, to
put others in their room and place, and not to suffer the Clergy to meddle in
secular affairs, for the Kingdom of Christ is a spiritual, and not a carnal
Kingdom; as Christ said, No man can serve two masters* so I say, No man can
faithfully discharge his Ministerial office in Christ's Kingdom, which is his
Church, if he be entangled in secular affairs in the worldly Kingdom. You
cannot serve God and Mammon, Mat. 6.27.

Mr Elmer. Mr. Elmer, in his Harborow for faithful Subjects, Printed at
Strasburg, writes thus on the 12 of Luke, Who made me a Judge, etc. As if
Christ should say, It belongs not to my office to determine in matters of
policy, but to the Civil Magistrate: And if it did not belong to Christ, how
dare Prelates take it upon them to do it? for if it had been within the compass
of Christ's Function, he could not in conscience have refused it, to set them at
one which were at strife; if he might do it, and would not, he lacked Charity,
and did not his duty, which were blasphemy to say of Christ; and if it belonged
not to him, neither did it belong to his Apostles, nor their successors. Had he
not as large a Commission as he gave? His Kingdom is not of this world;
therefore Bishops by his example cannot give themselves so large a scope in
temporal matters; therefore by their fruits you may know them, whether they
have their Commission from Christ, or, I had like to have said, from
Antichrist? for, says he, if these two offices, Ecclesiastical and Civil, be
jumbled together in one Function, there can be no quiet, nor well-ordered
Commonwealth.

Richard Armacanus. Richard Armacanus, about the year 1350. in de questionibus
Armenorum, book 11. chap. 1. says, that neither the Dominion nor Ministry of
temporal things, belongs to Ecclesiastical Dignity, but rather diminishes
it; for Christ prohibited the Apostles of temporal Dominion, saying, It shall
not be so among you. And again, Possess neither gold nor silver, nor brass in
your purses, nor scrip for your journey, nor two coats, neither shoes, nor
staves, Math. 10.9, 10. If thou will be perfect, go sell all that thou have and
give to the poor: He says in chap. 2. that the states and degree of Patriarch,
Primate, Archbishop, Bishop, etc. were invented by men, and not instituted by
Christ, nor his Apostles, and that no Prelate of the Church, how great soever,
has any greater degree of the power of order, than a simple Priest. But how do
Prelates observe Christ's rule, who commanded that they should possess neither
gold nor silver, and as if they would strive to do as contrary as they can
devise, they possess thousands of gold and silver, coaches and horses, and what
not: Is it not high time therefore for Kings and Nobles to take these
temporalities from them, which they thus abuse, as if they would set Christ at
defiance, and bid him command what he will, they will do what they will; do not
their actions tend to this end? the good Lord direct the King, Princes, and
Lords, etc. that by connivance they partake not with the Prelates in these
sins, lest they, which God forbid, should partake with them in their
punishments.

Cyprian. Cyprian, in his fourth Book Epist. 4. says, Our Lord Christ observed
the will of his Father, but we, speaking of Prelates, observe not the will of
the Lord, as appears above, having all our minds set upon Lucre and
Possessions, given to pride, full of Emulation and Dissension, void of
Simplicity and faithful dealing, renouncing the world only in word, but nothing
in Deed, every one pleasing himself, and displeasing all others.

John Huss. John Huss, in the Council of Constance did affirm that the Clergy
ought to have no temporal possessions, and that Temporal Lords may justly,
without any offense take them away from the Clergy, and that Kings and Nobles
ought to compel the Clergy to observe and keep the Law and Rules of Christ: He
also says, that Tithes and Oblations given to the Church are public and
common Alms, and that the Clergy, living wickedly, ought to be reproved by the
Laity, by taking away their Tithes and other Temporal Profits from them, and
give them to others, etc.

Mr. Tindal. Mr. Tindall, in his Book of Obedience of a Christian, page 114,
115. says, That the Sword is put into the Kings hand to execute vengeance upon
all evil dooers; But now says he, the Bishops minister the Temporal Sword, and
the Office of Preaching they lay aside, and will neither preach themselves, nor
suffer others that would to preach, but slay them with the temporal sword; and
as none, (says he) can preach Christ, except they preach against Antichrist;
and as none can heal a disease, unless he begin at the root, so can thou not
preach against any mischief, except thou begin at the Bishops. And in page 124.
he says, Those that are sworn to be true to the Pope, Cardinals, and Bishops,
it is as if they should swear to be false to Christ, to the King and to the
Realm; for such Prelates that will revenge themselves of men for speaking the
truth, and for every trifle, they are not fit to preach the patience of Christ.

Henry Stalbridge To the same purpose writes Henry Stalbridge in his
Exhortative Epistle to his dear Countrymen of England, he says, that what
blood has been shed between Emperor and Emperor, Kingdom and Kingdom,
Constantinople, Almain, England France, Italy and Spain, who sees not that the
pride of bloody Bishops, is the ground and original foundation of all
Controversies, Schisms, Variances and Wars between Realm and Realm; see the
fifth and sixth part of the Homily of Whitsunday. And to confirm the truth of
this, consider whether the carriage and practice of Prelates, and their
Doctrines, such as Godfrey Goodman Bishop of Gloucester, who in one Sermon at
White Hall before his Majesty delivered five points of flat Popery, and did
follow many Popish practices. And at another time, in the year 1636. he said,
that the Church of Rome, and our Church are both as one, for we, said he, (and
he said not much amiss) have both the same Hierarchy and Government, the same
Liturgy, Holy Days, Fasts, Ceremonies, Sacraments, etc. so as those who
affirm that Papists are damned, do but through the sides of the Church of Rome,
give a deadly blow to the Church of England, and deny that we are saved; with
more the like. And also Bishop Laud's silencing and suspending of Ministers,
and sending a new book of Common Prayer differing from ours, into Scotland:
consider whether these, and the like, were not the cause of our late unhappy
Wars in England.

Bernard. Bernard, as touching Bishops having Conusance in their Courts of
Tithes, etc. writes thus, For Tithes, Testaments, Administrations, Servitude,
Legitimations, and such like, says he to Pope Eugenius, you went beyond your
bounds, when you restrained them to your Courts, and without Caesar, made Laws
for things that did belong to Caesar; for the Goods, Lands, Livings, Estates of
Laymen, and Clerks also, are Caesar's Charge, and not yours nor the Prelates.
My Kingdom, says Christ, is not of this world; If then, the Pope, Prelates,
and Priests, will be the servants of Christ, says Ambrose, they must not
challenge any worldly Kingdom, Ambrose.
the servant is not above his Master, and if the Master deny it, the servant
may not affirm it and usurp it. Soldiers of Christ must not entangle
themselves with the affairs of this world, much less to make themselves Lords
and Judges of earthly matters.

William Ocham. William Ocham, a famous Schoolman, writ a book about the year
1330. which was printed in London, in which he says, that Clergy men are
liable to pay tribute unto Princes, and that Princes may take away their Lands
and Possessions when they abuse them to Luxury, Pomp, and other private uses,
and they may employ them for the defense and peace of the Realm: And after he
adds, That all the Revenue of Clergy men, but that which is sufficient to
provide them Food and Raiment, with which they ought to be content, as Paul
says; 1 Timothy 6.8. Having Food and Raiment, let us be therewith content, and
the rest ought to be spent in pious uses, and in feeding the poor, which if
they be not employed in this sort, Kings ought to take care of them to set some
to see it done.

William Prynne. In the second part of Mr. William Prynne's book of the
Antipathy of the English Lord Prelates, both the Regal Monarchy, and Civil
Unity, page 311, he says, that the endowing of the Prelates with great
temporel Revenues, was the very bane and poison of Religion, and one principal
cause of Bishops Rebellions, Treasons and Exorbitances he had forementioned;
and therefore they may both with good Conscience and reason, be subtracted from
them, and put to better uses, and they like other Ministers, be confined to one
competent living with Cure, there constantly to reside and instruct the People
like Bishops in the Primitive Church; for so long as our Lordly Prelates
continue, there will not only be a possibility, but a probability of bringing
in Popery and the Pope again amongst us since their Lordly Hierarchy is
supported by Popish Doctrine, Canons, Ceremonies, Liturgy, Godfry Goodman.
Holy days, etc. as Godfry Goodman Bishop of Gloucester said a little above,
which they are engaged to maintain to preserve their tottering Thrones from
ruin.

John Salisbury. John Salisbury, our Country man, flourished about the year of
Christ 1140. de nugis Curialium, lib. 8. cap. 17, and 23. writ thus of the
pride and sedition of the Bishops: Thou may admire to see the various
Household stuff, and Riches, as they say of Craesus, amonst them that preach
poor Christ, they live of the Gospel without preaching the Gospel, and it is
well if they live only so, as they do not also riot, they so gape after gain,
that they contem the things of Jesus Christ, and are neither worthy the honor
nor name either of Pastor or Hireling; they do that which makes them to be
feared of all, and to be beloved of none; they preach Peace, yet make Division;
they make a show, and counterfeit Humility, that they may challenge Pride; in
fullness they dispute of Fasting, and what they build up with words, they pull
down with deeds, the works, they do bear witness of them; you may know them by
their Fruits, they do not only contend, but fight for a Bishopric, the
Ancients were dragged against their wills to a Bishopric, but went willingly
to Martyrdom, they feared the chief Chains worse then a Prison or Cross.

Ex Catal. Illyr. There is a Story, that about the year 1228. at Paris in a
Synod or Convocation of the Clergy, one that was appointed to preach, was
much troubled in his mind what to say; the Devil came unto him and asked him
why he was so careful what to Preach, say thus, quoth the Devil, the Princes of
Hell salute you, O ye Princes of the Church, and gladly give you thanks,
because that through your default and negligence, all Souls go to Hell, and the
Preacher added, that he was enforced by the Command of God to declare the same,
yea, and a certain token was given him for a sign whereby the Synod might
evidently see that he did not lie. Ex Catall. Illyr. fol. 546.

Alexander Fabricius. Alexander Fabricius a Popish English Writer about the
year 1420. in his Destructorium Vitiorum part 6. cap. 79. says, Who are more
horribly inthralled to the Devils servitude, than those who are constituted in
the sublimity of Honor; Ecclesiastical men, who ought to be the light of the
world, yet where is more abundant darkness of vices? Where more abundant gaping
after earthly things, than in modern Prelaet^* who are fatted in both powers,
as well Temporal or Spiritual? Where is greater Pomp in all appendicles, yea,
and that so much, that having left the poverty of the Primitive Church, they
are now rather to be termed Princes of Provinces, than Postors of Souls, thus
he, and much more to this purpose.

Lucifers Letter to the Prelates. Mr. Fox, in Acts and Monuments, makes mention
of a Device or Letter fained under the name of Lucifer Prince of Darkness,
written to the persecuting Prelates of England, which Mr. Fox transcribed out
of the Regester of the Bishop of Hereford, written, as some think, by William
Swinderby; I will only mention some few expressions to our purpose:

Lucifer Prince of Darkness, etc.
To all our Children of Pride, and Companions of our Kingdom, and especially to
our Princes of the Church of this later age and time, etc. send greeting, to
all that obey our Commandments, and the Laws of Satan already enacted:
Know ye that in time past, certain Vicegerents of Christ following his steps,
etc. in a beggarly life converted in a manner all the world, from the yoke of
our tyranny, to the great derision and contempt of our Prison, House and
Kingdom; but we seeking remedy for time to come, instead of those Apostles, we
have caused you to be their Successors, which be Prelates of the Church, by our
great might and subtilty, as Christ said of you, they have reigned but not by
me; once I promised him all the Kingdoms of the world, etc. but he would not,
but to you, who are fallen from grace, co serve us in the earth, is that my
promise fulfilled; therefore fill your selves full, and be contrary to those
Fathers in your life and conditions, and exalt your selves above all other men,
and neither give to God nor Caesar that which is theirs, but exercise you the
power of both Swords, fight our quarrel, entangle your selves in worldly
matters, and climb up from the miserable state of Poverty, to the highest seat
of Honor, and Princely places of Dignity, by Wiles and Subtilty, Flattery,
Lying and Perjury, Treason, Deceit and Symony, and what our Infernal Furies may
devise; and after you are advanced thither where you would be, then either by
Violence, Raving, or by Ambition subtly pilfer away, and wrongfully wrest,
and by false Titles possess those goods which should be for the sustentation of
the poor members of Christ, whom from our first fall we have hated, and consume
these goods as your selves list, with Whores, Strumpets and Bauds, etc. with
whom ye ride pompously like mighty Princes, far otherwise than those beggarly
Priests in the Primitive Church; for I would have you to build Palaces, fare
like Princes, to eat the daintiest Ma ts and drink the pleasantest Wines, and
hoard up Treasure and not be like Peter and Paul, who said, Silver and Gold
have I none: Ye fight for us, according to your ways O acceptable Society or
Fellowship, promised to us, when Christ called you the Synagogue of Satan, we
love you for your deserts, which contemn the Laws of Simon Peter, and embrace
the Laws of Simon Magus: Ye regard Money, and have no regard to Souls, ye have
made the House of God a Den of Thieves, ye make Laws and keep not the same, ye
justify the wicked for reward, and take away the just man's desert from him and
thus the Sovereignty of our Empire, by you, has been reformed, and our
intolerable loss restored: We would also you should do our Commendation to our
entirely beloved Daughters Pride, Deceit, Wrath, Avarice, Belly-chear and
Leachery; especially to Lady Symony, who has made you men, and given you suck
on her own breasts, and therefore in no wise shall call her Simon: And if any
man preach, or teach otherwise than you will have him, oppress ye him violently
with Excommunications and Censures heaped one upon another, and let him be
condemned as an Heretic or Schismatic, and kept in Prison till he die, for an
example to all such as confess Christ: And thus do your endeavor that you may
deserve to have the place which we have provided for you.

Fare ye well. Given at the Center of the Earth in that dark place where all
the Rabblement of Devils were present.

Lord Cobham: The noble Martyr Sr. John Oldcastle, Lord Cobham professed that
the Will of God is, That Priests being secluded from all worldlyness, should
conform themselves to the Example of Christ and his Apostles, that is, in
Poverty, and teaching the Scriptures purely, and giving good example to others,
more than any other sort of people, where (says he to the Prelates) do ye find
in Gods Law, that you should sit in Judgment of any Christian man, but in
Annas and Caiphas that sat thus of Christ and upon his Apostles afrer his
Ascension; of whom only have ye taken it to judge Christ's members as ye do,
since the Venom of Judas was shed into the Church, and by Venom (says he) I
mean your Possessions and Lordships, for then an Angel cried in the Air, Woe,
Woe, Woe, this day is Venom shed into the Church; as your own Churches mention:
before that time all the Bishops of Rome in a manner were Martyrs, etc. but
since, Popes and Bishops, one has cursed and poisoned, slain and done much
mischief to another: Christ was meek and merciful, but they are proud and
tyrannical, Christ was poor, but they are rich, etc.

Arnulphus In the second Tome of the general Councels, mention is made of a
Book called Opus tripartium, which Sabellicus and Platina thought to be written
by Arnulphus; In which Book he complains of the great number of Holy days in
which Whores and naughty women said, That they vantage more in one of those
days, than in fifty days besides: He complained also of the inconsiderate
promotion of evil Prelates, and the wantonness and laciviousness of their
Servants, and excess in Aparrel; Also of Prelates mispending the Church goods
in superfluity and upon their Kinsfolks and other worse ways, etc.

Hostiensis. Hostiensis, says in his third book Idecime; That if Priests do
not minister of their Spiritualities to the people, the people ought to take
away the Alms of their Tithes from them; and John Huss, said, That Tithes and
Oblations given to the Church, John Huss.
are public and common Alms, when Kings and Princes, Knights and Citizens,
etc. give to the Church or to the Priest for his Stipend, they give it to the
Church of God and to the party as a perpetual Alme that they should attend upon
the Ministry, otherwise Alms should not be a work of mercy, hereupon (says
he) it appears that Tenths in Gospel times are pure Alms given to the Church
for the use of the poor: And hereupon holy men have said, that Tenths are
tribute of needy souls, as St. Augustine.
August^n in a Sermon of the restoring of Tithes, says, The giving of Tithes,
my dear Brethren, are the tributes of poor souls, therefore pay your tribute
unto the poor, for whatsoever does remain more then a competent living and
decent clothing, it is not to be reserved for riot, but is to be laid in the
heavenly Treasury by giving it in Alms unto the poor, for whatsoever is given
to us more than we have need of, it is not given us for our selves, but to be
bestowed upon others by our hands, and if we do not give it, we invade another
man's possession.

Augustine. Also, in another place Augustine says, Forasmuch as every man as
does any work of mercy ought diligently to have respect to the ability of them
that he bestows his Alms upon, lest that by nourishing Loyterers, he be made
partaker of their offenses: and in 23. quest. 7. Augustine says, If we possess
any thing privately more than what may reasonably suffice us, it is not ours,
but the goods of the poor whose Stewards we are, except we challenge to our
selves a property by some damnable usurpation. The gloss upon this part of the
question says, That Prelates are but only Stewards of the Church goods and not
Lords thereof

Hierome o^ Prague. Hierome of Prague affirmed before the Council of Constance
that the Patrimony of the Church was given for three uses; First, for the use
of the Poor. Secondly, for Hospitality. Thirdly, for repairing of Churches, and
not to be spent upon Harlots, great Banqueting or Feasting of those that need
it not, nor keeping great Horses and Dogs, nor for gorgeous Apparel and other
things unbeseeming Christians.

Richard Wimbleton Richard Wimbleton, in a Sermon at Paul's Cross, in the reign
of King Hen. 4. upon these words; Give an accout of thy Stewardship. He said,
Every Prelate and Priest shall give an account how they entered into the
sheepfold, and how they have ruled the Flock, whether for outward hire, or
love as a Father, or as a Wolf that eats the Sheep; whom have thou turned
from his wicked life, etc. have thou taught the Law of God, or the Laws of men?
how have thou disposed of the goods of the poor? they shall (says he) hear
grievous complaints of Fatherless Children, that Prelates and Priests have
lived of their Alms and have not done away their Sins, they are not ashamed to
waste in the house of Pride and Lechery, and keep to themselves wickedly and
cursedly that which should be the livelihood of the poor: they live not like
Priests, but like Beasts, they are clothed like Knights, they ride like
Princes, and all they thus spend is the goods of the poor: This, and much more
the like did he declare in that Sermon.

William Swinde William Swinderby, a Martyr under King Richard the 2d, had this
Article objected against him, that he held that all Priests are of like power
in all things, notwithstanding that some of them in the world are of greater
and higher honor, degree, and pre-eminence, but that is man's appointment and
not of God; and as concerning the Wealth, Possessions, and Lordships of
Prelates, he thus affirmed before the Bishops that convened and examined him,
he said, That it was lawful and needful for Secular Lords by way of Charity and
power given to them of God, for the default of Prelates and cursed Curates,
that openly misuse the goods of the Church, that be poor men's goods, the which
poor men, Lords been holden to maintain and defend, to take away and withdraw
from such Curates, poor men's goods (which Curates wrongfully holden) in help of
the poor, and their own wilful offerings he means, their freewill offerings,
and their bodily Alms deeds, and give them to such as duly serve God in the
Church, and been needy in upbearing of the charge that Prelates should do, and
do it not: And as anenst taking away of Temporalities, I say that it is lawful
for Kings, Princes, Dukes and Lords of the world, to take away from Popes,
Cardinals, Bishops and Prelates, possessions in the Church, their Temporalities
and their Alms, that they have given them, upon condition that they should
serve God the better, when they verily seen that their giving and their taking
been contrary to the Law of God, to Christ's living and his Apostles, and
namely, in that they take upon them that should be next followers of Christ and
his Apostles in poorness and meekness, to be secular Lords against the teaching
of Christ and St. Peter, Luke 22.25.26. and 1 Pet. 5.3. And namely, when such
Temporalities makes them the more proud both in heart and in Array then they
shoulden been else, and more in strife and debate against Peace and Charrty,
and in evil ensample to the world, to be occupied in worldly business which
draws them from the service of God and edifying of Christ's Church, etc. then he
thought upon such misdemeanors to take away their Temporalities, etc.

Anselme. Anselme, also says that Presbyters are above, and were before
Bishops, and are of Divine Institution, but so are not Lord Bishops, and says,
That Presbyters did first elect and institute Bishops and ordeyn them to their
office, and not Bishops ordeyn Presbyters as they do now: So Anselme Bishop of
Canterbury, on 1 Timothy 4.14. Canon of Africa.
Also the Canon of Africa in the year 990. Sect. 17. says, There is no
difference between a Priest and a Bishop, but that the Bishops were constituted
by men, to confer orders, A general consent that Ministers and Bishops are of
equal power.
this equality of power in Priests and Bishops according to divine institution
has been also maintained by John Wickliffe and the one and twenty Bishops, and
eight Archdeacons, and seventeen Doctors mentioned above in King Hen. the 8th
his reign, who did all declare that there was no pre-eminence of power, order,
or jurisdiction between the Apostles themselves, or between Bishops themselves;
but that Ministers or Bishops are all equal in power, authority, and
jurisdiction, and that there is now any difference, it is a device of men by
the permission of Princes and Civil powers; the same also is maintained by
Cyprian, St. Hierom, Ocham, John Lambert Martyr, John Bradford, William Alley
Bishop of Exeter, Alexander Nowell Dean of Paul's, Pilkington Bishop of Durham,
and innumerable Writers more, hold Ministers and Bishops of equal power by
divine Institution.

Henry Stalbridge. Mr. Henry Stalbridge whom I have mentioned once before, in
his Exhortative Epistle printed at Basil, says, I say yet once again, and that
in the zeal of the Lord, as he is my Judge, I wish, if his gracious pleasure so
were, that first the Kings Majesty, and so all those to whom God has given
power and authority on Earth may thoroughly see and perceive, how that not only
the bloody Bear and Wolf of Rome, but also the most part of other Bishops and
stout sturdy Canons of Cathedral Churches, with other petty Prowlers and
prestigious Priests of Baal in all Realms of Christendom, especially in England
do roar abroad like Lions, fret like angry Bears, and bite like cruel Wolves,
clustring together like swarms of Adders in a Dunghill, or most wily subtle
Serpents, to uphold and preserve their Interest, Paul admonished us of them,
that after his departing grievous Wolves should enter, not sparing the flock,
Acts 20.29. These spiritual man-hunters are the very offspring of Cain,
Children of Caiaphas, and Successors of Simon Magus as their Doctrine and
Living declare: Most cruel enemies have they been in all ages to the Verity of
God, and most fierce Persecutors of Christ and his Church. Marvel not ye
Bishops and Prelates, says he, though I thus, in the zeal of Elias and Phineas
stomach against your sturdy stubborness, for never was any tyranny ministered
upon Christ's mistical members but by your procurement; never did Christ send
such bloody: Apostles and two horned Warriers, but the Devils Vicar-Antichrist
sent them, who is the deadly destroyer of faithful Beleivers, etc. and so he
goes on. I reckon it therefore (says he) high time for all Christian Princes
which pretend to receive the Gospel of Salvation, and to live in peace and
tranquillity for ever, to cast the Bishops out of Privy Councels, and utterly
to seclude you from all administrations, till such time as they find you no
longer Wolves, but faithful Feeders, no Destroyers, but gentle Teachers; for
consider your beginning, never came you in with your Miters, Robes and Rings,
etc. it the door, as did the poor Apostles; but by the window unrequired, like
Robbers, Thieves and Man-quellers, with Simon Magus, Marcion and Menander,
never was your proud pontifical power of our heavenly Fathers planting, and
therefore must be rooted up, Matt. 15.13. If any thing under Heaven has need
of Reformation, let them that mind any Godlyness, think this to be one, for if
these be not spiritual Spiritual Thieves, Soul-murtherers, Heretics,
Schismatics, Church-robbers, Rebels and Traitors to God and man, where are any
to be looked for in the world; for nothing can they do but work daily mischief,
as well may they be spared in the Common wealth (says he) as Kites, Crows,
Buzzards, Polcats, Rats, Weasles, Otters, Wolves and Foxes, bodily Fleas or
flesh Flies, or other devouring noisome Vermin; for so long as they sit in the
Parliament House, the Gospel shall be kept under, and Christ persecuted in his
faithful members: take me not here (says he) that I condemn any Bishop or
Priest that is godly, doing those Offices the Scripture commands, as
preaching the Gospel and providing for the poor, etc. but against bloody
Butchers that murder Gods people, and make havoc of Christ's Congregation, to
maintain Jewish Ceremonies and Paganish Superstition in the Christian Church,
these are not Bishops, but Sheep-biters, Tyrants, Tormentors, and the Devils
slaughter men, but such as in poverty preach the Gospel, provide for the poor,
rebuke the wicked world of Pride, Idolatry, Hypocrisy, they are not only
worthy of a competent living, but worthy of double honor: but from the
inordinate excess of Riches, Bishops and Prelates ought of all men to be
sequestered, considering that the wicked nature of Mamon is always to corrupt;
yea the very Elect of God were not more merciful, says he.

Thus as you have heared by these Testimonies above, Lord Bishops standing in
the Church with their Dignities and Jurisdictions is not of Gods institution,
but by men, yet God suffers such kind of Adversaries in the Church, says Mr.
Fox, in Acts and Monuments page 1440. who under the name of the Church maintain
a worldly State and Kingdom; and because they cannot uphold their cause by
Scripture, the holy word of God, they bear it out, with outfacing, railing and
slandering, making Princes and People believe that all are Scismaticks, Rebels,
and what not; and subverters of the Common wealth, whosoever that dare,
although it be by plain Scripture, to speak against their doings: As it is
written of the Emperor, that when he had burned Rome six days and seven
nights, he made Proclamation that the innocent Christians had set the City on
fire, to stir up the people against them, whereby he caused them to be burned
and destroyed as Rebels and Traitors. See Suetonius in Nerone.

Melancton Melancton, in an Epistle to King. Hen. 8. says, That long and
horrible darkness has been in the Church of Christ, that men's traditions not
only have been a yoke to good men's Consciences, but also which is worse, they
have been reputed for Gods holy Service, to the great dishonor of God and
hindrance of his true worship, and the Keys were abused to the maintenance of
usurped tyranny, and Ceremonies, men's inventions; and it is not light offense
to set up new kinds of worshipping and serving God, such presumption God does
horribly detest, the manner of his worship is known in his word only, and he
will not hale Religion to be invented by men's devise, for so the Alcaron, and
all Religion in all Nations might be approved and allowed of: Therefore says
the Wise man, In all thy ways acknowledge God, and lean not unto thine own
understanding. Prove. 3.5, 6. God has commanded us to hear Christ, Acts 3.22.
and not to hear the invention of subtle politic heads which frame Religion
for their own Lucre, and advantage; we ought not to dissemble in Gods matters,
but use them as the Scripture speaks, for no service nor worship pertaining
to God ought to be set up by man's device, and Bishops will never cease to rage
against the Church of Christ without mercy or pity, for them the Devil uses as
Instruments and Ministers of his malice and fury against Christ in his members.

Luther. Luther, in his answer to the Popes Bull, says, That any Fool, Ass, or
Blockhead may condemn a man of Error, by saying, I like it not, I deny it, I
will not have it so, without any reason from Scripture: Is not thy whorish face
ashamed to dare to set the trifling vanities of your own bare words, of the
Canons and Institutions of your own inventions, against the Thunderbolts of
Gods Word? if such reasoning were sufficient to condemn men without Scripture,
why may we not turn Turks, Heretics, Jews or Atheists, as well as Papists?

Steven Gardener. Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, in his Book de vera
Obedientia says, Though it be granted that Peter had the preferment of the
first name or place in the Order of the Apostles, which yet I would deny him,
yet it follows not (says he) that with this primacy he had also a Kingdom
given him, and though the Lord bid him confirm his Brethren, yet was he not bid
to exercise an Empire over his Brethren, for so they should not be his
Brethren, but his Subjects.

Richard Feurus. Richard Feurus, a Martyr about the year 1554. in the Province
of Dolphine, in his disputing against his Adversaries, he affirmed, That the
word of God ought to be our Rule, and that nothing is left to Doctors or
Councils to be devised without the word of God, and that all things necessary
either for government of the Church, off or the Salvation of man, are expressed
and prescribed in the word of God, for Paul says, That he durst not utter any
thing but what the Lord had wrought in him and showed unto him, Romans 15.18.
John wills us to receive no man, unless he bring the same Doctrine, that we
have received from Christ and his Apostles, Let him be accursed: Christ's Sheep
hear his voice and know his voice, but they know not the voice of a Stranger,
and all manner of worship and service that is not prescribed in the word of
God, is the voice of Strangers; Hence it will follow, that such Strangers that
both command and practice such Ceremonial service of God, as is not prescribed
in the Word of God in the New Testament, Kings and Princes, etc. may lawfully
take away their Temporalities and Tithes, and dispose of them to better uses as
has been said above.

Richard Lovingham, in the reign of King Hen. 4. gathered out of a Book of John
Purvey, that the Temporalities of the Clergy in England at that time in the
hands of such as did no duty for it, belonging their office to do, besides
other Temporalities, he said, That the King, Lords, and Commons, might without
any other Charge, but these Temporalities, maintain fifteen Garrisons with
fifteen thousand Soldiers having sufficient Lands and Revenues to live upon,
and also maintain fifteen thousand Priests and Clerks, and fifteen Colleges
more, and an hundred Hospitals, and every house an hundred Marks a year, and
bring in besides above twenty, thousand Pounds a year into the Kings Coffers.
He said also, that the Kings and Lords ought to banish the Pope and his Factors
out of their Lands, and all Bishops and their Factors that say it appertains
not to Kings and secular Lords, but to them and their Officials, to punish
Adultery and Fornication, they do fall into manifest Treason against the King,
and Heresy against the Scripture, and that it does appertain to the King to
have the ordering of Priests and Bishops, as Solomon and Jehosaphat and others
had, says Mr. Fox Acts and Monuments, page 502. Now if the temporalities at
that time would have done so much in England, what will the temporalities and
tithes of three Kingdoms do now that Lands are at so high a rate to what they
then were.

Augustine. Huldrick, Bishop of Ausburg, in an Epistle to Pope Nicholas the
first, about the year 867 said, that good correction proceeding from the lesser
to the greater, is not to be refused nor disdained, when he that is corrected
is found to strive against the truth, to please men, and he mentions Augustine
writing to Boniface, that the disputations of all men, be they never so
Catholic or approved persons, yet ought not to be received instead of
Canonical Scripture; Gregory.
so that we may (says he) disprove or refuse any thing that is in their
writings contrary to truth, to which he adds a saying of St. Gregory; What
shall become of the Sheep, when the Pastors themselves become Wolves.

Panarmetanus. Mr. Rogers, in his Answer to the Bishop of Winchester, said,
that all the Laws of men, might not, nor could not rule the word of God, but
that all things should be discussed and judged thereby, and obedience given
thereunto, and that no Christian man's Conscience could be satisfied without
Laws that agree not with Gods word, and he quotes Panarmetanus, which said,
That unto a simple lay man that brings the word of God with him, there ought
more credit to be given, than to a whole Council, and to what they concluded
without or beside the word of God. Walter Mill.


Walter Mill, a Martyr in Scotland, said, that these which we call Bishops, do
not the work of Bishops, nor the Office of Bishops, as Paul bids Timothy,
but live after their own sensuality and pleasure, and take no care of the
Flock, nor yet regard the word of God to do thereafter, but desire to be called
Lords, etc. And Luther says, that neither Pope nor Prelate can make Articles
of Faith, nor Laws of good works and manners, and that we may withstand their
doings, and Judge upon their Decrees by the word of God, though their Decrees be
approved by a General Council.

Doctor Molius. Doctor Johannes Molius, sometime a gray Friar, disputed three
days together at Rome, against Bishops and Cardinals, by Pope Paul the third
his appointment, of Original Sin, of Justification by Faith, and of Free Will
and Purgatory, and they all not being able to refell his Arguments, at last
they answered him: That what he affirmed was truth, nevertheless it was not
meet for that present time, for that it could not be taught nor published
without detriment to the Apostolic See: wherefore he should refrain from
preaching the Epistles of St. Paul, and return to Bononie, and there profess
Philosophy: By this it appears, That Popes and Prelates Act against their
Conscience, and will not suffer the truth to take place, least they should lose
their honor and wealth, for here they confess that what Doctor Molius said was
truth, but they might not suffer it at that time; no nor never since to be
taught; their reason was, it would be detriment to the Apostolic See; but what
detriment the truth received and the soul of men, by hiding the truth from
them, these Prelates cared not for: they silenced him from preaching the truth.
to profess Philosophy: And thus Prelates in this age Silence Ministrs from
preaching the truth, lest they should come to dishonor thereby and lose their
sweet Morsells, for if all Christian Kings Princes, and Nobles were rightly
informed in the truths of the Gospel, and of the unlawfulness of Popes, Bishops
and Prelates, of their standing in the Church with their titles, dignities and
jurisdictions, which Papists themselves have confessed is but from men, and not
from God, why then should Kings and Princes by suffering them in such ways
become guilty of their Sins, but rather rouse up themselves and take from them
that which is not theirs but by usurpation; that is, the temporalities and
tithes which they unjustly possess, as is showed above. Neither need they fear
the Popes nor Bishops Excommunications, for they have no more Authority from
God to Excommunicate for such things, than the poorest Shepherd or Swineherd
has that keeps Sheep or Swine upon the Commons, for as their standing in the
Church is not of God, so their Excommunication is not of God.

John Claydon. Richard Turming. John Claydon and Richard Turming, both Martyrs,
they did both affirm, that the chief cause of the Persecution of Christians was
the Prelates unlawful keeping of temporalities and other superfluous goods
which they are afraid to be deprived of, for they know that they cannot hold
them if the truth should take place, and were publicly manifested, by what
unlawful means they hold their Temporalities and Tithes, their Courts and
Offices, and the unlawfulness of their Dignities and Jurisdictions, and the
like.

Eneas Silvius. Eneas Silvius who wrote the Book of the Council Basil, he
writing to Jasper Sthlick the Emperors Chancellor in his 54th Epistle says,
That the way to remedy Schism and make peace in the Church is, for Kings and
Princes to unite together and and conclude of Peace, and this way neither Pope
nor Council, could withstand, Unity may be concluded whether Pope or Council
will or not, and so Kings and Princes in their own Dominions may take the
Temporalities and Tithes, and so put in order things that are amiss, whether
Pope or Council will or not: neither says he, do I see any of the Clergy so
confident to death which will suffer Martyrdom, neither for King or Pope, for
all we do lightly hold that Religion which our Princes hold, if they would
worship Idols we would do the same, and not only deny the Pope, but God also,
if the Secular power strains us thereunto; for Charity waxes cold, and all
Faith is gone, however let us seek for peace, and whether it come by a Council,
or a Synagogue, or a Conventicle, call it what you will, I care not, so we have
peace.

Cardinal Aralatensis And Cardinal Aralatensis, in the same Council of Basil
said, That all Bishops ought to understand that they come to have greater power
then Priests only by custom, and not by dispensation of the truth of God, and
that they ought to rule the Church together, for a Priest is the very same that
a Bishop is by divine Institution, for there is such a concordance, says he,
between a Bishop and a Priest, that Paul to Titus calls Bishops Priests, and
Christ says, Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, neither was there any rich Bishop
in the Primitive Church, neither did the ancient Church reject Dionysius Bishop
of Millan, nor Eusebius Bishop of Vercellus, Hillarie Bishop of Pictauia,
although they were never so poor, but if we will grant the truth, the poor are
more apt to give right Judgment then the rich, because riches causes fear,
lest they should be taken from them, and others poverty causes liberty, for
the poor fear no Tyranny as rich men do, who are given over to all kind of
Vanity, Idleness, and sloth, and will rather deny Christ, than lose their
riches, whom not love to the Flock, but love to Revenues makes them Bishops.

And farther, to show that Bishops will not own the truth against opposition
for fear to lose their riches, the same Eneas Silvius in his thirty eighth
Epistle to Cardinal Julian says, those Cardinals which so magnified the
Authority of the Church, as though they were ready to spend their lives for the
same, and now at the sight of one Letter from their King wherein no death was
threatened, but only loss of their Temporalities and for fear of that, they
slipped away from the Council of Basil, etc. and in the same Epistle, he said
derideingly, That they had rather lose their faith, than lose their flock and
preferment, etc.

Hierome. St. Hierome upon these words, Unsavory Salt, says, That it is no
easy thing to stand in the place of Peter and Paul, and to keep the Chair of
them that reign with Christ: This Unsavory Salt, says he, is foolish and
unprofitable Prelates, unsavory in their places, good for nothing but to be
cast out and trodden down of Swine, that is, says he, of wicked Spirits, which
have dominion over wicked Prelates, as their Flock and Herd.

Mr. Tindal. Mr. Tindal in his book of the wicked Mamon, page 45. says, seek
the word of God in all things, and without the word of God do nothing though,
it appear never so glorious, for what soever is done without the word of God,
that count to be Idolatrous, but by the word of God Prelates have no right to
Temporalities, Christ, says he, took away the violence and power of the Law to
make us free, and set us at liberty from Ceremonies and other impositions which
do consist in places, persons, garments, meats and days, etc. so as their use
should be to all men free and indifferent, so that if the Pope would make all
observations of Geremonies, as Lent, Fasts, Holy Days, Confession, Masses,
Matins, Relics and all the rest free and indifferent, he should not be
Antichrist, but the commanding them in the name of Christ, he corrupts the
Church, and suppresseth the Faith, and whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin,
therefore by that means he advances Sin, and becomes Antichrist, and upon
this account we have many inferior Antichrists under the Pope, who, to their
power seek to establish the same Ceremonies, etc. and so become Antichrists.

Jacobus Selestadiensis. In a Letter of Jacobus Selestadiensis to Maximilian
and Emperor, he said, The goods of the Church as it is alleged by the
Fathers, are the Vows of the Faithful, and Patrimony of the poor, for the
faithful through the fervency of their faith and love of Christ have enriched
the Church with their own goods, that the poor might be refreshed, and Captives
redeemed; wherefore such as have the administration of these goods, ought
diligently to be looked upon, that they do not convert them to their own proper
use, and neglect them in whom Christ is fed and clothed. -- Prosper also
says, That holy men did not challenge the Church goods as their own, but as
given to the poor, to be divided to all them that have nothing, neither ought
they to give any thing to those that have of their own enough, for that is but
to cast things away. Ex Illyrico. Illyrico. Reynold Peacok.


John Brothwick. Reynold Peacock, Bishop of Chichester said, That the riches of
Bishops are the good of the poor, and that spiritual persons by the law of God
ought not to have temporal possessions, and that personal tithes is not due by
Gods law: that the Universal Church of Rome may err in matters of faith, and
that it is not necessary to Salvation, to believe what General Councils ordain
and determine: these points and other to this purpose he confessed he held and
taught the space of twenty years, and after the Bishop of Canterbury and other
Bishops set themselves against him, he was imprisoned during his life. -- Also,
Sir John Brothwick, Martyr in Scotland in the year 1540. said and did affirm,
that all temporal Possessions and Jurisdiction ought to be taken from the
Prelates.

The assembly of the Tigurines at Zurick, affirmed to the Synod of Lucerna,
that what now does maintain the Monasteries and houses of Canons; was first
given to the poor and needy, whereas now one has so much, as might serve a
great many, wherefore it seemed to them not inconvenient, that those goods
should again be converted to the use of the poor, for it is well agreeing to
the will and service of God, said they, that the poor should be succored, but
this cannot be expected from any Synod nor Council who possess these goods, it
must either be done by the King, Lords, or Commons, or it will never be done
while the Prelates may be Judges in their own cause.

In the Council of Basil, there was one at the choosing of a new Pope, which
seems to be Eneas Silvius, or Cardinal Aralatensis, who said, he had often in
his judgment consented to their opinion, which said it was evident that the
temporal Dominion should be divided from the Clergy or Ecclesiastical state,
for I do think said he, that the Priests thereby would be made more apt to the
Divine Ministry.

Cornelius Bish. of Rome. About the year 255. Cornelius Bishop of Rome and
Martyr under the Tyranny of Dicius the Emperor, this Cornelius in his Epistle
to Fabius, alleged also in Eusebius lib. 6. cap. 43. Cornelius speaking of
his Church of Rome how that there ought to be but one Bishop in the same, he
makes mention of 46. Priests, seven Deacons, and seven Subdeacons, and and
42. Acoluthes; and of Widows and other poor afflicted persons to the number of
fifteen hundred and above, found and nourished in the same Church by the
merciful providence of God out of the Church goods and alms given to that
purpose, and yet all that time the Church was not endowed with Temporalities
nor Tithes; and yet the Bishop being a faithful Steward of such alms and
oblations as was offered, there was 102. Church Officers and above 15 hundred
poor relieved out of the Church goods. This is a president sufficient to show
how Church goods was bestowed in the Primitive Church, and this plainly proves
all Prelates in this later age to be Sacrilegious persons, by robbing the poor
of their right, and converting it to their own use.

S. Laurence. In the eighth persecution of the Primitive church, under the
Emperor Valerianus, when the Tyrant demanded of St. Laurence the Treasure of
the Church, Laurence stretching out his arms over the poor said, these are the
precious treasure of the Church, these are the treasure indeed, in whom the
faith of Christ reigns, in whom Jesus Christ has his Mansion places, and
what ye do to the least of these, ye do to me, said Christ.

William Thorpe. William Thorpe in the reign of Hen. 4. maintained before the
Bishop of Canterbury, that Cisteriensis says, that Gregory the tenth a
thousand years after Christ was the first under the Gospel that ordained and
commanded by a Law that Tithes should be given to the Priests, but Paul
exhorts all men to follow him as he followed Christ, and that was in patience
and poverty to preach the Gospel and to labor with his own hands that he might
not be chargeable to others, and though Christ has ordained that those that
preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel: but we says Paul, that covet to
be faithful followers of Christ, use not that power, he would not make the word
of God chargeable, and though Tithes were given to the Levites during the
Levitical Priesthood, yet under the Gospel neither Christ nor his Apostles took
Tithes, nor commanded the people to pay Tithes, but to give alms and other
good works of mercy, for Christ being come, he changed the Priesthood from the
tribe of Levi to the Tribe of Judah, to which Tribe never Tithes was paid; for
as there was a change of the Priesthood, so there was a change of the Laws, and
the Law of paying tithes ceased when the Ceremonial service of the Tabernacle
and Temple ceased, for which service tithes were given, so that tithes are not
now to be given by any right of the Levitical, and there is no new gospel law
for paying of Tithes. And Sir, says he, ye wot well that Priests and Levites
who received tithes, were not so perfect as Christ and his Apostles who
received no tithes, but preached the Gospel and lived by pure alms of the
people, and the Disciple is not above his Lord; it is sufficient that the
Disciple be as his Lord. To which the Archbishop was not able to answer, but
broke out into cursing, and bid Gods curse and his fall on him for his so
teaching. And Sir, says he, there is a Doctor, I think it is St. Hierom that
says, St. Hierome.
those Priests that challenge tithes now under the new law of the Gospel, they
say in effect that Christ is not become man, nor that he has yet suffered
death for man's love, he means for love to man, nor abolished the Levitical law,
wherefore this Doctor says, seeing tithes was the hire of the Levites in the
old law for bearing about the Tabernacle, and slaying and fleying of Beasts,
etc. and for keeping of the Temple, and sounding the Trumpets before the Host
of the Battle, etc. which law is now abolished: those Priests that now challenge
and take tithes, deny Christ to be come in the flesh, and those that stick to
the rights of the Law, Paul says Christ shall profit them nothing, Gal. 5.2.
and as this Dr. says, they take tithes wrongfully, for whatsoever dignity any
Priest is in, if he do not follow Christ and his Apostles in true preaching, in
poverty, and other heavenly virtues, though such be named Priests, they are not
Priests but only in name, for the work of a very Priest in such a one is
wanting; this sense says he, is approved by Austine, Gregory, Chrysostom and
Lincoln.

Thorps. Testament. There is a writing in the Acts and Mon. of the Church, p.
499. which is called Thorps Testament, but might better be called his complaint
against the vicious Clergy, in which he says, that either God the Father has
deceived all mankind by the living and teaching of Jesus Christ and his
Apostles in poverty-meekness and humility, etc. or else Popes; Cardinals,
Archbishops, and Bishops, with all the contagious flock of Priesthood, etc. are
deceived, which live so contrary, to Christ and his Apostles, increasing
damnably in sin, in pride, and are obstinate Symoniack, and so are heretics,
defiled adulterers, as their works show, for instead of following Christ and
his Apostles in poverty and preaching, the Prelates and Priesthood challenge
and occupy unlawfully, temporal Lordship and possessions, and for temporal
favor and advantage they sell benefices to unworthy and unable persons, and
sell sins for advantage, suffering men and women to live from year to year in
scandalous vices, and they contemn the meekness and poverty of Christ, to take
their livelihood of the free will offering of the peoples pure alms, thus by
their fruit you may know them, whether they be the followers of Christ, or of
Antichrist; wherefore all Emperors, Kings, Lords, Ladies, and common people of
every degree and state, that know these things and will not withstand these
enemies and traitors of Christ, and of his Church, ye strive says he, for
Antichrist against our Lord Jesus Christ, and shall bear the indignation of God
Almighty without end, if in time it be not prevented by repentance and
amendment.

Walter Brute. Wall. Brute, before John B. of Hereford in K. Rich, 2d's reign,
affirmed that under the Gospel tithes are alms, he denied not but under the old
law tithes were given to the Levites for their service in the Tabernacle and in
the Temple, but that service of the Levites ceasing at the coming of Christ,
who put an end to that Ceremonial law, how can tyths now be demanded or
received for that service which is ceased, they may as well demand the first
fruits which was paid in the old law, as well as tithes; but if they claim
tithes by force of the Levitical law, then by the same law, Prelates and
Priests are prohibited to have any temporalities among their brethren, no more
then the Priests and Levites had then when they received tithes: Christ gave no
new Commandment of tything any thing, when his Apostles said, we have left all
and followed thee, what shall we have? Christ did not say that he would give
them temporalities and tithes, and worldly dominion, no that he forbad them, it
shall not be so among you, Mat. 20.25, 26. but upon their obedience to his
commands, he promised to give them an everlasting Kingdom, they that will have
tithes by virtue of the Levitical law, they are bound to keep that law, and by
the works of the law no man can be justified.

Hierome. Hierom, writing to Nepotianus says, how can they be of the Clergy
who pretend to be so, who are commanded to contemn and despise their own
substance, and yet take the substance of others, to take away from a friend is
theft, and to deceive the Church and take away that which should be given to
the poor, it is sacrilege, so that by this testimony all Bps. Prelates, and
Priests that hold temporalities and tithes, etc. that belongs to the Church and
to the poor, they are sacrilegions. Mersiliu.
Also, Mersilius of Padua taught, that Bps. and Priests should not enjoy
temporal estates, and that the corrupt manners of the people did spring from
the wickedness of Prelates and Priests, by their evil example.

Nicholas Herford. Philip Ripingdon. Robert Rigge. Nich. Herford, Phil.
Ripingdon and John Ashton, being altogether brought before Will. Bishop of Cant.
in K. Rich. 2d reign, did all affirm and say, that it is against the holy
Scripture for Ecclesiastical persons to have temporal possessions, and that
temporal Lords may at their pleasure take away temporal goods from Church men
offending, and that tithes are pure Alms, and that Parishioners may for the
offense of their Curates detain the same, and bestow them on others at their
pleasure, And Rob. Rigge Vice Chancel. of Oxford was displaced for holding of
these truths with these men, the Popish Prelates did so rage.

Pope Alexander and 310. Bishops. In a Council at Rome, in the year 1179. it
was decreed by Pope Alex. and 310 Bishops, that none of the Clergy within
orders should meal with any temporal business, and that Priests should have
but one benefice, and that the Bishops should be charged to maintain such
Priests as they did ordain, until they were promoted to some benefice, but how
these decrees, as to the Clergies not meddling with temporalities and
maintaining such as the Bishops ordain until they be promoted, is manifest to
the world: for Popes and Bishops will do and undo at their pleasure for
temporal profits.

D. Hall. George Cassander. Bishop Hall, not many years ago in his book, page
835. says, that George Cassander, a learned Papist, was set on work by two
Emperors (viz.) Ferdinand and Maximillian, to compose the quarrels of the
Church: and in his 56. p. he says, that the principal cause of the destruction
of the Church, is to be laid upon those, who being puffed up with a vain
insolent conceit of their Ecclesiastical power, do proudly and scornfully
contemn and reject them which rightly and moderately admonish their
reformation, wherefore my Opinion is says he, that the Church can never hope
for any firm peace, unless those which are in Ecclesiastical government will be
content to remit something of their too much rigor, and yield something for the
peace of the Church, and correct abuses according to the rule of divine
Scripture, from which they have swerved, and if abuses be corrected according
according to the rule, then must their temporalities and tithes be taken from
them, and their Lordly titles and Jurisdictions, and they made like other men.

By what is said above and proved by many Authors, of Prelates worldly
mindedness, and their usurped dominion of temporalities and tithes which they
rob and steal from the poor and needy by breaking the conditions for which
temporalities and tyths were given and have falsified the trust reposed in
them, so that now there is no hope that they will yield any thing for truths
sake, to be reformed according to the Scriptures, except Kings and Princes,
Lords and Commons, as Angello Cararo the Venetian Ambassador said of the Court
of Rome, unless they go about it roundly in express terms laying aside all
Civility, says he, it will be difficult to bring it about, they are so settled
upon their Lees: But their is one text of Scripture which I think does clear
this point of the Lawfulness for Kings and Princes to take again their
possessions from Bishops Prelates and Priests, which all the forenamed Authors
plead for, for it does not only Justify the King and Princes in taking the
temporalities from Prelates etc. but it is a precept and law of God that ought
to be obeyed and put in execution, that the Kings inheritance be not imbezled
and given away from succeeding Kings, Ez. 46.16, 17. Thus says the Lord God,
Ezekiel. 46 16.17.
If the Prince give a gift unto any of his sons, the Inheritance thereof shall
be his sons, it shall be their Inheritance by a possession by an inheritance,
but if he give a gift of his Inheritance to one of his servants, then it shall
be his to the year of liberty or Jubilee, which was so named of the long sound
of the Trumpet and Joyful shout, because servants that were sold was then at
liberty, and joyful to the poor, because their land that was sold or mortgaged
was then at liberty and they returned to their possessions. The year of Jubilee
or liberty was every fifty years, but many fifty years are expired, and still
the usurping Prelates hold the temporalities both from the King, etc. and from
the poor who should be relieved out of the profits of those temporalities, but
Prelates have been unfaithful Stewards, and therefore it is high time to
compel them to deliver up their Stewardship, that they may be no longer
Stewards for the Priests as they call themselves and desire to be called, ought
to have no temporal possessions or inheritance for their service as Eze. 44.28.
I am their Inheritance, ye shall give them no possession in Israel, I am their
possession, yea even the Primate himself as he expects to be called, who
thinks himself to be Successor to Aaron, cannot by Aarons example possess any
temporalities, as in Number. 18.20. And the Lord spoke unto Aaron, then shall have
no inheritance in their land, neither shall thou have any part amongst them, I
am thy part and thine inheritance among the Children of Israel, and Josh.
13.33. But unto the tribe of Levi Moses gave not any inheritance, the Lord God
of Israel was their inheritance.

If Prelates consciences were not seared as with an hot iron, how could they
pretend any right to Temporal possessions, either by example of the Levitical
Priesthood, unto whom you see Temporal possessions was prohibited, neither by
the example of Jesus Christ nor his Apostles, if it were not as Cardinal
Aralatensis said in the Council of Basil, that Prelates value their
Temporalities above their Spiritualities: Therefore if you observe the rule of
Christ, by their Fruits you may know them, and their Fruits in that way has
been the occasion to bring in, and to uphold and maintain Antichrist, the Pope
in his Throne; for if it were not for his great Temporal possessions, he could
not domineer over Emperors, Kings and Princes as he has done: and whilst
Prelates possess their Temporalities, they do uphold him in his Throne, for
both of them are one upheld by the other, if once the one fall, the other will
shortly follow.

Angelo Cararo. Whosoever, says Angelo Cararo, beholds the surpassing state
and magnificence of the Church and Court of Rome, above other Kings and
Princes, cannot but wonder that she upon so slender a foundation, and so far
from the intention of her Founders, should raise her self to so proud a height,
as to turn those benefits she has received, against, and to the prejudice of
them that gave her those possessions, for the Canonists and other Emissaries of
that Court, study nothing more, than how to strengthen and extend their
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and abase and demolish the power of Secular
Princes if they can possible.

A Book of the Image of a Bishop In a Book called, The Image of a Christian
Bishop, and of a Counterfeit Bishop, set out in the year 1539. he speaks of
some that he calls shadows of Bishops, that have raised themselves to dominion
and Lordship, against both God and man, against reason, common sense and
judgment, after the nature of Tyrants, which rule only by the wrath and
indignation of God; for Prelates, says he, if they be not good and virtuous,
to promote the word of God unfeignedly with all their hearts, they are Wolves
and cruel murderers of Souls, much like as if Satan should have a Mitre on his
head, and Rings on his fingers, and should sit in a Chair to rule the people;
for Bishops that do not preach the pure word of God, they are as much to be
eschewed as the Devil himself: And whereas Bishops exercise their tyranny over
men, under pretense of Conformity to keep men from sedition and strife, he
says, the word of God does not stir up to sedition and strife, but the
stubborn obstinate disobedience of Bishops themselves against the truth, and
their rage against the word of God, is the cause of sedition; for whosoever
receives the word of God, that man raises not up sedition, albeit he no longer
fears such vain Buggs, nor worship such Episcopal Puppets: for since he knows
the word of God, he does not fear nor reverence their vain humane Innovations
and Traditions. But will thou that I tell thee at one word that they are, they
are Wolves, Tyrants, Traitors, Man-quellers, monsters of the World, burdens of
the Earth, the Apostles of Antichrist to corrupt and destroy the Gospel: And
therefore it is the part and duty of all Christian men, with the word of God,
to destroy and pluck up by the roots them and their Kingdom, which our heavenly
Father has not planted, who by their Tyranny destroy the Gospel Institutions
of Christ, to establish their own Institutions; so that if there be any
Christianity in our minds and breasts, we ought (says he) to speak unto the
King for a Reformation: Thus he, and much more to this purpose. See Mr. Prynns
Book of the execrable Treasons, Conspiracies and Rebellions of Prelates, page
389, 390, 394.

William Wroughton, William Wroughton, in his rescuing of the Roman Fox,
dedicated to King Hen. 8. We have, says he, put down some of the Orders of the
World, there remains yet two, (viz.) the pompous Bishops and the dependants
thereon, and the gray Friars, which if they were put down also, as well as the
other, I reckon that there would not be any Kingdom wherein Christ would more
reign than in England; and there he proves at large, the Prelates Canon Law to
be the Popes Law, and that so long as the Bishops maintain it in England, they
maintain the Pope in his Sovereignty and Legislative power in England. Thus and
more to the same purpose.

Roderick Morce. To the very same purpose Roderick Morce, in his Complaint to
the Parliament, the 37 of Hen. 8. writes thus. The whole Body of the
pestiferous Canon Law, according to which Judgment is given through the Realm,
so that we are still in Egyptian bondage to the Popes Law. And so long as ye
walk in those wicked Laws of Antichrist the Pope, and maintain his Knights the
Bishops in such inordinate riches and unlawful Authority, so long ye shall
never banish that monstrous beast the Pope out of England; yea and it shall be
a means, says he, in process of time to bring us into bondage to the Pope
again, and that knows our forked Caps full well, meaning Mitres: Wherefore if
you will banish the Pope, you must fell down to the ground these rotten posts
the Bishops, etc. And in another place he said, that one Bishop, one Dean, or
College or House of Canons, has ever done more mischief than ten other
Religious Houses. The King, says he, has done well in weeding the Garden of
England, but yet he has left the fowlest stinking weeds standing, the pompous
Bishops, Canons of Colleges, and Deans, etc. But now, says he, I will speak
no more against the particular Pope, seeing every Bishop now is a Pope.

Martin Bucer. Martin Bucer professors of Divinity in Cambridge writ to King
Edward the sixth, that the reformation of the Church could never be expected
from the Bishops and said that the wealth of Princes, which ought to be
bestowed upon faithful Ministers, upon Schools, and upon the Poor, the Prelates
sacraligiously spend it in riot and Princely pomp.

John Hooper And Mr. John Hooper, both Bishop and Martyr, and great opposer of
Ceremonies episcopal rochits and vestments, in which he would not be
Consecrated, he said that Magistrates that suffered the abuse of Church goods
by the Prelates be culpable of the fault, for if the fourth part of the
Bishopric remained to the Bishops it were sufficient, and the third part to
Schoolmasters, and the rest to the Poor, and to Soldiers.

Petrus Blesenses Petrus Blesenses Archdeacon of Bath, writ to the Bishop of
Bangor thus, the Title of Poverty is glorious with Christ, and that which
became Christ, ought not to misbesem you, St. Peter said Gold and Silver have I
none, Acts. 3.6. Yea famous Augustine Bishop of Hippo made no will, because the
Poor servant of Christ had nothing to bequeth, it becomes not you to go
sumptiously in Ornaments, nor in Pride with great Horses and multitude of
attendance, but to cut off all occasions and Footsteps of such a Conversation,
and in another place he says, the voice of Christ is not, till thy Land, nor
build high Houses, nor increase thy Rents, but feed my Sheep.

Thomas Walsingam. Thomas Walsingam, In hyst. Angl. Page. 205. Said that Popes,
Cardinals, Bishops, and other Priests, may not rule like temporal Lords, nor
bear any civil Office without mortal sin, and that is a sin to endow them with
temporal possessions, and that no Prelates ought to have Prisons to punish or
restrain offenders nor ought they to purchase large temporal possessions or
riches, etc.

A nameless Author. A nameless Author in his supplycation to King Hen. 8 says
of Bishops, that the only infection and Pestilent poison of Bishops is their
great Lord-ships and Dominions with their yearly revenue with superfluity of
goods, which justly belongs to the Poor, and so long as Bishops do possess
them, so long will they waste them to maintain their pride and so long as they
continue in pride, they shall not receive the Holy Ghost which would teach them
to speak the truth, but there is no room in a proud rebellious heart for the
Holy Ghost to dwell in wherefore you being our dread Sovereign Lord and King
whom God has set to govern and to redress, enormities and abuses, you are
bound in justice and equity, and God requires it from you, to take away from
Bishops and Prelates and other spiritual Persons such superfluity of temporal
possessions and riches which they abuse and other seculars cures and worldly
offices which is the cause of much sin in them.

William Tindall. William Tindall in another place of his book of the obedience
of a Christian Page 181. writing of the falsehood and juggling of the Pope and
Prelates, he says they have put out the light of Gods truth, and set up their
own traditions and lies, and robbed the world of lands and goods, of peace and
Unity, and of all temporal Authority etc. and that as Christ's Kingdom is not of
this world, even so the officers of Christ's Kingdom may have no temporal
dominion or jurisdiction, nor exercise any temporal authority; for Christ
commanded his Apostles that they should not exercise any worldly authority
saying it shall not be so among you, Mat. 20.25, 26. And when he sent them out
to preach he commanded them that they should not provide neither Gold nor
Silver nor brass in their purses etc. for the workman is worthy of his meat,
Math. 10. And Paul commanded that if any would not work, neither should they
eat, 2 These. 3.10. Why then should non residents and others have such large
possessions that work very little or not at all, except it be works of darkness
their wages should be proportionable to their work, and the overplus should be
to the King and the public use of the Common wealth for Clement, Clement the
successor of Peter.
Bishop of Rome and successor of Peter says of Prelates if thou be occupied in
worldly cares, thou shall both deceive thy self and them that hear thee, for so
thou can not fully distribute those things which pertain unto salvation:

Mr. Mead. Mr. Mead, in his book of the Apostasy of the latter times says as
in Deuteronomy. 7.6. the Lord chose Israel to be a peculiar people unto himself above
all the people of the world. And Amos. 3.2. you only have I known of all the
families of the Earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities: the
more light of truth God reveals to any people, if they walk not suitable
thereunto, the more there sin is increased. The Lord was head and husband to
the Church of Israel, but when Israel forsook the Lord and followed their own
inventions, God cast them off, and chose another Spouse namely the Church of
the Gentiles; And the first Churches of the Gentiles, as the seven Churches of
Asia and others, for falling from their first love, as the Church of Ephesus,
and the Church of Smyrna, that said they were Jews, as our Prelates say they
are the successors of the Apostles, and were the Synagogue of Satan: and the
Church of Pergamos, who held the doctrine of Baalim, who loved the wages of
unrighteousness, as our Prelates do in their unlawful holding of temporalities,
and it were well if we were free from the fornication of Thyatyra, and
lukewarmness of Laodecea, I fear that in the general we are like the Church of
Sardice, that we have a name to live and are dead, now God for their sins has
cast off all these Churches, and chosen himself another Spouse in these
northern Nations, etc. But if we continue in the same and other sins we cannot
assure our selves of any long continuance of the Gospel, except God put it into
the hearts of our King and Nobles to endeavor a through Reformation especially
in the Bishops and Prelates, and other of the Clergy, and their reformation
will be a leading way to reform the rest.

Volusianus. In the Epistle of Volusianus to Pope Nicholas for Priests marriage
he says, the great Shepherd and Prince of the Apostles does declare how all
Pastors ought to entreat the flock of Christ in love, and to remove all
tyrannical Lordship from Bishops for that they ought not to be Lords, but
fathers over their flock, and not imperiously to command them as exercising
Stately Authority and power over them, but gently to admonish and beseech them,
in zeal and piety according to the strength of every person, after the Lord,
and not after their own will and ambition, to see forth their power and
jurisdiction, whereas they should be ensamples to the flock, first doing that
themselves which they command others to do, but some, and that many says he,
are inflamed with affection not of Charity, but of covetousness, greediness,
ambition, who covet to be their Masters and more to rule over them than to
profit them, they oppress the weak by force and violence of their authority and
compel them to their obedience, pretending a zeal for God, but like Uzzah
stretch forth their hands and authority beyond the rule, further then God has
allowed them, but Uzzah died for his presumption, to have a zeal according to
knowledge as the Apostle says, is to do all things in Gods matters prudently
and circumspectly according to the rule of Christ and his Apostles institutions
and not according to Men's traditions nor humane inventions of Cannons etc.

Whichcot I heard a Doctor I think his name was Whichcot preach in Blackfriars
about seven years ago, a conformable man, and he said that if you would have
men to conform, you should first convince their consciences by plain Texts of
Scripture of the lawfulness of those things which you would have them conform
unto, otherwise to force men to conformity and not convince them by plain
Scripture Arguments of the lawfulness of what they conform unto, he said it was
to make men outwardly hypocrites and inwardly atheists, now according to this,
by the neglect of duty in our Bishops and Prelates, how many thousands, if not
hundred thousands hypocrites and atheists have our Prelates made in England
within ten years, by pressing ceremonies and observation of things which many
hundred thousands do question whether they have any warrant in the word of God,
and in the 20. and 21. articles of the Church of England, it is said, that it
is not lawful neither for the Church, The 20. and 21. Articles.
nor for general Councels to ordain any thing contrary to the word of God
written, which word excludes all unwritten traditions and customs, and that
things so ordained have neither strength nor authority, unless it may be
declared that they are taken out of holy Scripture, and yet our Prelates will
have such things observed without clearing them by Scripture or hearing what
may be said against them by Scripture.

And further Volusianus said from Jer. 48.10. Cursed be he that does the work
of the Lord negligently, that is says he, not to do the work of the Lord
carefully and with a willing mind, for whereas the Lord wills us not to offer
any thing to him against our wills, so does he forbid us to compel any man to
offer any thing against our wills, and he proves it, Ex. 20.21. Thou shall not
vex nor oppress thy neighbor or a stranger, now it is an oppression and wrong
to our neighbors to be corrected for his fault when it is done with disdain,
and upbraiding, and not in compassion and mercy toward him, to inform him in
the spirit of meekness and not to destroy him in the spirit of bitterness and
rigor, much more is our neighbor oppressed when he is corrected for well
doing, for endeavoring to follow the Laws of Christ rather than the Laws of
men, thus Valusianus.

Norfolk and Suf^^lk m ns ^^pplication. And in a Supplication of Norfolk and
Suffolk men to Queen Mary and her Commissioners, they thus writ, is not this
the time say they among other times that Satan rides upon the red horse to take
peace from the Earth, for can man go into any place where the sons of
wickedness are not ready to search out a man's deeds, and mark his words, and if
he agree not with them, in despising Gods word, in swearing, lying, whoring and
drinking, etc. Then will they spitefully and hatefully rail against him,
calling the truth of God error and heresy, and the professors of it heretics
and Schismatics, with other odious and despiteful names, as Traitors, and not
the Queens friends, as if to love Gods word were heresy, as though to talk of
Christ and Religion were Shismatical, as though none could be true to the Queen
but such as are false to God, as though none could be the Queens friends, but
such as despitefully rail against her Graces Father and Brother, and the word
of God, as though none were truly Religious but such as blaspheme against the
purity of Religion, as though none favored the Queen but such as hate all
Godly knowledge, wherefore we learn that true obedience to God the King of
Kings, and for him, and in him, and not against him, to obey Princes and
Magistrates, who are not truly obeyed when God is disobeyed, nor yet disobeyed
when God is truly obeyed, wherefore we pray that God may move your hearts to
weigh these things and take the word of God unto your Council, and then you
shall see how Gods commands, and Bishops commands agree, or rather disagree, to
which I shall add that by the word of God you may see clearly that neither
Bishops nor Prelates etc. ought to have either temporallities or tithes.

Christ has said Rev. 11.3. That he will give power to his two witnesses to
bear their testimony and witness against the Beast or Ante-christ, therefore
they that endeavor to suppress this witness bearing against Ante-christ are
themselves Ante-christian, and whether is not Christ's Priestly office invaded
by urging men to the observation of ceremonies and a form of worship which
Christ has not instituted, but contrary to Christ's institutions and so against
men's consciences, and his Kingly office invaded by exercising a Government over
men that has no ground nor warrant in the word of God, but is of man's
devising, and yet punish men that would gladly observe the word of God, for not
observing the devices of men.

Daniel 6 and 7.
What an odious thing is it said one to call out obedience to God by the name
of disobedience to men, as in Dan. 3.12. and Dan. 6 10. For his obedience to
God in praying three times a day, he was accused for disobedience to the King,
and thus it has been with others, for there is a generation of men, who charge
all with Schism that dare not subject their selves to the usurpation and
arrogant impositions of the sons of pride, that neither have authority nor
ability from God to govern us, who lay snares for men's Consciences, and then
accuse men for falling into those snares as the Pagans did against Daniel, who
make Laws for the Church unnecessary in their own opinions, and sinful in other
men's opinions, and command things which they know others think the Lord
forbids, and then load men with reproaches of disobedient, turbulent,
heretical, schismatical persons, for not yiedling to their imperious commands
against their consciences, to call men factious if they will not be of their
faction against the Catholic unity and simplicity of the Gospel, how easy and
how common is it to call a meeting of sober Christians, for prayer and mutual
edification, by the name of a factious and schismatical conventicle, and a
meeting of drunkards or gamesters, or harlots, by a far less disgraceful name,
if men will but turn their Religion into forms of words or beads, or canonical
hours and days outward shows and ceremonies, which have no ground nor warrant
in the Scripture, few or none will let, or reproach or persecute you for being
too precise or strict for so doing, for by such a Religion it is that Prelates
have so long enjoyed their usurped temporallities and tithes.

^^timer. In Ezekiel. 44.24. It is said in controversies the Priest shall stand in
judgment and they should judge it according to my judgment says God, but the
Bishop of Gloucester had written a book, and for his own and other Prelates
advantage he had changed the meaning of the Text from judging according to Gods
judgment declared in the word of God to this, they shall judge as the Priest
shall decide the matter, therefore Latimer reproved him, saying what gelding of
Scripture is this, what clipping of Gods coin, nay my Lord the Clergy must not
rule according to their own wills, I would there were more faithful dealing
with Gods word and not leave out a part, and snatch a part here and there etc.
If Prelates may thus interpret Scripture they may easily maintain their usurped
hierarchy and what not that they have a mind to maintain.

^rmaca^us. ^ilus Richard Armacanus says, that to speak, and seek to procure
any high place in the Church, it is a point of pride and ambition, and Nilus
Bishop of Thessalonica, says that the Pope himself has no dignity above other
Bishops, but by humain Laws and institutions given by Councels and Emperors,
^nselm
and Anselm says that Presbiters are above Bishops and were before Bishops and
did elect them, and Cardinal Aralatensis and several others more says that
Priests or Presbiters are of equal power and authority with bishops, ^ralaten^.
so that all their Lordly Titles dignities and jurisdictions, their
temporallities and tithes are all humain devices and not of any Gospel
institution, for Christ has forbidden their Lordliness, saying it shall not be
so among you, Mat. 20.26.

^^hn ^erson. John Gerson declares that the neglect to observe an ancient
Canon, viz. that bishops should have poor apparel, lodging, and diet and should
not strive for transitory things, but to imitate the Apostles, also he says
their making of laws such as they have no authority from God to make and their
enjoining men by censures and excommunications to observe their Laws, their
Courts with the oath ex officio and many other things the like, which is the
cause of division, which he says will never be appeased until the heads
spiritual be reformed.

Episcopacy when it first crept into the Church, was not so inconsistant with
the Gospel rule as now it is, for the bishops that are now, are other kind of
Creatures than those were, as the records of antiquity do show that at the
first original of them they were chosen by the people and Ministers who were to
live under their inspection and Government, yea even the Popes themselves in
ancient times were chosen by the people and Priests, and after confirmed by the
Emperor, and were not chosen by Cardinals and Curtesans as they are now,
neither had they then either temporalities or tyths, but now they intrude
themselves with a high hand over the Church and people of God and makes
themselves Lords over Gods heritage which the word of God forbids, 1. Pet. 5.3.
And yet all this the giving both the Pope and Bishops and other Prelates
temporalities and tyths, is but an Antechristian humain invention, and not of
divine institution, neither do the Bishops now observe the ancient Canons in
their ordinations, as Distinct 70. T. ordinationis. which says. Distinst. 29.
quando. Distinct 70. T. ordinationis.
Let not the Bishop presume to ordain any without the Council of the Clergy
and testimony of the people, and again Distinct 70 T. ordinationis, see that
solemnly at convenient time in the presence of many standers by, you make
ordination, and especially Distinct. 64. T. Si forte, which says he shall be
no Priest henceforth, who neither Clergy nor people of his own City has
elected: so that if the Clergy or people of any other place elect, and not the
Clergy and people of the City or place where he is to serve, by this Canon he
is no Priest: And by Acts 1. verse 23. did 64. Si forte
to the 20 and Acts 6.3. to 7. compared with this Canon, there is are thrust
upon the people without their electing of them, and therefore have no right to
officiate unto, nor to rule such a people.

Extravag de institu cap ex frequentibus Extravag de prescript c. 51. diligent
et cum omne ex de qualit pen^ls 50 destinct
For a Sole possession is not sufficient in Eclestical benefices, unless there
concur a Canonical institution Extravag de institu Cap ex frequentibus, a Sole
possession makes not one a Senator or Captain, but a lawful election a
prescription does not profit, in case it be grounded upon an evil consequence,
and therefore Sithence men so ordained be unjust possessors, their deceit and
collusion ought not to support them, Extravag. de prescript. T. 51. dilligenti,
etc. cum omne. In these Laws in another place it is provided that both the
promoter and the promoted, as well the abetters as the deed doers, are to
sustain equal punishment, there is a Law, that as well the man unworthily
promoting, as the man unworthily promoted shall be deposed ex de qualit c.
ponuis, again it is decreed, that if they shall henceforth presume to ordeyn
any that are unskilful and ignorant, that both the ordeyners and the ordained
be subject to grievous punishment, upon which decree and the word ordination
the gloss flatly concludes that the Law evermore is that whosoever promoteth
an unworthy man deserves to be deposed: Well then upon this account, that
neither the Bishop himself not being elected nor ordained in the presence of
those over whom he does rule, nor those whom he does ordain and send forth,
they both ought to be deposed, both by the Scriptures, decrees, and extravag,
above named, so that if there were no other ground or reason but this only, it
were sufficient to depose them and to take away their temporalities and tyths
from them.

Cod offic prefec orient lib. 3.
For the Emperor Justinian commanded Signos judicis, according to what is said
above, if thine excelencie find any judges for their negligence or any other
like defect, to be unprofitable, thou may remove them from their
Administrations and place others in their stead: Cod offic prefec orient lib.
3. And says the said Emperor in another place in bello etc. A Soldier in
time of war that does any thing forbidden by his Captain, or does not keep his
Generals Commandment is to be punished with death, though his enterprise take
good success, and shall then a pretended Minister that forsakes his standing
to walk according to the rules and institutions of Christ and wears only the
Ensign of Antechrist, the proclaimed enemy of Christ his Lord and Master,
Mauger the law of his Lord and Master and Mauger the Laws of men above
specified and other the like, and shall he enjoy Life and Lands, Panormetane
and Livings, and tyths, and all? Panormetane a famous Canonist concludes,
that a Doctor allowed may be disallowed again, yea rather says Bartol a famous
Civilian, he may be degraded as a Soldier, Bartol
and as a Clerk, for those things says he, which I have spoken in degrading of
a Soldier, the same is to be verified touching the degrading of Doctors and
Clerks.

Herenius Modestimus Hereneus Modestimus said, that a Senator was not therefore
a Senator because his name only was in the Table or Regester where the names of
Senators was written, unless he also were made a Senator according to Law, and
the gloss upon that Law verifieth the same to be an argument against those who
are not rightly placed in the Churches, and it is manifest that none of our
Bishops nor Prelates accord- to their titles and jurisdictions, are rightly
placed in the Churches of Christ, because they are not of the institution of
Christ as themselves do confess, both Protestants and Papists, and also not
having the Seal of divine approbation upon them, they are not rightly placed in
Churches nor are not lawful Ministers of Jesus Christ according to his holy
institution in truth, but only in name, but in real truth they are the
Ministers of Antechrist the Pope, for their titles and jurisdictions is of the
Popes Hierarchical institutions, they cannot deny it, and therefore it is a
work of mercy to their souls to unlord them and being them into the right way
to imitate Christ and his Apostles, by taking the temporallties and tithes from
them, as once an Emperor said and did: That which we unadvisedly have done, we
will advisedly revolve and undo.

And Prelates to excuse their tyrany pretend decency in imposing their
unnecessary Ceremonies upon the People, but let it be considered, whether the
people who are turned unto God and endeavor to observe the rules of Christ
rather than the rules of men, or the Prelates who have forsaken the rules of
Christ as appears above all along, to embrace and follow the rules and devices
of Men, let wise men judge which of these walk most undecently, and let Bishops
consider and examine themselves, whether there robbing the Poor and murdering
of Souls, by granting dispensations to none residence, and in giving
pluralities be not an undecent walking, can any but those whose Consciences are
seared, count these and Covetousness, Pride, hypocrisy, ambition, hatred,
malice and revenge, decent and comely in themselves, and the endeavoring to
observe the rules of Christ, to be uncomely and undecent in others, if Bishops
and Prelates would first reform themselves and take the beam out of their own
eyes, or if the King and Nobles would compel them to a reformation according to
the word of God, then what the people were required to do, that is decent and
comely according to the word of God, they would readily obey, provided as Paul
says, they cast not a snare upon them, but for that which is comely, 1 Cor.
7.35. But now our Bishops take as much upon them as the Pope, (viz.) to make
nothing something, and to make the rules and institutions of Christ which is
something, nothing in respect of their own traditions and Canons, and to make
nothing something, that is to make their own Canons and traditions etc. which
are nothing in comparison of the word of God, to set them above the word of God
and punishes the transgressors thereof with sorer punishments than the
transgressors of the word of God, and thus they make their nothing something,
and Christ's something nothing. And thus they make sin to be no sin, and no sin
to be sin, by their unjust Laws, and their disobedience to the Laws and
institutions of Jesus Christ, may, not God justly complain as once he did of
Israel, they have defiled the Land by their own way and by their doings, their
way is before me as the uncleanness of a removed Woman, Ezekiel. 36.17. and chap
22.13. I have smitten my hand at thy dishmest gain which thou have made, there
is a conspiracy of her Prophets like roaring Lions ravening the Prey, they have
devoured Souls, they have taken the Treasure and precious things, can our
Prelates think that God will not thus charge them who have taken the treasure
of the Church from those who are the true Church indeed and from Widows
fatherless and other poor that should be releived with that treasure, it
follows her Priests have violated my Law, as you see in this page above, they
have profaned mine holy things, they have put no difference between the holy
and profane, neither have showed difference between the unclean and the clean,
except it be in countenancing the profane and unclean and discountenancing the
holy and the clean, see the 25. and 26. verse.

Mr. Tindall. Mr. Tindall an English Man, and a Martyr in Flanders, petitioned
to King Hen. 8. to have compassion on his Subjects, that the Realm should not
utterly perish, through the wicked counsel of his pestilent Prelates, for says
he, the cause of false Preachers is the cause that the people have not love to
the truth, being kept ignorant of the truth through their neglect in not
preaching the truth

Mr. Hookers Episcopus Divinus. Mr. Hooker in the second part of his Survey of
Church discipline page 23. he says Episcopus is threefold, Divinus Humanus,
Satanicus.

First a Bishop by divine Institution is such an Officer as Christ has set in
his Church whose Office is set forth and discovered in the word of God, and
such are Pastors and Doctors and Teachers. Tit. ^ 7. and 1 Timothy 5.17. Episcopus
and Presbyter is one thing in Scripture sense.

Episcopus Humanus. Secondly Episcopus Humanus is a president or moderator
chosen by consent of Ministers meeting and consulting about the affairs of
their Churches in their common consociations, to whom it appertains to
moderate the actions of the assembly, to propound things to be agitated to
gather voices, to pronounce the Sentence which passes by common approbation,
and he had no more but his equal suffrage with the rest and when the action was
ended he was but in equal honor with the rest, and it may be in less respect,
in regard of years or gifts and yet to leave this constantly upon one man it is
perilous and might be an inlet to worse inconveniences than at first could
have been suspected.

Episcopus Satanicus. Thirdly Episcopus Satanicus is such an Episcopus, which
the enemy Satan, acting the Pride and suiting the Soveraignity of the Spirits
of men has by a misterous way successively and secretly brought into the
Church that so he might Midwife Antechrist into the world, this being the next
step to that man of sin, and he becomes Princepe Episcopus who by his
Insolency has arrogated and assumed and at last confirmed even a Monarchical
power unto himself, and however the Pope who is Universal Bishop, is the man of
sin, yet the Bishop especially when he is ascended to his Arch Bishops Chair is
the same, but only considered in his minority as the Child of sin, or the man
of sin in his Childhood, for laying aside the rankness of those extravagancies
of the Popes temporal power, or that power in temporalities, it will appear
that the Arch Bishops power in spiritualibus is of the same kind for he assumes
a peerless power unto himself, that look what the King is to his Counsel which
he takes unto himself for consultation, but the final determination and
resolution lies in his own bosom, Downam
even so the Bishop is to his Inferior Clergy, he will hear them speak when he
pleases to give them allowance, Bilson
but it is in his own breast to cast the balance which ways seems best to
himself: so say Downam Bilson and Saravia. Saravia


It is incredible that Christ should appoint such an high Officer in the
Church; as the Lord Bishop or Diocosan Bishop, or Lord Primate or Lord
Metropolitan to bear such an high handover the Church and people of God, and
yet never give them any name in all the new Testament whereby they should be
known and distinguished from other Church Officers which Christ at his
Assention gave for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry,
and for the edifying of the body of Christ. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. Hence it is
clear that they are no Gospel Creatures, nor their Authority and Jurisdictions
were never instituted by Christ nor his Apostles, for Paul says, Acts 20.20.
that he kept back nothing that was profitable for the Church, but taught them
both publicly and from house to house, and shunned not to declare unto them
all the Counsel of God. verse. 27. And yet Paul has not in all his Epistles
named one of these Officers nor their offices.

God himself in the time of the Law prescribed all the Circumstances and
Ceremonies, Officers and Offices that was to be used in his worship and service
and left not any thing to the will and devising neither of Moses nor Aaron nor
any other, and God has given Christ to be head to the Church Ephesians. 1.22. he is
the head of all Principallity and power. Col. 2.10. So that Christ is Sovereign
and Supreme, the Sole and only Lawgiver to the Church which is his Mistical
body, to give Laws unto his Church both for the outward polity and inward
purity of the same, in the duties of his worship and service; And I think it
does argue a very unworthy, If not blasphemous carriage toward Christ, for any
man or men Inconsiderately to intrude upon Christ's prerogative, to alter or
change, to add or diminish from Christ the Lawgivers institutions, either for
matter or manner, for Circumstances or Ceremonies, Officers or Offices other
than Christ gave at his Assention for the perfecting of the Saints. Ephesians. 4 11,
12, 13. For so to do is to condemn Christ of ignorance or of negligence, as if
he knew not or cared not for ordering the affairs of his own house which God
has entrusted him with, but should leave it to sinful men who presume to
command things that Christ has not prescribed to be done, under the name of
indifferency, but I conceive that things indifferent, ought to be left to men's
free choice to be done, or not to be done, but when those things which they
call indifferent are imposed by Mulcts and penalties, it changes the nature of
the thing and makes that which before was indifferent, to be of absolute
necessi y, the which thing for any man or men to do (viz) to impose and command
in the duties of Gods worship that which Christ has not commanded, it is to
exalt themselves above Christ, to impose and give Laws to the Church which
Christ has not given.

Mr. Perkins Mr. Perkins says in his first Volum Page 676. That if God be
either represented or worshipped in at or before an Image he is presently
transformed into an Idol and in Hab. 2.18. He says that Images, which also in
the same verse he calls dumb Idols, they are teachers of lies, because as soon
as God is represented in an Image, he is deprived of his glory and changed into
a bodily visible Circumscribed and finite Majesty, for so when the Children of
Israel intended to worship God in the Golden Calf, they proclaimed to morrow is
a holyday unto the Lord. Exodus 32. And yet the Psalmist says in so doing, they
changed or turned the glory of God into the Similitude of a beast that eats
Grass, Psalm. 106.20.

Humain devised worship is Idolatrous Worship
Now if to represent or worship God in at or before an Image be an Idolatrous
worship, because God has not any where in his word appointed nor required such
a kind of worship, does it not hence follow upon the same ground and reason,
that to worship God by the traditions and devices and inventions of men, in a
way that Christ nor his Apostles never instituted nor appointed, and this kind
of worship also to be celebrated by Officers in the Church which neither Christ
nor his Apostles did ever institute or appoint unto such Office, but they are
also of men's devising, as Lord Primate, Lord Metropolitan, Lord Arch-B shop,
Lord-Bishops, Deans, Sub-Deans Dean and Chapter, Archdeacons, Subdeacons,
Chancellors, Vice-Chancellors, Chanter, Sub-Chanter, Prebends, resident and non
resident, Canons resident and non resident, Vicars-Corrals, Vicars Choristers,
Curates, and a rabble of the like, the Spawn of Antechrist, and is not this as
Idollatrous to worship God by such usurping Officers in a way of their own
devising, as to worship God in at or before an Image, let wise impartial men
judge for Mr. Perkins says Page. 696 That the worship of God which is devised
and taken up by men it is in deed and effect Idolatry, because it is a worship
that God does abhor and detest, who will precisely be worshipped according to
his own word and institution, without any addition detraction or change, and it
is so much the more Idolatrous because the Officers that do the service have
not their Authority from God, but from men, as themselves have confessed.

Bishops and Prelates are the abominatie of desolation
In 2 Cor. 44. Satan is called the God of this world because men obey his
suggestions rather than Gods word, and in this respect also Antechrist the Pope
is called God, because he more strictly enjoyneth men to obey his own
traditions, then the very word of God says Mr. Perkins Page. 681. And in this
respect also our Bishops and Prelates make themselves Gods, because they
presume to prescribe a form of worship to God which God has not prescribed nor
appointed, and so they set themselves in Gods stead, to order the affairs of
Gods house as God, for none but God himself can prescribe the matter and manner
of Gods worship, and yet our Bishops and Prelates do alter and change, do add
and diminish in the duties of Gods worship both for matter and manner of
worship and so make themselves Gods, and do a so more strictly enjoin men to
observe and obey their own Canons and constitutions than the very word of God,
and do punish the transgressors of their Canons with greater punishments, than
the transgressors of the word of God, and thus they do not only set themselves
in Gods stead, and make themselves Gods, but they exalt themselves above God,
by punishing men for disobedience to their Canons, more than for disobedience
to the Canons of holy Scripture, and thus our Lord Bishops and Prelates by
their abominable usurpation, they are the very abomination of desolation
standing in the holy place, Matthew 24.15. Whose reads let him understand,
and you will find that Bishops and Prelates are the very same.

Bishops ought to conform themselves (...) the rule of Christ
And therefore is it not high time, for Kings and Princes and Lords temporal
etc. And a duty which God requires from them, having invested them with power
to reform such abuses, the which cannot be done but by taking the usurped
temporallities and tyths from Bishops and Prelates, and so to call them back
from their erronius usurped wicked ways and compel them to conform themselves
and submit unto the rules and institutions of Jesus Christ and no longer suffer
them by their usurped power to tyranize and constrain men against their
Consciences to decline or forsake their conformity to the rules and
institutions of Christ, and to conform to their wicked usurped Authority in
their Idolatrous way of worship of their own devising, for man's intention
makes not Gods worship says Mr Perkins, but doing Gods will, and Gods will,
is not to be worshipped by an immaginary devised formality of worship, which is
but as an Image or representation of Gods divine instituted worship, for we may
not think to bind the presence of God, the operation of his Spirit, and his
hearing and accepting of us, to any thing to which God has not bound himself,
either by word of Commandment or promise, or both; now God has not any where
bound himself either by word or promise to hear us nor accept us in a formal
way of worship of men's devising, but according to his own institution, for God
is not worshipped, but when it is his will to accept of our worship, and it is
not his will to accept of our worship, but when it is according to his own will
and institution, and not according to our will and devising, for what God has
not instituted, he will not accept of in any part of his worship, therefore we
ought not to add nor diminish from Christ's institution, though our pretenses
seem never so plausible in the conceit of men.

It was the real intention of the Israelites to worship the God of their
Forefathers in the Golden Calf, and is was the intention of Jeroboam to do the
like in the Calves at Dan and Bethel, and yet the holy Ghost gives his
judgment upon them, that the Israelites worshipped the Molten Image, Psalm.
106.19. And that Jeroboam sacrificed to the Calves that he had made, 1 King.
12.32. The reason why their worship was esteemed the worship of the Calves was,
because they worshipped according to their own invention, and not according to
Gods divine institution, as in Psalm. 106.39. They were defiled with their own
works and went a Whoring with their own inventions, and can any Prelate give a
reason why they might not as well worship after their own inventions as our
Bishops and Prelates may worship after their own inventions and compel others
to worship so too, was such a worship counted Idolatry in them, and will it not
be counted Idolatry in us, what assurance can our Bishops give us to the
contrary that in so worshipping we shall not be Idolaters by their invented way
of worshipping an Idol.

For thus you see, that to worship according to men's inventions, it is by the
holy Ghost counted Idolatry, therefore if you would have a right reformation,
and a right conformity and unity in the Church in Religion, the right way to do
it is to compel the Bishops and Prelates especially, and all others to conform
themselves to the rules and institutions of Jesus Christ and his Apostles. And
this belongs especially to the King to cause it to be done, for he bears not
the Sword in vain, says the Apostle, he is the Minister of God for good to
those that do well, and for terror to those that do evil, for says the Text,
He is Gods Minister attending continually upon this very thing, Romans 13. to
verse the 7. He primarily has power given him of God to break the power of
wicked usurping Prelates and their carnal traditions and cannons, except by
conniving at their usurped wickedness, we endanger our selves to partake with
them in their punishments, which God forbid.

Again when God is adored and worshipped according to men's invention, the
worshippers are said to forget God, Psalm. 106.21. though they think that they
well remember him, the reason is because they forget his Commandments and
institutions, for God commands that we shall not add nor diminish from his
institutions, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Nor turn aside to the right hand or to the left, Deuteronomy.
28.14. And that if we do turn aside, all the curses from verse 15. to the 68.
shall come upon thee, and over take thee, for those that worship with a devised
worship of their own invention, they do also worship a devised God of their own
invention, for such as the worship is, such is the God that is worshipped: The
Samaritanes worshipped the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and yet Christ
says of them, ye worship ye know not what, because they worshipped the true
God in a way devised by men, Gods worship must be according to this nature,
Heavenly, Divine, and Spiritual, but all devised worship is according to the
nature and disposition of the deviser, foolish, carnal, and vain, as Christ
says, In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrine the Commandments of
Men, Mat. 15.9 God will not have nor accept of any worship but such as himself
has appointed, men's intention to worship God is nothing, unless they worship
him according to his own will and appointment.

It is said 1 Cor. 10.20. The things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they
sacrifice unto Devils and not to God, and yet the wiser sort of the Gentiles,
their intention was to sacrifice unto God in Images, and the Children of Israel
who by the Commandment of God were to offer sacrifices unto the Lord yet they
might not offer their sacrifices in every place as Deuteronomy. 12.13. Nor in any City
or Field, but in the place which the Lord had chosen, namely at the Door of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, as in Leviticus 17.3, 4, 5. They must neither
sacrifice any thing but what God had appointed to be sacrificed, nor in any
other place but where God appointed, for if they did their sacrifice was
accounted as sacrificing unto Devils. Leviticus 17. and 7. and in Deuteronomy. 32.17,
18. They sacrifice unto Devils, not to God, and forget God that formed them;
now if the not observing of the place appointed for to sacrifice in did make
such a difference, that the sacrifice offered in one place was accepted as
offered unto God, and the same sacrifice offered in another place appointed by
men and not where God had appointed made the sacrifice to be reputed as
offering sacrifice unto Devils as these Texts and others do prove.

Then is not this sufficient to convince any reasonable man, that to alter and
change the worship of God from the rules and institutions of Christ to the
rules and Cannons of men's devising, and to force men so to worship, does make a
greater difference in the worship of God, than in the time of the Law to offer
the same sacrifice in any other place but where God had appointed it to be
sacrificed, and yet the very alteration and change of the place made the same
thing sacrificed to be esteemed the sacrificing unto Devils, and not to God,
have we not need then to take care that we keep close to the rules and
institutions of Christ? I beseech all, especially those who would have us to
worship after the precepts and Commandments of men, to consider this, and to
remember what our Savior Christ says, In vain do they worship me, teaching
for Doctrine the Commandments of men, Mat. 15.9.

Christ says, Matthew. 11.29. Take my yoke upon you, now this yoke of Christ is,
subjection to Gods word and will, and such as do not worship him according to
his word and will, but according to their own will and humain devices and
traditions, such persons casts off the yoke of Christ, and deny their
subjection to him, which is the property of wicked men, and is as much as if
they should say, who is the Almighty that we should serve, or be subject unto
him, for true subjection is a resignation of our selves to the will and word of
God; and that in all things and this is the right serving of God.

Mr. Perkins says, Page. 699. That nothing may go under the name and worship
of God, which God has not ordained in his word and commanded us as his own
worship, for when the Jews worshipped God after the devised fashion of the
Gentiles, though their meaning was to worship nothing but God, yet they
worshipped nothing but Devils, says he; for all voluntary Religion and will
worship is utterly condemned, therefore nothing may go under the name of Gods
worship, but what God has prescribed for the rule of divine worship, is not
the will of him that worshippeth, but the will of him that is worshipped.

Again, if there be such a God, who will be worshipped according to the
traditions and devices of men and has promised his presence to hear and answer
us in such a way of worship, then he has either revealed himself, that he will
hear us and accept us in such a way or he has not revealed himself, let the
Bishops and Prelates show us the Scripture, where God has promised his
presence to hear and accept us in a way of worship of man's devising, and let
the Commandment be showed that binds us to worship so, but if the Bishops
and Prelates cannot show us any such Commandment that binds us so to
worship, nor show, us any promise of Gods presence to hear and accept of us in
such a way, then ought not the Prelates to force us to such a kind of worship,
neither ought we to obey them, nor have we any promise to ground our faith
upon, and whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.23. Radulph calls it
Idolatry in manners to prefer the creature before the Creator, and so in
Prelates to prefer their Canons and Inventions before the Canons of Scripture,
and institutions of Jesus Christ.

We all know that under the Law God required that Sacrifice Oblations and
Incense should be offered unto him, but when they did not observe Gods way and
order which he had ordained and appointed, how they should be offered, but
devised a way of their own, you shall hear what the Prophet Isaiah says of
such a devised worship, Isa. 66.3. He that kills an Ox, is as if he flew a
man, he that sacrifices a Lamb is as if he cut off a Dogs neck, he that
offers an Oblation as if he offered Swines blood, and he that burns Incense
as if he blessed an Idol, God esteems no better of men's devised way of
worship, as appears in the latter part of the verse. (viz.) They have chosen
their own way, etc. Hence we may take notice how dangerous a thing it is for
any, either to do it themselves, or to enjoin others to worship God in a way of
men's devising by humane traditions and Ceremonies and not to keep close to the
rules and institutions of Christ, for Christ is the alone Sovereign Governor
and Lawgiver to prescribe Laws and rules to his Church, how he will be
worshipped, he will have no fellows nor partners joined with him in that work,
and Christian Magistrates have power and authority given them by Christ, to
command their Subjects and all under them to observe the rules and institutions
of Christ, and that they turn not aside to the right hand or to the left, for
Christ says, in vain do they worship him, that worship him according to the
Commandments of Men.

But perhaps some men may think, that men may prescribe rules for the outward
form and duties of Gods worship by the example of David, in 1 Chronicles. who
ordered the courses of the Priests and Levites, etc. How they should serve in
the temple when Solomon had built it, and gave the pattern thereof unto
Solomon. But with submission to better judgments, I think David did not that
as he was a King only, but as he was a Prophet and received the pattern thereof
form God by his spirit, for so he says, 1 Chronicles. 28.12. He gave to Solomon the
pattern of all that he had by the Spirit, and in verse 19. All this, said
David, the Lord made me understand in writing by his hand upon me even all the
works of this pattern.

Some men think it a matter of nothing to frame a form of worship of their own
devising, and think that God will be satisfied and well pleased therewith,
whereas God will accept of no worship neither for matter nor manner but what he
has instituted as you may see in Levit. 10.1. Nadab and Abihu, they thought it
no great matter to take common fire, instead of fire from the alter to offer
incense with unto the Lord, and yet for this very thing in not observing Gods
appointment, in the manner of their burning of incense, there went out fire
from the Lord and devoured them that they dyed, verse 2. For God will be
sanctified, says Moses, in them that come nigh unto him, ver. 3. This may
teach all generations to the end of the world, how jealous God is in every part
of his worship, that it be performed according to his own institutions without
alteration, or adding or diminishing after the devises of men, and shows us
what need there is in reforming the Church, to make the word of God our Rule.

Hence it will follow that those that decline and forsake the means appointed
us of God, for our edification and salvation, to embrace other means prescribed
by men, or to mix them with the institutions of Christ, how specious soever
they seem to be in our eyes, and carnally flattering to be of more strength and
efficacy to attain the end, yet they cannot, because they want the seal of
divine approbation upon them, they will fail, as it is said of King Ahaz in his
distress, he sent for Tilgath Philazer King of Assyria for to help him, and he
came unto him, but distressed him, and helped him not, 2 Chronicles. 28.20.21. For
unto the wicked, God said, what have thou to do to declare my statutes or that
thou should take my covenant into thy mouth seeing thou hate instruction
and castest my word behind thee. Psalm. 50.16.17. If thou will not be reformed
to observe the Law of Christ thou have no right nor authority from Christ to
preach his Law nor to take his covenant in thy mouth.

Holingshead. Hollingshead in his History of Scotland, page 183. says that the
superfluous possessions of the Church as they are now used are not only
occasions to evil Prelates to live in most insolent pomp and corrupt life, but
is as a Not to draw Gold and Silver out of the Realm.

The Nobles of Bohemia in the council of Basil propounded 20. Articles against
the Prelates, of which there was four, which they said they would maintain
until death, and one of those four was that the Pope, the Prelates and Clergy
from the highest to the lowest, their temporal possessions and riches ought to
be taken from them, and that they ought to be made poor as the Disciples of our
Lord Jesus Christ was, who had no possessions in this world, neither worldly
power, for the Clergy are but Administrators or Stewards of the Temporallities
of the Church for the use of the poor, and what Temporallities the Clergy has
that does not belong to the poor they have gotten by false indirect ways,
either by promising that their prayers and masses should deliver the Souls of
those that gave such Lands, out of purgatory, which they never could nor never
can do, and therefore the condition failing, the Lands ought to return into the
hands and possession of the King and Nobles, who are the successors of them
that gave them, or else some of those Lands were gotten, by cursings and
excommunications, as Pope Gregory the ninth excommunicated Frederick the
Emperor until he gave one hundred and twenty thousand ounces of Gold for his
absolution, in Mr. Prynns book of the rebellion, conspiracies, treasons and
seditions of Bishops, between page 293. and 298, you may read that the Bishops
of Landusse from time to time excommunicated 7 or 8. Kings, and 12 other of the
Gentry, and some gave 2. some 3. or 4. or 5. pieces of Land to the Bishops for
their absolutions, and this was one way how bishops and Prelates come by their
Temporallities, and therefore the King and Lords, etc. may justly take their
unjust gotten lands from them and make them more conformable to Christ and his
Apostles.

Arch bishop of St. Andrews his Recantation And to show the unlawfulness both
of bishops Temporallities and jurisdictions, some of the bishops when they were
in their right wits recanted, as Patrick Adamson, Archbishop of St. Andrews in
Scotland, made his Recantation in the Synod of Fife. April the 8. 1591. in
these words following I confess with a sincere mind, without color or fraud,
that I have formerly erred in this, that I thought the Government of the Church
to be like the Regiment of Terrene Kingdoms, expressly against the precept of
Christ our Lord, and that the monarchy whereby the Church is governed did not
rest in the person of Christ our Savior alone, as it does in truth, but
likewise in the Ministers, who yet are nothing else but vassals and Clerks
under Christ and equal among themselves, and lastly, I confess that the office
of a bishop as now it is used and claimed is destitute from all authority from
Gods word, and founded only upon the politic device of men, out of which the
primacy of the Pope or Ante-christ is sprung, and it is deservedly to be
condemned, etc.

bishop of Dunkel his recantation. In like manner Alexander Lindsay bishop of
Dunkell in the year, 1639. did also make his recantation at St. Andrews the 24
of January, as he had formerly done at Glascow the 21 of November, where he did
freely submit himself, and lay down says he my pretended office of Episcopacy
as pretended bishop of Dunkell, and declare the said office of Episcopacy as it
has been used in the kirk of Scotland, to be adjured by the confession of
faith, therefore wit ye me to have demitted quite claim, etc. the foresaid
pretended office of Episcopacy of Dunkel, with the whole title, style, name,
and dignity thereof, power of ordination, jurisdiction, voice in Parliament and
all usurpation of the same in time to come, and do faithfully promise, and by
these presents bind and oblige me never to exercise nor use the said pretended
office, nor any other power ecclesiastical, belonging, usurped, or claimed to
belong to the same pretended office, which I acknowledge ought to be abjured
and removed, and the whole premises I heartily acknowledge as I will answer to
God, in testimony hereof I have subscribed these presents with my hand, etc,

The bishop of Orkneys recantation.
Bishop of Orkneys recantation. To all and sundry whom it may concern, to whose
knowledge these presents shall come especially to the reverent and honorable
members of the future assembly to be holden at Edinburgh the 12 day of August.
1639. I Mr. George Gryame sometime pretended Bishop of Orkneys being sorry and
grieved at my heart that I should ever for my worldly respect embrace the order
of Episcopacy, the same having no warrant from the word of God, and being such
an order as has had sencibly many fearful and evil consequencies depending on
it in many parts of Christendom, and particularly within the Kirk of Scotland,
as by doleful and deplorable experience this day is manifest, to have
disclaimed, like as I do by the tenor hereof altogether disclaim and abjure all
Episcopal power and jurisdiction with the whole corruptions thereof etc.
promising and swearing by the great name of the Lord our God that I shall never
while I live directly or indirectly exercise any such power within the Kirk,
neither yet shall I ever approve or allow the same, not so much as in my
private or public discourse etc. and shall Concur to the uttermost of my power
sincerely and faithfully in advancing the work of Reformation within this Land
to the glory of God, the peace of the Country and the comfort and contentment
of all good Christians as God shall be my help: In testimony of which premises
I have subscribed these presents with my hand before these witnesses etc.

Now to conclude; John Huss a Martyr at constance, he prophesied that the light
of the Gospel should break out a hundred years after his death, which was
fulfilled in Luther, whom God stirred up a hundred years after, there is
another Ancient Prophecy which some think was by John Huss also, which
Prophecy is, That the Church cannot be reduced to its former dignity and
reformed until all things be made new, the former dignity of the Church is, to
have the same Officers for quality that Christ and his Apostles instituted, and
to have Episcopacy and all the rabble depending thereon, plants which our
heavenly Father has not planted, rooted up, for so long as they stand the
Church cannot be reduced to its former dignity, neither in doctrine nor
discipline, because these Church Officers, as they are esteemed, are not of
God, but usurpers and other the like in the Roman Church, who are not of Gods,
but of humain institution, they mix their humain devices with the Laws and
institutions of Christ, and so defile and polute the Ordinances of Christ, much
like unto those Nations which Sholmanezer King of Assyria placed in the Cities
of Samaria, every Nation made Gods of their own and yet it is said of them that
they feared the Lord and served their own Gods, 2 Kings 17.29 33. Just so the
Pope and Prelates make Gods of their own, or devise a way of their own to
worship God by, which is all one, for a devised worship of men, which Christ
has nor appointed may justly in Scripture fence be said to be an Idol worship,
and so they may be said to fear the Lord and serve or worship their own Gods or
Idols, a worship of their own making; for did ever Heathen dote more upon their
Idols, than Popes and Prelates dotes on their own devised way of worship: ye
shall says Moses from God, walk after the Lord your God and keep his
Commandments and obey his voice, and that Prophet or dreams of dreams shall be
put to death that speaks to ^hou^^ (...) out of the way which the Lord thy God
commanded thee to walk in, Deuteronomy. 13.4, 5. What then shall be done to those
dreaming drones that not only speak but make Laws and command Gods people to
turn out of the way that Christ has appointed them to walk in, to have them to
walk in the Ceremonial ways and appointments of men. This does imply as much
as to say, go and serve other Gods, serve him with a worship which he has not
appointed, for to be compelled by Laws and penalties to leave the Commandments
of Christ, to follow the Commandments of men, is no other than to serve other
Gods, the Lord says, that such an one, if it be a Brother, a Son or a
Daughter, or a Wife, thine eye shall not pity, neither shall thou spare nor
conceal, but thou shall kill him, thou shall stone him with stones that he
dye, because he has sought to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God, ver.
8.10.

The Lord threatened by the Prophet Zeph. that he would cut off Man and beast,
and the stumbling block with the wicked and them that worship and that swear by
the Lord, and that swear by Malcham, Zeph. 1.3.5. To swear by the Lord in truth
in judgment and in righteosness as Jer. 4.2. Being Lawfully called to swear,
it is one part of Gods worship, but to swear by Malcham or other things is
Idolatrous, for so the thing that is sworn by is made an Idol and set in Gods
stead and honor given unto it as to be the searcher of the heart and to
witness that, what is sworn is truth, and so it is in other parts of Gods
worship, if we keep not close to Gods word, but devise a way of worship which
Christ has not prescribed, it is Idolatrous as well as to swear by Malcham, it
is the stumbling block of the wicked, for diminish ought from his word, which
also is to be understood of his worship, for it is not found in the Scripture
that Christ has given power to any man or men to add or diminish to any part
of his worship from his institutions either in the old Testament or the New, to
swear by Malcham etc. The thing that is sworn and affirmed may be true and yet
the oath is sinful and Idolatrous, because it is not Gods way that he has
instituted that oaths should be given and taken, God says of the Rebellious
and wicked Jews, though they swear the Lord lives surely they swear falsely,
why so, because their swearing was vain and customary and not in such a way as
God had appointed oaths to be taken, and therefore he reckoned it a false oath
though the thing they swore was true: The Lord does live, and so men may devise
a way to worship God, and snatch here and there a sentence or two of Scripture
and mangle it in pieces and then patch it together to make up a form to please
themselves and it may be some others, and though the words for the matter of
them are words of truth, yet this also is sinful as to swear by Malcham or as
the wicked Jews to swear the Lord lives, Because Christ has not any where
instituted such a way of worship to jumble a many texts fetched here and there
together to make a form of worship, though the words themselves be good yet
they were not ordained for such an end, nor we have neither precept nor example
from Christ nor his Apostles so to use them, but from Antechrist the Pope such
example may be taken by them that please; Conjurers, Witches and Charmers use
or rather abuse good words, for they often times mutter over the Creed and our
Lords Prayer and several texts of Scripture to work their feats, but God has
not trusted us with the Scriptures for such ends especially not that those who
can please themselves with such a form, should impose the same upon all others
by penalties of imprisonment or banishment or the like as has been done to
some.

And therefore it is impossible that ever there can be any right reformation or
that the Church can be reduced to its primitive purity and dignity so long as
the Bishops and Prelates bears such a sway both in the Church and Common
wealth, until God put it into the hearts and minds of Kings, Princes, and Lord
etc. and to take away the temporalities and tyths from Bishops, Prelates, and
Clergy which they have so long usurpingly and unjustly detained from the King
and Nobles and not performed the conditions for which their predecessors gave
them, and sacraligiously kept to their own use what was given for the use of
the Poor, and so reduce them first to live after the examples of Christ and his
Apostles according to the rule of the new Testament of Jesus Christ which is
the thing I am now to show, and not after the example of Antechrist as now they
do and will do if they may be suffered.

It may rationally be imagined that the Prelates and Clergy will say, that if
temporallities and tithes be taken from them how shall they then live.

I answer, that such an objection will argue want of faith in the objector, for
can they pretend that they can trust God with the salvation of their Souls, and
can they not trust God with their bodies, for food and raiment in the way of
Gods appointment, unless they carve out a portion for themselves by dishonest
gain, we must not presume to be wiser then God, to think that we can prescribe
a better way for the maintenance of Gospel Ministers, than Christ has
prescribed to his Apostles, and they practiced, indeed I confess that man's way
to be maintained by Lands and Tithes is a fit way for Thieves and Robbers that
comes not in an the door by Christ into the Sheepfold, but comes in at the
Window or some other way by Antichrists invention to rob and steal, as I knew
a pretended Minister that said, he cared not if the Devil had the flock, so
that he had the fleece, maintenance by Lands and Tithes are fit only for such
and none else, and Christ's way of maintenance, which I shall show anon, is most
fit for Christ's Ministers, who come into the Sheepfold at the door by Christ,
for such Ministers will neither teach nor provoke the people to any manner of
Ceremonial worship, which they have not learned from Christ, and which he and
his Apostles has not instituted, neither will they presume to seek their
maintenance in unwarrantable ways, contrary to the precepts and example of
Christ and his Apostles, for if they do, they do thereby lay an imputation upon
the wisdom and holiness of Christ, as if he had not in his word sufficiently
provided for his own worship, and for their maintenance except men will presume
to be wiser then God.

If Ministers would approve themselves to be true Gospel Ministers of Jesus
Christ, by following his example, and live as he lived, then here is an example
for them to follow, first Christ was poor as to worldly things, for he says of
himself, the foxes have holes, and the birds of the Air have nests, but the Son
of Man, who is also the Son of God, has not where to lay his head, Mat. 8.20.
but thus it pleased him to be an example of poverty and humility to all Gospel
Ministers to follow his steps, that we by his poverty might be made rich in
faith and good works.

Secondly, he suffered hunger, and went to the Fig Tree expecting to find fruit
thereon but found none, Mark 11.12.13. and at another time after his
Resurrection he asked his Apostles, have ye here any meat, and they gave him a
piece of a broyled fish, and of an honey comb, and he did eat, Luke 24.42.43.
Thirdly, he was wearyed with traveling on foot, he had not his Coach and 4 or
6 horses as our Bishops have, you may know them by their fruits, whether they
belong to Christ or Antichrist, Christ was also thirsty, and asked water of a
woman to drink, Joh. 4.6.7. but our Prelates drinks the best Wines. Fourthly,
Christ had his maintenance by the charitable bounty and benevolence of the
people, amongst whom was Mary Magdalen, and Joanna the Wife of Chusa Herod's
Steward, and Susanna and many others who ministered to him of their substance,
Luke 8.3. And this is the way that Christ has ordained should have their
maintenance, namely by the bountiful and charitable devotion of the people unto
whom they minister, Learn of me says Christ, for I am meek and lowly in hear,
and ye shall find rest to your Souls, for the Disciple is not above his Master,
nor the Servant above his Lord, Mat. 10.24. If Christ were so poor, why should
Prelates and Priests be so rich, if Christ and his Apostles suffered hunger and
thirst as Paul says of himself and the rest of the Apostles, 1. Cor. 4.11.
That they did both hunger and thirst and were naked and buffeted, and had no
certain dwelling place, why then should Prelates and Priests be so full and so
gorgeously apparrelled and have such stately palaces settled on them for their
lives. If Christ and his Apostles were wearied with traveling on foot, as Paul
faith, 2 Cor. 11.27. That he was often in weariness and painfulness, etc. Why
should Prelates and Priests have their Coaches and great horses, and if Christ
and his Apostles had their maintenance by the charitable devotion of the
people, why should Prelates and Priests have such large revenues of
temporallities and tithes, this is to make the Disciple above his Master and
the Servant above his Lord, contrary to the words of Christ, Mat. 10.24.

For according to this example, when Christ sent forth his twelve Apostles to
preach, he commanded them, and in them all others that are right Gospel
Ministers, saying, Provide neither Gold nor Silver nor Brass in your Purses,
nor Scrip for your journey, neither two Coats etc. for the workman is worthy of
his meat, Mat. 10.9.10. and in Luke 10.7. Eat and drink such things as they
give, but Christ did not bid them, if the people did not give, that they should
take it by force of Law, as the practice of Prelates and Priests is, whereby
they, like the Sons of Eli, make the offering to be abhorred, this is not
Christ's but Antichrists way for maintenance of ministers, Christ only bids the
Apostles, that those who would not receive them, to shake off the dust of their
feet for a testimony against them, but yet with this threatening, that it shall
be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, than for
those people that receive not Gods messengers, nor allows them not maintenance
out of their substance. Thus you see men are bound under pain of damnation, to
give Christ's Ministers sufficient maintenance, for God has ordained that they
which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel, Thou shall not muzzle the
mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn, for says Paul, if we have sown
unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap your carnal things, 1
Cor. 9.9.11.14. And yet this must not be exacted by Law or constraint, but as a
matter of bounty, that every man as he purposes in his heart, so says the
Apostle, Let him give, not grudgingly, or of necessity for God loves a
cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.7. but this I say, He that sows sparingly, shall
reap sparingly, and he which sows bountifully shall reap bountifully, God
will prosper his endeavors so much the more.

If Churches might have leave from the supreme magistrates according to the
word of God to elect and choose their own ministers, then as Paul says, If any
provide not for their own, he has denied the faith and is worse then an
Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. for their choosing of him to be their pastor, makes him to
be related to them as one of their house, and as he lays out his time and
strength and tallent for the good of the Church, so the Church should jointly
make provision for him and his family for the things of this life, that as he
sowes unto them spiritual things so he ought to reap their carnal things, and
this is not a matter of liberty or courtesy which may be done or left undone,
but it is a duty, a work of justice unto which the Church is called and bound
in conscience to perform, so that provision in this kind is wages and not
benovolence, so when Christ sent forth his Apostles, he bids them not to be
solicitous for relief, for the workman is worthy of his wages, Luke 10.7.

The Apostle Paul in 1 Cor. 9. determines this by the verdict of all Laws, look
at the law of nature, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, etc. Look at
the Law of Nations who goes a warfare a^ his own charge, look at the Law of
God, he has ordained that those who preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel, this is the way to make good and laborious Ministers, for no preaching,
no wages and this wages ought to be so plentiful and comfortable, col ected by
the people and given to the minister that he may employ his time, his strength
and study, and attend upon the work of the Lord without destraction, 1 Cor.
7.35. For if he should be straightened so as to be put to bestow his time and
thought on the week days to provide Bread for his family, how shall he be able
to provide spiritual food for the Church upon the Lords day.

And such Ministers as can live by faith in a holy dependence upon Christ's
promise, that in seeking first the Kingdom of Heaven and the righteousness
thereof, that all other things shall be added. Mat. 6.33. No doubt but God will
both open the hearts and hands of the people to give bountifully unto such
Ministers; And indeed, he that is a right Gospel Minister called of God to his
Office, his faith will bear him up against all difficulties and opposition
whatsoever, with the Prophet Habbakkuk, who said, although the Fig Tree should
not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vine, the labor of the Olive shall
fail, and the Fields shall yield no meat, the Flock shall be cut off from the
Fold, and there shall be no Herd in the Stalls, yet says he I will rejoice in
the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. Hab. 3.17, 18.

Now as touching the order how this maintenance may be raised for the
Ministers, there is one text most pregnant and carries most conclusive evidence
to direct and determine in this case, Gala. 6.6. let him that is taught in the
word communicate to him that teaches in all good things, that is of all good
things that is communicable, and may Lawfully be communicated, A man may have
one room to lodge in, one servant to attend him, one Coat to cover him, so much
provision as will only supply his own necessity, and these cannot be made
common.

But whatsoever good things we may make common, if we have to serve our selves
and to spare, every man should communicate according to his place and portion,
that God has bestowed upon him, whether Money, Corn, Cattle, the Fruit of
Orchards, Gardens, Wool, Flax, or Clothing for him and his, etc. whatsoever
may be either for necessity, or comfort, that God casts in occasionally which
may be communicated, they should give some part thereof, toward the
maintenance of their Ministers, yet this is not to be levied by compulsion, but
every man is to give as God shall enlarge their hearts, and open their hands to
so good a work, for he that Sows liberally shall Reap liberally, and he that
Sows sparingly shall Reap sparingly, he that gives says Paul let him do it
with simplicity or liberally, and he that shows mercy with cheerfulness, 1 Timothy 6.8. And our Savior says give and it shall be given unto you, good
measure, etc. Luke 6.38. And as he said in another case, freely ye have
received, freely give, for whatsoever we have it is the gift of God, charge
them that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded, nor trust in
uncertain riches but in the living God, who gives us richly all things to
enjoy, 1. Tim. 6.17. And if we use not well what he has given us, he can when
he will take it from us, unless he give it as a snare to try how men will use
it.

This I conceive to be the Gospel rule for maintenance for Ministers, that
every one that is taught in the word, ought to communicate to him that teaches
according to their abillity this may be further enlarged upon if there be
occasion, but there is another Gospel duty which is too much neglected, and
that is the ministering to the poor Saints, which was so frequently and so
liberally used in the Apostles days, that Paul in 2 Cor. 9.1. said as touching
the ministering to the Saints, it was superfluous for him to write unto them,
for he knew the forwardness of their minds to that duty, for he had in his
former Epistle given them direction, how this duty should be performed in 1
Cor. 16.1, 2. Now concerning the Colection for the Saints, as I have given
order to the Churches of Gallatia, even so do ye, upon the first day of the
week, let every one of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him that
their be no gathering when I come. The giving of alms is a duty well pleasing
to God, to do good and to distribute forget not, for with such sacrifice God is
well pleased. And Solomon says there is that scatters and yet increases,
and there is that with holds more then is meet, but it tends to poverty the
liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters, shall be watered also
himself, Prove. 11.24, 25. again he says, cast thy bread upon the waters thou
shall find it after many days, by waters is meant peoples and multitudes, as in
Rev. 17.15. Give a potion to seven and also to eight for thou know not what
evil shall be upon earth, Eccles. 11.1, 2. Some have thought that this
Colection ought to be the tenth part of every man's profit, but whether it be so
or not, this the Scriptures assure us off, that he which sows sparingly shall
reap sparingly, and he that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully, 2 Cor.
6.6. as it is written, he has dispersed and given to the Poor, his
righteousness remains for ever, Psalm. 112.9.

FINIS.

