Laying on of Hands UPON BAPTIZED BELIEVERS, As such, Proved an Ordinance of
Christ. In Answer to Mr. Danvers's former Book, Entitled, A Treatise of Laying
on of Hands.

The Second Edition.

WITH A brief ANSWER to a late Book, called, A Treatise concerning Laying on of
Hands; written by a nameless Author.

By B. K.

Psalm. 119.141. I am small and despised, yet do not I forget thy Precepts.

LONDON, Printed, are to be Sold by Benj. Harris at the Upper-end of
Grace Church Street, near Cornhil, School.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
To the Congregations of our Lord Jesus Christ, baptized upon Confession of
Faith, and under Imposition of Hands, particularly in South- Wales, and more
generally throughout England; Grace, Mercy, and Peace be multiplied.
Brethren,
NOtwithstanding the glorious Light broken forth among us in these later Times,
yet we see gross Darkness covering the face of the Earth; nay, and our Heavens
are not so clear as we hope e're long to behold them: for tho the Light is
come, yet the Glory of the Lord is but rising upon us; ours is but the Morning
of that longed-for Day, and poor Sion is but looking forth of the Wilderness:
hence are so many Divisions amongst us; we speak as we see, and according to
the Light received, and as we are bound by the Authority of Divine Precept to
walk: God gradually discovers Himself, and the true Order and Form of his House
and Worship unto us: and tho we are still laboring under many difficulties,
having had much Rubbish to remove (like the Israelites when they came out of
the 70 years Captivity) and many have endeavored to weaken our Hands, yet
through infinite Grace we may say, the Foundation of God's House is laid: Tho
some who would build cannot find the Wall, and some strive to bring in a Stone
of Babylon for a Corner, whilst others endeavor to cast away a principal
Pillar, because it has lain a long time corrupted and covered amongst the
Antichristian Rubbish. Reformation is a glorious work, and it is what we all
long and breathe after. Mr. D. and others have been helpful to the Church of
God with respect to Baptism, but for want of further Light have lost their way:
by which means I perceive many, in one respect much behind them, in another are
got before them, and may (as far as I can judge) get into Canaan as soon as
they. Imposition of Hands is the Principle of our present Controversy; and it
is to be lamented, that in this day we should be forced to a Work of this
nature. Our Brother on this Consideration was dissuaded from doing what we now
see published, and rather on this account than any other; and tho some judged
it would do the Truth it self much injury, by weakening the hearts or hands of
those established in it, or enquiring after it, yet some judged it scarce
deserved an Answer: But others considering how well he wrote on the other
Principle, thought it might the more likely tend to entangle the weak, and more
unwary Christian. Now as to my undertaking the Work, as I judged my self
incapable in respect of others: so it was not my purpose to have been
concerned, till put upon it by some in this City; and considering the
backwardness of others, it the more induced me to it. And tho but abruptly
done, yet such as it is, I present it to the serious perusal and consideration
of all, whose Souls long after the good, full restoration, and perfection of
Sion; hoping the God of Truth will cause it to entertainment in the hearts of
the humble, tho I expect it will be slighted by such as are passionately
opinionated of their own seize and persuasions, and who are below
receiving instruction from their Inferiors. It is the grief of some of you (as
I believe) to see any whom you love and tender in the Lord, opposing so holy an
Institution of Jesus Christ; but however, this you will find in perusal of this
Discourse, that tho too many Baptized Christians utterly disallow and reject
it, nay seem not desirous to know the Mind of God herein, yet many godly
Persons both of the Presbyterian and Independent Persuasions (tho dark and
negligent about the business of Baptism) have longed, and searched after the
knowledge and discovery of this Truth, nay have attained to a good understanding
and satisfaction herein, having labored after a perfect restoration of it to
its primitive use and purity, refining it from the Corruptions and Mutations of
the Popish Church, not only in respect of those abominable additions and
mixtures of Chrism, and other ridiculous Ceremonies in its administration, but
also of the Subject to whom of right it belongs, as abundantly appears in a
Treatise of Mr. Jonathan Hanmar's, writ 1658. when it is apparent their Spirits
were very hot upon it. I find Mr. Caryl (writing Epistolary wise in
commendation of the said Book) speaking thus: I conceive (says he) the Learned
Author of these elaborate Exercitations has deserved well of the Churches, by
clearing the way of those admissions from Scripture-grounds, and the concurrent
Testimony of many, both Ancient and Modern Writers; also by discovering and
removing those Popish Additions and Pollutions, which by several steps have
crept into it. And further he says, that this ingenious and pious Overture
holds forth more, than most Churches have hitherto attained.

Also Mr. Vennings's honest and judicious expressions (in his Epistle to the
same Treatise) I cannot well omit; who speaking of Reformation and Godliness,
says, Either by reason of our dimsightedness, being not able to see afar off,
nor penetrate into the depth and bottom of them, or by reason of the abusive
Traditions, and corrupt Glosses with which for many Ages they have been clouded
and over-cast, many Truths seem not so clear, but they need further clearing;
among others, such as relate to Church Discipline and Order, have long been
under debate, and not without some considerable advantage, tho I humbly
conceive we have not attained so far as to be already perfect. It remains
therefore that we press forward, and not be so passionately fond of our
prepossest Conceptions, as not to have the patience to consider what may be
offered to us, especially by such as wish well to Sion, and desire to see the
Gospel-Temple in its Beauty. If any Persons are spirited to search after
further knowledge in these Affairs, to dig for it as for hid Treasures, and when
they have found a Vein of Golden Ore, to refine and stamp it for us, we should
be in readiness to receive the Truth in the love of it, and pay the tribute and
homage of Obedience for the sake of the God of Truth, whose Image and
Superscription it bears.

What great and profitable Pains my much honored Friend, the Reverend Author
of the ensuing Exercitation, has taken in this one Particular presented to
consideration, and with what Curiousness without Curiosity, with what Learning
without Ostentation, etc. -- you will best perceive by the perusal of it; and
tho my Opinion be of little signification, yet I cannot forbear to say, that as
to the substance and main of the design I judge it of so considerable
importance, that I see not how it can be neglected without very great prejudice
to Church Communion, to say no more. Happily some may be so nice as to be
offended with the Name, and dislike Confirmation for fear of Bishoping, as if
that old-fashioned Garment had but a piece of new-nam'd Cloth put to it, and
dressed up in another Mode: if it were so, can no good come out of Nazareth?
Bonus odor veritatis ex re qualibet: but if any are under such a fear, I think
I may assure them they are more afraid than hurt, yea afraid where no fear is,
as they will quickly find if they please to come and see.

I could wish our dissenting Brethren would weigh the matter more seriously and
moderately; and since there has been by many of different Persuasions so
diligent a scrutiny made ad veritatem invest^gandam, and such holy longings
after the mind of God herein, the result was hoped to have been, a singular
Agreement in the thing it self. But it may seem strange, I confess, to all
discerning Christians, that such should not be able to discover or find out the
Antichristian pollutions and mutations in Baptism, in respect of the Subject
and Manner of Baptizing; which is so apparently contrary to the Gospel-rule and
pattern also. O that the God of Israel would open the eyes of some eminent ones
amongst them, to see the pure crystal Stream of this Institution of Christ, or
help them (to use Mr. Vennings's phrase) to find the Vein of this Golden Ore,
since they will not receive it as refined and ready-stampt for them by such,
whose Skill or Faithfulness they seem to suspect.

But, 1. How can they be perfect in Church-constitution and Order; whilst they
miss the mark in so considerable an Ordinance as Baptism, taking a Stone of
Babylon for a Foundation, and that for Baptism which is none? For it has been
so grossly abused, (as a learned Writer noted in another case) that there is
nothing remaining of it amongst them save the mere Name.

And, 2. May it not be admired to see Men of such Light and Conscience be only
pleased with the Theory and notional part of an Ordinance of Christ? They see
it to be a Gospel-Institution, but I could never yet understand they are in the
practice thereof; If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

3. But how contrary to the Rule and glorious Doctrine of the Lord Jesus would
they act, should they get into the practice thereof, whilst they so grievously
err in the administration of Baptism, since that also wholly belongs to adult
persons, as must be owned if the Scriptures be a perfect and sufficient Rule
for us to walk by, and express whatever is necessary to know concerning this as
well as things of the like nature?

But probably some may object, Since most of the Authors mentioned in this
Discourse for the further evincing the Truth contended for, are corrupt either
in Baptism or laying on of hands, or both, to what purpose are they produced?

In answer to which I must say, that what is offered on the account of Authors
and Antiquity, has been occasionally done, Mr. Danvers having led us in that
path. Nay, I might say, we are necessitated thereto by his means, unless we
should leave one chief part of his Book unanswered, in regard he utterly denies
the thing it self, viz. Laying on of hands upon baptized Believers, as such,
affirming there is no mention made of any such thing or practice in the
Scripture: and secondly, in saying the Ancient Fathers and asserters of it flew
mainly to Tradition, and the usage of the Church in the case. Should an
Adversary utterly deny Water Baptism, however administered, and say it was never
commanded by Christ, but is a mere human Invention, or Innovation of Man; yea
and affirm that all the Fathers and Confessors, that heretofore pleaded for it,
wholly made use of Tradition, and usage of the Church in vindication thereof:
Would not any that is for Baptism judge it necessary, not only to prove it
instituted by the Lord Jesus, and practiced by the Apostles and primitive
Christians, but also, in opposition to his Opponent, that those Writers both of
former and later times who contended for it, did fly to the Scripture for its
proof and confirmation, tho some of them could not do so as touching the
Subject and Manner of Administration? Hence it is we have took the same method
in the defense of an Ordinance of the same Nature and Authority.

And now, my dear Brethren, I cannot but acquaint you, that my Spirit has been
much refreshed to hear how the work of the Lord has been carried on of late
amongst some of you, and the readiness of many to receive this despised Truth.
I am persuaded the more a Truth is opposed, the more it gets ground, and the
Saints with others inquire after it: for since Mr. Danvers's Book came forth,
at one Meeting in London, on one day, upon my own knowledge, near 30 persons
came under the practice hereof: Vincet veritas, let Truth go on conquering, and
to conquer; the Lord will arise and scatter all the clouds of Darkness and
Opposition, and take away the reproach cast upon his Servants for their Witness
to his Truth, and Zeal for his Name. Let them be ashamed who transgress without
cause: if we are reproached, let us take it patiently, since it is for our
precious Redeemer's sake, who has said, You are my friends if you do
whatsoever I command you; and in another Place, Whosoever therefore shall break
one of these least Commandments, and teach Men so, he shall be called the least
in the Kingdom of God, Mat. 5.11.

Brethren, remember the Spirit of God pronounces them worthy of commendation
who stand fast, and keep the Ordinances as delivered to them, 1 Cor. 11.2. and
the more we see evil Men and Seducers (as those called Quakers and others)
laboring on every side of us to tread under feet, and contemptuously despise
all of them, let us stir up our selves with one heart in defense of them all;
and as they are appointed as Conduit-pipes for conveyance of the Spirit and
blessings of the Gospel to our Souls, so let us walk as such that experience
the inward Life and Virtue of them, that thereby we may beautify the Gospel and
Doctrine of God and our Savior in all things, having Lamps and Oil also in our
Vessels, viz. the form of sound Words, and power of Godliness in our Hearts and
Lives. And now finally, Brethren, that I may not be further tedious unto you,
my breathings and desires are, that the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of Lights, the God of all Comfort and Consolation, would
fill you with the knowledge of his Will in all Wisdom and spiritual
Understanding, grant you more clear and heavenly Communion with himself, and
with one another in the paths of Peace and Righteousness, and enable you to
walk inoffensively in all well-pleasing, being fruitful in every good work; and
that the God of all Grace would establish, strengthen and settle you in his
Truth and Ways, that so you may remain unmovable like a Rock in these evil and
perilous times, wherein so many turn aside, giving ear to Seducers, Impostors,
and lying Spirits, with which our Days so abound, that it will be a choice
Blessing to be kept from falling, and preserved without blame till the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now that the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus,
the great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
would sanctify you throughout, and keep you from falling, and present you
without spot before him, in the day of his glorious Appearance, shall be the
constant and hearty Prayer of

Your Brother and Servant for Christ, and his Truth sake, Benjamin Keach.

The Epistle to the Reader.
THE Substance of this ensuing Discourse was formerly wrote and published in
answer to Mr. Danvers's Book against laying on of Hands: but the former
Impression (called Darkness vanquished) being quite gone, I now, upon earnest
desires thereto, present thee with a new one; and the rather, because I have
met with a later and short Tract wrote by a nameless Author against this sacred
Ordinance, which is also here briefly answered. I have also some hopes it may
tend to establish such Churches and Christians as are in the practice of it,
and convince such as do oppose it; that so clear and precious an Ordinance may
not be lost; Destroy it not for a Blessing that is in it. But being unwilling
to be tedious to thee, I commit it to the Blessing of God, whose Appointment it
is. Farewell.

December. 13 1697.
Laying on of Hands UPON BAPTIZED BELIEVERS, As such, Proved both from
Scripture and Antiquity, to be a holy Institution of JESUS CHRIST.
The INTRODUCTION.
AS it is matter of grief and trouble to many sober and pious Christians, so it
is no less of admiration to see such eminent and worthy Persons beclouded and
darkened concerning one Ordinance, that are so clear in, and so much for the
practice of another. How well have some of our Brethren written concerning
Baptism? And how have they defended it against the strongest opposition, as a
glorious Institution of Jesus Christ? but yet how have they opposed this other
sacred Ordinance, or holy Oracle of God? Heb. 5.12. and Principle of the
Christian Religion, viz. Imposition position of hands upon baptized Believers
as such? which they have some of them cried down as much as they have cried
Baptism up, rendering it nothing save a mere human Innovation, or Antichristian
Forgery; whereas nothing can be more clear, than that it is of the same nature
and authority with Baptism, and ought equally to be contended for, being inter
prima Rudimenta Fidei Christianae, among the first Rudiments of the Christian
Faith. Dangerous it is to pull one stone out of the Foundation of the House of
God: the Lord open their eyes to see their weakness. However, what they have
written concerning this Principle, is in this ensuing Treatise examined,
weighed, and particularly answered.

CHAP. I.
MR. Danvers in his Introduction tells us, page 3. after having given us an
Account both from Scripture, and Antiquity, of the business of Baptism, in its
Institution, Subject, Manner, and End, etc. that it may neither be unnecessary
nor unprofitable to give us an account of Laying on of hands, not only because
it immediately follows that of Baptism, Heb. 6.1, 2. but more especially
because for Confirmation (as it has been called) it had been next after Baptism
so solemnly asserted, practiced and enjoined, both in former and later times,
as an Ordinance of Christ, and essentially necessary to Church Communion: But
what this Laying on of hands is, and how that of Confirmation is founded on the
Word of God, he tells us, he shall consider, examine, and recommend it to the
judgment of all discerning, and impartial Christians.

Reply. He has in his Treatise of Baptism done well; Jehovah bless his Work
and Pains therein. And is it so in very deed? Is the ground and reason why he
undertook to write about Laying on of hands, because it immediately follows
Baptism, Heb. 6.1, 2? Did he find it so clearly there? and has that of
Confirmation, as it is called, been so solemnly asserted in former and later
times as an Ordinance of Christ, and necessary to Church Communion? Methinks if
this be so, he should have been very careful how he spoke or wrote against such
an Ordnance, which so immediately follows Baptism according to the Scripture;
and more especially considering what he says about Authors and Antiquity,
concerning Confirmation, or laying on of hands, it having been so solemnly
asserted, practiced, and enjoined, as above said.

Tho for my part I judge it not worth my while to make such a narrow search into
Authors, Canons, Decrees of General Councils, and the like, as probably he and
many may do: considering we have the Word of Christ so plain and clear in the
case, what need we trouble our selves further, especially being satisfied, as
some of the Fathers have said themselves, that no Doctors, nor Councils are of
any authority or credit without the Word of God? Yet finding so many of the
Ancients speaking so clearly touching this Ordinance, tho under another name,
it confirms me in my belief and practice herein; and one would think it should
the more stumble them: for whatsoever credit, or esteem some of those Authors
have whom he mentions, yet I judge he will grant several of them to be as famous
as most who have written since the Apostles time, as hereafter may be hinted.

In the next place he tells us, what method he will observe in writing his
Treatise, viz.

First, Give us an account what he finds of this Rite (as he is pleased to call
it) in the New Testament.

Secondly, How asserted and practiced by the Ancients, with the Opinions of the
Fathers, and Decrees of Councils.

Thirdly, How practiced and injoined by the Church of Rome.

Fourthly, How by the Church of England.

Fifthly, How maintained by some of the Presbyterian and Independent
Persuasions.

Sixthly, How practiced and injoined by several of the Baptized Churches in
this Nation.

Then he proceeds to show, how Laying on of hands was used in the New Testament:

1. In Benediction, Mark 10.16.

2. For Healing, Mark. 6.5.

3. For conferring the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit before Baptism, Acts
9.17. After Baptism, Acts 8.14.

4. In Ordination, Acts 6.6. 1 Timothy 4.14. Acts 13.3.

Reply. I readily grant what he says about the several sorts of Laying on of
hands, and the use and end of them, but must needs except against what he
speaks concerning the third sort: he affirms that Hands were laid upon Persons
for conferring the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit; and mentions two
Scriptures for proof, viz. See God's Oracle, p. 62, 63.
Acts 9.17. and Acts 8.14, 15. in which affirmation he altogether begs the
question, and proves nothing, nor removes what has been said to this very
point. In this I must withstand him, for he goes too fast. I should be glad
could I be an Instrument in the hand of Christ to rectify their understanding
herein who doubt about it; for they seem to be much mistaken about that Text,
Acts 9.17. but especially that in Acts 8.14, 15. I shall therefore offer
something in the first place to this; Does not the Scripture say plainly in
Acts 9.17. that Ananias put his hands upon Saul, that he might receive his
sight? why should he say then, it was for the extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit? If that which is expressed to be the effects of Ananias his putting his
hands on Paul, was the only end of that Service, which is according to his own
arguings upon Acts 8.14. Acts 19.16. then it was only for his sight; for it is
said he received his sight, but not a word of his receiving the Holy Ghost,
when he laid his hand upon him: that he was sent to Saul, that he might receive
the Spirit, is granted; but whether by laying on of hands, or some other means,
is yet to be proved: And this being an extraordinary case, and different from
that in Acts 8.14, 15. viz. Ananias his laying hands on Saul as a blind Man,
that he might receive his sight (which answers to that in Mark 16.18.) and
Peter and John laying their hands on them in Acts 8.14. as on baptized
Believers as such, for their receiving the Holy Spirit, makes nothing to the
Controversy depending, tho Mr. D. has put them together, as if the Subject,
Manner, and End, were one and the same.

But Secondly, to proceed to that Scripture Acts 8.14. where mention is made of
Peter and John's laying their hands on baptized Believers in Samaria, which our
Brethren affirm was also to confer the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit; but
how much they are mistaken herein, shall be examined: Since it appears not that
the Apostles at Jerusalem did either send Peter and John to Samaria upon that
account, or that they laid their hands upon those believing Samaritans to that
only end, it is very strange Mr. D. or others should affirm any such thing;
therefore to prevent this mistake, let us once again examine these Texts; Now
when the Apostles, which were at Jerusalem, heard that Samaria had received the
Word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John, who when they were come down,
prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Spirit, ('it is not said the
extraordinary Gifts, but the Holy Spirit, those you see are the express words)
for as yet (says the Text) he was fallen upon none of them, only they were
baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus: then laid they their hands on them, and
they received the Holy Ghost, Verse. 14, 25. I know it is objected from the
following words, that the Spirit came upon them in some visible or
extraordinary manner, because Simon saw, that through laying on of the Apostles
hands the Holy Spirit was given. This is only a supposition: for who can tell
what kind of Manifestations of the Spirit might appear in them, to convince
Simon that they had the Holy Spirit? The Text does not say, they either spoke
with Tongues, or wrought Miracles. But if for arguments sake, we should grant
they received the Spirit in some extraordinary manner, as those in Acts 19. it
would not follow, that this was the absolute end of this Service; for if we may
reason as they and others have done after this manner, that what was the
effects of their laying their hands upon them, was the end why they laid on
their hands, and that End is by none attained in these days, therefore Laying
on of hands is not practicable in these days; we shall show you the sad
Consequences and Absurdities that would follow such an Inference. To proceed,
it is said Acts 4.31. that when the Apostles had prayed, the place was shaken
where they were assembled; Now mark, because this Miracle was wrought as the
effect of their praying, can it be thought that was the end of Prayer, or that
we must not pray because no such effects are wrought now? And when Philip had
baptized the Eunuch, Acts 8.39. it is said the Spirit caught away Philip, that
the Eunuch saw him no more: what a strange thing was this that followed
Baptism? But now because this Miracle followed as the effect of that
Administration then, shall we conclude it was the end of the Ordinance of
Baptism? But again in Acts 10.44. while Peter was preaching the Word to
Cornelius, and unto those that were in his House, it is said, The Holy Ghost
fell on all them that heard the Word, so that they spoke with Tongues, etc. Now
shall we say, the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, or Miracles, were the end
of Preaching, because such kind of Effects followed preaching? Surely none will
argue so, that understand themselves: for if that was the End of preaching,
because it was the Effect that followed, and that Effect now never following,
we may say as many do, Preaching is ceased, if he and others argue right: for
such and such extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit followed (say they) when
baptized Believers did come under laying on of hands in the Apostles days, and
these Gifts are not given now; therefore that Ordinance is ceased, it being
only for the Confirmation of the Gospel.

Now say I, by the same Argument, all the Institutions of Christ may be denied,
as well as laying on of hands: As First, Meeting and assembling together; see
Acts 2.1. it is said, They were all met together with one accord in one place,
and suddenly there came a Sound from Heaven as of a rushing Wind, and it filled
all the House where they were sitting. Verse. 2. And there appeared unto them
cloven Tongues like fire, and sat upon each of them. Verse. 3. And they were all
filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with Tongues as the Spirit gave
them utterance.

Here is no mention of any other Ordinance, save only assembling together, God
graciously being pleased first to confirm the Time of Worship under the Gospel,
viz. the first Day of the Week, for so was the day of Pentecost, as Tradition
has handed it down: and mind what effects followed. But,

First, It Is not so now, shall we therefore assemble together no more? The
Seekers use this Objection against all Ordinances, saying none are empowered to
administer any, because not so endowed with Power from on High; and their
Arguments fully agree with theirs herein against laying on of Hands. Of this
let the rational judge.


Secondly, When the Apostles prayed, the House was shaken, but it is not so now;
does Prayer therefore cease to be a duty?

Thirdly, When Christ was baptized, there was a voice heard from Heaven,
saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; and the Spirit came
down in likeness of a Dove. And when the Eunuch was baptized, the Spirit caught
away Philip; but such Effects follow not now when Persons are baptized; ergo
it is not the duty of any to be baptized now, if theirs be right Reason.

Fourthly, Peter preached to the Jews, Acts 2. and at one Sermon three thousand
were converted: And he preached to Cornelius, Acts 10. and while he preached,
the holy Spirit came upon them that heard the Word, that they spoke with
Tongues, and magnified God, But such Effects as these follow not now when we
preach; ergo no Man is authorized to preach now, by their arguing.

Fifthly, When Paul laid his hands on those baptized Believers, Acts 19. the
holy Spirit came upon them, and they spoke with Tongues, etc. but these Effects
follow not now when baptized Believers have hands laid upon them; must we
therefore lay hands no more? Surely we have no more reason to neglect or lay
this aside, than we have all the other Ordinances, considering the like Effects
followed them respectively, as well as Laying on of hands: But contrariwise I
must needs say, instead of being stumbled, or weakened in my Faith and Practice
concerning laying on of hands, from the consideration of those extraordinary
Gifts of the Spirit being the Effects that followed once or twice as expressed in
the Scripture, that I am thereby abundantly confirmed, and established in it,
and that because I find every Gospel-Ordinance and Institution of Christ was in
the primitive time more or less confirmed, according to Heb. 2.4. by Signs,
Wonders, and diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own
Will. And finding this Ordinance of Imposition of Hands, so visibly owned by
Jehovah, and wonderfully confirmed by the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit,
like as Assembling together, Prayer, Preaching, and Baptizing has been; it is,
I say, of an establishing nature to me. And I see no ground to except against
this Ordinance more than any of the other, notwithstanding what ever has been
said or written against it from hence. And because I know it has stumbled many,
that the end of laying on of hands, Acts 8.19. was for the extraordinary Gifts
of the Spirit, I shall be the larger upon this particular, fully to remove and
take off this Objection, which in part has already been done. But to proceed, I
affirm again that the end of that laying on of Hands, Acts 8.14, 15. and Acts
19.6. was not for the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, and I argue thus:

First, Because it was never propounded as the End of it, neither can it be
proved it was. What can they instance in the Case, since what they mention of
such and such Effects which followed, proves nothing in the least?

Secondly, It could not be for the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, or
Miracles, because not promised unto baptized Believers as such, nor was it ever
given but to some particular Persons; only I grant, the Holy Spirit is promised
to all, as he is the Comforter, according to John 14.16. If ye love me, keep my
Commandments. And I will pray the Father, and he shall send you another
Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth, which shall abide with you for ever. All
the Disciples of Christ who believe, and are baptized, have the Spirit promised
to them, as further might be made appear, Act. 2.38. Then said Peter, Repent,
and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ for the remission
of Sins, and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Spirit; for the Promise is
to you, and to your Children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the
Lord our God shall call. The Spirit being so plainly promised to all that were
obedient to Jesus Christ, or the Called of God, the Apostles that were at
Jerusalem, hearing how God had called by his blessed Word and Spirit, the
Samaritans to Obedience, they well knew, and were assured that the Holy Spirit,
the Comforter, was their Right, Promise and Privilege, as well as any other
Gospel-Believers; and therefore sent them Peter and John, that they might
receive (through the use of that holy Ordinance) the Promise of the Father: and
upon consideration that the Samaritans were Gentiles, or a mixed People, or such
as were not of the Seed of Abraham according to the Flesh, and some of the
first of the Gentile Race that were called by the preaching of the Gospel,
Jehovah was pleased to give some visible sign and demonstration of his
receiving them into his Grace and Favor, to satisfy any of the Jewish
Disciples that might doubt concerning the extent of the Blessings of Christ and
the Gospel: for palpable it is that for some time after the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, few of the Apostles themselves understood the glorious
intent and purpose of the Almighty, in bringing in the Gentiles, making them
fellow-Heirs, and of the same Body,, and Partakers of his Promise in Christ,
through the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.6. This I conceive to be one reason, why God so
visibly owned the Ordinance of Laying on of hands when administered, as well as
for the Confirmation of the Ordinance it self; and that Christ might convince
them he had made good his Promise, John 14.16. But if you will still say, that
the Reason, End, or Cause why Peter and John did lay their hands on those
baptized Believers, was not for the Spirit, the Comforter, as so considered,
but for the extraordinary Gifts thereof, I shall proceed to a third Reason; and
thus I argue:

Thirdly, Either Peter and John, when they laid their hands on those Believers,
and prayed for the Spirit, prayed in Faith, or not in Faith: If in Faith, then
they had (I presume) some ground or Promise of God and Christ, to build their
Faith upon, as to what they prayed for: But if it was for the extraordinary
Gifts of the Spirit, as some affirm, where shall we find any such Promise that
they might ground their Faith upon? And is it not sinful to pray for that which
God has no where promised, considering what the Scripture says, Romans 14.23?
There are diverse Promises, as has been hinted, made by God of giving the
Spirit, I grant, but not the extraordinary Gifts If any should object against
me Mark 16.17, 18. and say, miraculous Gifts are promised to such as do
believe, etc. I answer, that by believing, cannot be meant the Grace of Faith
in that place; for if it should, we may say, no man does now believe, or has
true Faith in Christ: it is therefore meant of the extraordinary Gift of Faith,
or Faith of Miracles, according to 1 Cor. 12.9. and 13.2. He that so believes,
nothing can be too hard for him.
. God promised, he would pour out his Spirit on his Servants and Handmaids;
and our Lord Jesus in John 14.16. promised, the Comforter to all that love him,
and keep his Commandments: And in Acts 2.38. it is promised to all that repent,
and are baptized; And doubtless it was by virtue of these Premises, or
Promises of the like nature, that Peter and John prayed, and laid their hands
on those Believers in Samaria, and Paul on those at Ephesus, Acts 19. or else
show us what Ground or Promise they had.

If you say, the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit were promised; then say I,
they were promised to Persons of such or such a Name, or so or so qualified.
Now surely none will say, to Persons of such or such a Name; therefore it must
be promised to Persons so or so qualified, and those Qualifications also must
be known: if the Qualifications be not Repentance, Faith, and Baptism, then
assign what they are: If you say, Faith and Repentance be the Qualifications;
then say I, the Promise of the extraordinary Gift is made to every Christian
Man and Woman; yea and every sincere Believer must receive those Gifts, or God
does fail of his Promise: For I am sure there is not one Soul that is a
Believer indeed, having obeyed from the heart the form of Doctrine taught and
delivered to the Saints, but has more or less received the Spirit of God,
according to the Promise or Promises made to them as Persons so and so
qualified or called, as has already been minded.

Fourthly, The end of that Laying on of hands, Acts 8. could not be for the
extraordinary, Gifts of the Spirit, because those extraordinary Gifts, or
Miracles, serve not for them that believe, but for them that believe not. Now
can any think, Peter and John were sent by the Apostles from Jerusalem to those
that had received the Word, and were baptized in Samaria, for the profit and
benefit only of the Unbelievers there, that they, viz. such as did not believe
in Samaria, might by beholding the Miracles, or extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit given to them that did believe, be convinced that Jesus was the Christ?
Surely no Man can think, or imagine such a thing, especially considering the
Text says plainly, They were sent to them that had received the Word, and were
baptized; sent for their particular Comfort, and further Consolation in Christ
Jesus, that so they might stand complete in the whole Will of God, and might be
made Partakers of the Spirit of Promise made to every believing Soul baptized,
Acts 2.38. for as much as it was their right, and they stood in great need of
it, as all poor Souls do who enter themselves under Christ's Banner: For as our
Lord Jesus, after he was baptized, had the Spirit descending upon him, and was
straightway exposed to temptation from the Devil; even so are all his
Followers, when they take up the Profession of the Gospel, to expect to meet
with sore Trials, Temptations, and Afflictions, and therefore have need of more
of the Spirit to strengthen, encourage, support, and comfort them, and to give
them further assurance of the Love of God, that they may not flag, nor be
disheartened, but may be abundantly enabled to overcome all Enemies and
Opposition, and remain faithful to the Lord Jesus unto the death. To this end
doubtless the Apostles sent Peter and John from Jerusalem; who when they came,
prayed and laid their hands upon those Men and Women baptized, even for the
Holy Spirit of Promise, for their particular profit, comfort and benefit, and
not for extraordinary Gifts or Miracles, which was ('it is plain from Heb. 2.4.)
for the Confirmation of the Gospel to them that believe not, (according to 1
Cor. 14.22.) Wherefore Tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to
them that believe not; but prophesying serves not for them that believe not,
but them which believe.

Fifthly; This being so, it could not be for the extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit, that the Apostles laid their hands on those in Samaria, because there
was no need of further Miracles, forasmuch as Philip had wrought such mighty
Miracles and Wonders in that City before, in so much that they were all
convinced; yea the very Sorcerer himself believed, and continued with Philip,
and wondered, beholding the Miracles and Signs which were done, Acts 8.13.
Surely the Apostles at Jerusalem hearing of those things, and how the People,
yea the whole City, were convinced and satisfied that Jesus was the Christ,
would never have sent Peter and John to do that work which was so effectually
done before by Philip; and therefore I conclude, that that laying on of hands
Acts 8. was not for Tongues, Miracles, or the extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit, as our Brethren affirm: and this being so, my work is near done
already; for if they miss in giving us a true Account how Laying on of hands
was used in the New Testament, they miss in the main case of all; and if that
Laying on of hands, Acts 8.14, 15. and Acts 19. was not for the extraordinary
Gifts of the Spirit, the greatest Objection is answered, and the chief
stumbling block taken out of the way of God's People: For if Prayer, and Laying
on of hands was practiced upon baptized Believers as such, as a Principle of
Christ's Doctrine, for the promised Spirit, the Comforter as so considered,
which is the absolute Right, Portion, and Privilege of every believing Soul to
the end of the World, then doubtless the Ordinance must needs remain in full
force and virtue as God's way, means, or method of conveyance of the said
Spirit to all his Chosen always, even until the end. But because I shall have
occasion to speak more to this anon, I forbear enlarging upon it here.

CHAP. II.
Showing that tho this holy Institution of Christ has been corrupted by
Antichrist, yet it ought not therefore to be rejected.

MR. Danvers, Page 6. proceeds to show how Laying on of hands has been asserted
by the Ancients, and by the Canons and Decrees of several Councils; Page 15.
how by the Church of Rome; Page 17. how by the Church of England; Page 24. how
asserted by some both of the Presbyterian and Independent Persuasion, etc.

What earnings or advantage he could propound to himself by filling up so many
Pages in his Book with Stories of this kind, I know not. Many (as I am
informed, and some in my owm hearing) do judge what he has done in this respect,
makes more against himself than us; Nay some, who are for this Ordinance, seem
to be much confirmed by what he has said concerning Antiquity in respect
thereof, and look upon themselves as beholden to Mr. Danvers for his pains in
searching into Authors, and in producing so much, both from Ancient and Modern
Writers, for Laying on of hands as immediately following Baptism, and as
necessary to Church Communion: And I must confess, I did not think so much
could have been produced from Authors and Antiquity in the case, as I perceive
there may, having through his means, according as I am capable, made some
search; Tho I must say, if there were ten times more to be urged on that
account, had we not the Authority of God's Word to warrant our Practice, it
would signify nothing: For we will say with Ignatius; Whosoever speaks more
than is written, although he fast, although he keep his Virginity, although he work
Miracles, although he prophesy, yet let him seem to thee a Wolf amongst the Sheep:
Epist. ad Hierom.

But to proceed, I wonder Mr. Danvers should condemn, and wholly cast away
Laying on of hands upon baptized Believers, and have nothing to do with it,
because it had been corrupted by the false Church; the Subject, and Manner of
Administration being quite altered, and changed; the Ordinance, or pure
Institution being turned into abominable Superstition: may he not as well cast
away Baptism and the Lord's Supper also, since they have been every way as much
corrupted, changed, and polluted as this? Nay, what Ordinance has not? Our work
is to discover, and remove all Popish Additions and Pollutions, which in the
days of darkness crept in, that so we may see every Institution shining forth
in its primitive purity and splendour; and not reject any Ordinance of Christ,
because polluted by Antichrist. What tho (as he said) those Popes, Councils,
and Fathers, that enjoined and imposed Infants Baptism for an Ordinance of
Christ, enjoined that of Confirming Infants?

Reply. If it was as early corrupted, altered, and changed as Baptism, ought we
not, since God has given us the Light of his Word and Spirit, to recover it
from those Corruptions as well as Baptism? Infants Baptism we all say, is a
Popish Tradition, or humane Innovation; yet is Baptism Christ's Ordinance: so
in like manner we say, is laying on of hands upon Infants, or such as have only
been baptized in Infancy, a mere Popish Rite, and Innovation: yet Laying on of
hands upon baptized Believers as such, is an Ordinance of Christ, as diverse
worthy Men have clearly proved from God's Word* And tho the Ancient Fathers and
Councils he speaks of, together with those of the Church of Rome and England,
do wholly fly unto Tradition, to prove their practice of Laying on of hands
upon Children; this will no more weaken our practice of Laying on of hands upon
baptized Believers, than their flying to Tradition, and Usage of the Church, to
prove their Infants Baptism, weakens our practice of baptizing Believers.

Moreover, those of the false Church, who wholly make use of Tradition to prove
their Pedobaptism, might without doubt, had God been pleased to open their
eyes, seen that Baptism was a Divine Institution practiced by the Apostles;
even so might they also have easily seen, that that Laying on of hands
practiced by the Apostles next after Baptism, was Christ's holy Appointment;
tho they could not find their ridiculous Rite, and Popish Ceremony of
Confirming Children so to be, there being not the least Word of God for it.

But from what our Opponents say of Authors, I observe, that in the
Antichristian Church, ever since the Apostasy from the good old way of the
Gospel, there has been somewhat practiced and kept up in the room and imitation
of that Laying on of hands (instituted by Christ, and practiced by the
Apostles) upon baptized Believers as such, and as necessary to
Church Communion, as well as they have kept up something they call Baptism, in
imitation of the true Baptism. And it is evident, that as the Romish Church has
abominably corrupted the Ordinance of Baptism as to the Subject and Manner of
Administration, and added many ridiculous, and superstitious Fopperies to it;
even so they have done by Laying on of hands: The Silver is become dross, and
the Wine mixed with Water, Isa. 1.22. He shall (says Daniel) think to change
Times and Laws (speaking of the little Horn) and they shall be given into his
hand, etc. Chap. 7.25.

But to proceed, do our Brethren utterly detect all those impious Forgeries and
Ceremonies used in Baptism, and contended for by those Fathers, Councils, and
corrupt Churches they speak of, and so clearly witness against them, for
changing the Subject, and Manner of Baptizing; and yet all the while hold for
Baptism it self, and faithfully contend for it; yea and conclude too,
notwithstanding those Abuses, and Corruptions by the Ancients, and in the false
Church, Baptism all along was maintained? this I say, rather confirms and
proves the thing it self to be an Ordinance of Jesus Christ than otherwise (tho
not as they perform and practice it) why cannot they do the like concerning
that Rite of Popish Confirmation? We do detect and abominate all those
superstitious Ceremonies used by them, and witness against them for changing of
the Subject, viz. from baptized Believers to sprinkled Infants, or such as were
rantised in their Infancy; and yet contend for the thing it self, as practiced
in the Apostles time: and little reason they have to blame us herein; since the
work of Reformation, or to labor to reduce Ordinances to their primitive
Purity and Luster, is by all accounted a glorious Work; yea, and it is a full
and complete Reformation we all long for, not only for one Ordinance to be
restored and refined from the dross, and abominable filth of Popish Traditions,
but every Appointment and Ordinance of Christ.

Mr. Danvers, p. 30. (having given us an account how Laying on of hands, or
Confirmation, has been asserted and practiced, By the Ancients; By Councils; By
the Church of Rome; By the Church of England; By some of the Independent, and
Presbyterian Persuasion;


And Lastly, By some of the Baptized Churches) He comes to examine upon what
ground such a great Ordinance has been, and is enjoined.

Reply. Doubtless it concerns us all to see what ground, or Scripture-warrant
we have for whatever we do, or is done in the Worship and Service of God; and
as to Confirmation or Laying on of hands, as asserted and practiced by some he
speaks of, I marvel not that they leave the Scripture, and fly to Tradition:
For first, as to that which the Popish Church calls an Ordinance of Jesus
Christ, it is so blasphemous and ridiculous (as he well observes) that the very
naming of the particulars thereof may fully detect the folly and impiety of it;
whether respecting the Name, which is called Chrysm, Unction, Perfection, etc.
or the Nature, which is done by putting the sign of the Cross, with the
Bishop's finger, in the forehead of the Confirmed, with these words: I sign
thee with the sign of the Cross, and with the Chrysm of Salvation, in the Name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; the Party being in a white Garment, his
Head bound with Linen, his Hair cut, and attended with Gossips, or Sureties;
this is (says Mr. Danvers) what several Popes and Councils have by their
Canons and Decrees determined, and enjoined as the great Sacrament of
Confirmation, page 3.

Reply. Well might Hommius tell us, that it is not only contrary to the
Scriptures, but Blasphemous and Idolatrous, and the vain Invention of
superstitious Men. And well might Tilenus call it, an Excrement of Antichrist:
And Amesius say, the reasons given for the same by the Papists, are both empty,
and vain; and Mr. Calvin cry out against it, as is minded by Mr. Danvers. To
which I might add a passage out of a Treatise of Mr. Hanmer, a Presbyterian,
who tho very clear as touching Laying on of hands upon Adult Persons Baptized
before they are admitted to the Lord's Table, yet cries down the Papists
practice herein in respect of manner and form; they use (says he) anointing
with Chrysm, a compound of Oil and Balsam, consecrated by the Bishop; which as
it was never instituted by Christ nor his Apostles, so says he (as some
affirm) it had its original from Calixtus Bishop of Rome, Anno 218, who
ordained Confirmation to be performed with Chrysm, which before was done with
imposition of hands without Chrysm.
And further he speaks of the form, which (says he) they make to lie in these
words: Consigno te signo Crucis, and confirmo te Chrysmate salutis, in nomine
Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti: I sign thee with the sign of the Cross,
and confirm thee with the Chrysm of Salvation, in the Name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost; A mere humane invention and device (says Mr. Hanmer) that has
not the least shadow for it from the Scripture See Mr. Hanmer on Confirmation
the ancient way of completing Church Members, page 45.
. Also another exception he brings against the Popish way of Laying on of
hands, viz. in respect of the Subject, they confirming Infants, when according
to the Apostolical Institution it belongs only to such as are Adult. And it
appears that Calvin from hence bore his witness against Confirmation, viz. in
respect of the abuse and corruption of it, as appears in his Institut. lib. 4.
cap. 19. To which agrees the Testimony of Chemnitius: Our Men (says he) have
often showed, that the Rite of Confirmation, if the unprofitable superstitious
Traditions, and such as are repugnant to the Scripture, were removed, may
piously be used to the edification of the Church, according to the consent of
the Scripture. Exercitat. upon Confirm. page 65.

That Calvin owned Confirmation, or Laying on of hands, to be a Divine
Institution, take his own words: Nam neque satis pro sua utilitate commendari
potest sanctum hoc Institutum, nec Papistae satis exprobari tam flagitiosa
Corruptela, quod illud in pueriles vertendo Ineptias, non modo sustulerunt e
medio, sed eo quoque ad impurae and impiae Superstitionis praetextum turpiter
sunt abusi. For neither can this holy Institution (says he) be enough
commended for its Vtility, nor the Papists be sufficiently upbraided with their
so flagitious corruption of it, that by turning of it into childish Fopperies,
they have not only taken it away, but have also so far shamefully abused it,
for a color of an impure and impious Superstition. And further he says:
Adulterinam enim illam Confirmationem, quam in ejus locum surrogarunt, instar
Meretricis, magno Ceremoniarum splendore, multisque pomparum fucis, sine modo
ornant. For they do beyond measure deck that Adulterous Confirmation, which
they have substituted in its room, like a Harlot, with great splendour of
Ceremonies. If therefore (says that worthy Author in his said Excercitat. p.
51.) Confirmation shall be drained from these mixtures of humane Inventions
that have for a long time so defaced and deformed it, viz. not called it a
Sacrament; if their Popish matter ( both remota, and proxima) of anointing with
consecrated Chrysm the forehead of the Confirmed in the form of a Cross, be
removed; if neither Infants nor Children, who are not yet arrived to years of
discretion, be admitted, but such as are Adult, who are able to give an account
of their Faith, and the work of Grace upon their hearts; finally if those
feigned Effects, mentioned by them as the end and use of it, together with
those idle Additions that have betided it in the declining times of the Church,
be rejected and cast off; and if done only with Prayer and Laying on of hands,
for the admission of Persons as full Members, to the enjoyment of all
Church-Privileges, as most agreeable to that of the Apostolical and primitive
times; it will (says he) I conceive be found to be exceeding useful and
advantageous, as a thing requisite, if not necessary to a right Reformation,
and the reducing of the Churches of Christ to their native beauty, and
primitive purest state and constitution, etc.

And that it might appear it was not only his own Judgment, together with
Calvin, and Chemnitius, he produces several other eminent Lights of the
Reformed Churches, viz. Peter Martyr, the Divines of Leyden, Pareus, Rivet,
Peter du Moulin, Didoclavius, as all witnessing to Laying on of hands upon the
Baptized as such, as an Apostolical Institution, and that which ought to be
practiced by the Churches of Christ, being refined from all Popish Corruptions
and Additions, as the best Expedient, and readiest way to a happy Reformation,
according to the primitive Pattern. To which I might add Mr. Caryl, Mr. Baxter,
Mr. Ralph Venning, and Mr. G. Hughes, who all speak the same things concerning
Confirmation, as may be seen in their Epistles to the forementioned Book of Mr.
Hanmers, Independents and Presbyterians clear touching laying on of hands, as
refined from Popish Pollutions,
in commendation, and approbation thereof: and indeed to see how clear they be
in their understandings concerning this Ordinance of Laying on of hands, and
how learnedly and judiciously they have labored to recover it from those
Popish Mixtures, and cursed Pollutions of the Romish Church, has been of a
refreshing nature unto me; tho I cannot but admire in the mean while, they
should still remain so blind and dark concerning Baptism, not perceiving how
that also has been as vilely corrupted and changed from the Apostolical
Institution, in respect of the Subject and Manner of Administration, as well as
in regard of those idle and ridiculous Forgeries and Additions of Chrysms.
Consignations, Albes, Salt, Spittle, Sureties, etc. which they witness against.
Now were but their eyes so opened as to recover and drain Baptism from Popish
Corruptions or Alterations upon this account also, how would it add to the
beauty and perfection of their Confirmation and Reformation, (provided
according to their Light they would also get into the practice of both) and
what glorious Churches might they soon come to be, yea excel many of the
baptized Congregations in respect of the plain Form, Order, and Constitution of
the House of God according to the primitive Pattern? But to proceed, there are
few, or none as I can gather, do oppose this Ordinance save some of the
Baptists, of which Mr. Danvers may be reckoned the chief; for besides these
modern Writers, already mentioned, who speak so fully concerning Laying on of
hands with prayer to God for more of his Holy Spirit of Promise, and as an
orderly admission unto Church Communion, the persuasion or judgment of the
Assembly of Divines concerning this Ordinance, I might also produce how clearly
they agree with the forementioned Presbyterian and Independent Ministers
herein, as you may see in their Annotations on Heb. 6.

But no more of this at present, lest we too far digress from the matter in
hand; what we have here said, is in answer to Mr. Danvers, in respect of the
Rite it self, or thing called Confirmation, and how to be rejected (as we have
a cloud of Witnesses agreeing with us herein) and how to be maintained, owned,
and practiced by the Churches of Christ.

I shall now return to Mr. Danvers, Those of the Ancients he cites.
page 32. he having in page 31. showed us how blasphemous and abominable a
thing the Rite of Confirmation is, as asserted by the Ancients, and Decrees of
General Councils, and practiced by corrupt Churches; in the next place he comes
to enquire what Credit or Authority the Fathers or Doctors are of that witness
to it, whose Authority he labors to disprove, calling them suborned Witnesses
and Knights of the Post.

CHAP. III
Showing who the Ancients are, and of their Credit and Authority who have born
witness to Laying on of Hands.

ADmit we grant what Mr. Danvers speaks concerning Dionysius the Areopagite,
and the Decretal Epistles of the first Popes, to be impious Lies and Forgeries,
shall we therefore conclude they are all suborned Witnesses. viz. the Ancients
who have written concerning Laying on of Hands? Surely many of the Fathers who
have born witness thereunto, are generally received, and their Authority
approved as the best of human Writers: What say you to Tertullian, shall we
call him a Knight of the Post? Take his Testimony: ( A.D. 200. de Bapt. c. 6.)
Manus imponitur per benedictionem, advocans and invitans Spiritum Sanctum; tunc
ille Sanctissimus Spiritus super emundata, and benedicta Corpora, libens a
Patre descendit. After Baptism the Hand is imposed by Blessing, and calling and
inviting of the Holy Spirit, who willingly descends from the Father on the
Bodies that are cleansed and blessed. Moreover he says: Tertul. de Bapt. ad
Quintil. cap. 8.
It is the fleshly, or outward act of Baptism, that we are dipped in water; the
spiritual effects, that we are freed from our Sins: Then follows Laying on of
hands, the Dispenser inviting the Spirit of God by Prayer. And being cleansed
by Baptismal Water (says he) we are disposed for the Holy Spirit, under the
Hands of the Angel of the Church. And further, speaking concerning the happy
state of the Church in this day, he says, ( de Script. cap. 36.) She believes
in God, she signs with Water (that is, baptizeth) she clothes with the Spirit,
( viz. by Imposition of hands) she feeds with the Eucharist, and exhorts to
Martyrdom; and against this Order or Institution she receives no Man.

Another Witness I shall call in, shall be Eusebius (not the Pope of that Name)
but Eusebius Pamphilus, who lived in the time of Constantinus Magnus the
Emperor, about three hundred Years after Christ; he certifies fully to our
purpose, ( lib. 7. c. 2.) that the ancient manner of receiving Members into the
Church, was with Prayer, and Laying on of hands. Doubtless by calling it the
ancient manner, he must needs refer to the Apostles time.

Again, Eusebius declares, ( lib. 6. c. 26.) That one Novatus being sick was
baptized, if it may be called a Baptism (says he) which he received, for he
obtained not after his recovery that which he should have done by the Canon of
the Church, to wit Confirmation by the Hands of the Bishop; which having not
obtained, how can he be supposed to have received the Holy Spirit? This was
about the Year 260. It Is also to be noted, that in neither of those places, nor
any where else in Eusebius, is the least mention made of Crossing, or Chrysm,
in the administration of this Ordinance.

A.D. 250. Cyprian. Ep. ad Jubar. 73.
Cyprian shall be the next, whom none I suppose take for a suborned Witness:
having urged that of the Apostles going to Samaria, to impose Hands on those
that Philip had baptized, (says he) which Custom is also descended to us, that
they who are baptized, might be brought by the Rulers of the Church, and by
Prayer, and Imposition of Hands obtain the Holy Ghost. Again says St. Cyprian,
(Ep. ad Steph. de Haereticis, Ep. 72.) It is of no purpose to lay Hands on them
to receive the Holy Spirit, unless they receive the Baptism of the Church. I
might produce Origin, in his 7th Homily upon Ezekiel, who speaks concerning it.

Also Hierom, who answers this Question, viz. Why he that is baptized in the
Church, does not receive the Holy Ghost, but by Imposition of hands, says he (
Dial. ad Lucifer.) This Observation for the honor of the Priesthood, did
descend from the Scriptures; If you ask me where it is written? it is answered,
in Actibus Apostolorum, in the Acts of the Apostles.

Ambrose is cited by Mr. Danvers himself; with Augustine, and others, whose
Authority is not questioned: To which I might add Chrysostom, Theodoret, etc.
Several others, yea many might be produced, besides those he calls suborned
Witnesses; and yet have we far better Authors and Witnesses to defend this
sacred Truth; for we have the Authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, it is left on
record amongst the first Principles of his Doctrine; we have the Testimony of
the Apostles Peter and John; and one not inferior to them, viz. blessed St.
Paul, ( Heb. 5. 12. and 6. 1, 2.) as has, and shall (God assisting) be made
further evident: And upon no better Authority, I must confess, is this sacred
Ordinance imposed upon us.

But now to speak more directly to Mr. Danvers, what he insists on in page 33.
about the Rite of Confirmation, as practiced in the Church of Rome, and as
corrupted from the pure Institution, we readily grant it is of no better
Authority than Infants Baptism. And as touching what he speaks of Rivet, (
Controv. Tom. 2. Exercit. p. 44.) that it was neither instituted by Christ, nor
his Apostles, it is spoken with respect of the Popish manner with Chrysm, and
other ridiculous Ceremonies, which was before done with Prayer and Imposition
of hands without Chrysm: They did, says Mr. Baxter, make haste to corrupt it;
they quickly introduced the Crosses, and Chrysm; but from the beginning it was
not so. And as to what he says concerning Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine, and some
others, it is granted, they lived in those times when the Church was
adulterated, and the holy Appointments of Christ corrupted, and changed from
their primitive purity; yet this makes no more against the holy Ordinance of
Laying on of hands, than it does against Baptism, and the Supper of our Lord,
etc. as I have already showed. All that Mr. Danvers has said hitherto of
Tradition, and Fathers, makes only against the Church of Rome and England, and
others who have drunk of the Whores Cup; those things which they cry up for
Apostolical Traditions, are naught else save mere human Innovations, and cursed
Inventions of corrupt Men. I shall close this with a passage of Dr. Jer.
Tailor, who treating about Laying on of hands upon baptized Persons as such,
says, This was ancient, and long before Popery entered into the World; and that
this Rite has been more abused by Popery than by any thing. As to what Mr.
Danvers speaks of the Waldenses, that the true ones were against Imposition of
hands; if that be true, yet it must be understood of the Popish Confirmation,
which they disowned as a Sacrament, accompanied with Ceremonies; for so I find
they express themselves: Such a Confirmation, I grant, they witness against, as
being none of Christ's Institution, but introduced by the Devil's Instigation;
'twas the corruption of it, and not the thing it self, doubtless they witness
against: but that they owned not Laying on of hands at all after Baptism,
before admission was granted to the Lord's Table, I judge too hard for any to
make appear. But if they were ignorant of this Truth, it is no marvel,
considering the Day they lived in.

Object. If it be objected, they with other Churches and People he mentions,
were much enlightened into the Truths of the Gospel.

Answ. That is no good Argument, since glorious Reformers, and eminent
enlightened Souls, may notwithstanding lie short of some Institution of the
Almighty, as appears both in the Old and New Testament: What glorious Light had
David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Josiah, and many others of the Godly Kings and
Prophets in Juda? And yet one thing plainly laid down in the Book of the Law,
they were short in, nay, as some judge, they did not see it, viz. sitting in
Booths in the Feast of the 7th Month; of which we read in Nehem. 8. 13, 14.
They found written (says the Text) in the Law which God commanded by Moses,
that the Children of Israel should dwell in Booths, in the Feast of the seventh
Month. Verse. 15. And all the Congregation of them, that were come again out of
Captivity, made Booths, and sat under the Booths: For since the days of Joshua
the Son of Nun, unto that day, had not the Children of Israel done so; and
there was very great gladness, verse 47.

CHAP. IV.
Showing upon what ground some of the Independent and Presbyterian Persuasion
have asserted Laying on of hands on baptized Persons.

IN Page 36. Mr. Danvers having done with Tradition and Fathers, he tells us,
he will consider the Scripture-grounds urged in proof hereof by the
Independents, and those of the Presbyterian Persuasion; In the first place
(which is the principal) Heb. 6.1, 2. which he says, Mr. Hanmer modestly
expresses to be but a probable ground.

To which I shall give this answer, that tho Mr. Hanmer uses such a Phrase (
viz. calling Heb. 6.1, 2. a probable ground) he does not say, it is but a
probable ground; and those that read his Book shall find, that by the Testimony
of diverse famous Men, he abundantly endeavors to prove it to be absolutely the
Laying on of hands intended in that Scripture. (See Page 25, 26.) And since I
find many eminent Men speaking so plainly on this account of Heb. 6. 1, 2. and
to satisfy some Persons herein, and prevent mistakes, take a few instances out
of Mr. Hanmer, as the Judgment of several Divines upon that Text.

The first I shall cite is Didoclavius, who of three Interpretations of this
Text, mentioned by him, admits of this, Cap. 2. viz. Laying on of hands after
Baptism, and before admitted to the Lord's Table: And gives a reason why it may
be called Confirmatory; Nempe ratione Ecclesiae approbantis, and confirmantis
sua approbatione examinatum, ad verum illud ac genuinum Confirmationis
Sacramentum admittentis: (viz.) Because of the Churches approving, and by their
approbation confirming of the Person examined, and admitting him unto that true
and genuine Rite of Confirmation.

The next is Major on Heb. 6.2. On this place (says he) all that I have seen
(mark) understand it of Imposition of hands on such as have been baptized only.
Bullinger.

Mr. Hooker, Lib. 5. Sect. 6. in his Appendix, Page 3. alleging T.C. thus
speaking, Tell me, why there should be any such Confirmation, seeing no one
Tittle thereof can be found in Scripture? Thus answers ironically, except the
Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 6. 2. be Scripture; plainly intimating (says Mr.
Hanmer) he thought that place to be a sufficient ground for it, and that to be
the meaning of the Apostle there.

Mr. Parker, de Polit. Eccles. lib. 3. c. 15, 16. refuting the Arguments of
such as plead for Episcopal Confirmation, at large assents (says our Author)
to what is by me delivered.

First, He shows the general nature, and end of it, viz. admission of Members
into the Communion of the Church, which accordingly was used toward such as
were converted. This Imposition of hands (says he) Heb. 6.2. is that very
Ecclesiastical Union, by a solemn professing of Faith, and admission into the
Church.

Secondly, He shows the necessity of it from this Text, Heb. 6.2. (says Mr.
Hanmer.)

Thirdly, That it ought to be done publicly, and before the Church: Et hic
ordo inter gravia negotia agitur, enim de membro recipiendo, publicum hoc est,
and publici juris, and ideo non nisi Ecclesiae consensu ejusdem, cui
adjungendus est competens, perficiendus. This course is to be reckoned among
the weighty affairs, it is a public thing, and of public right; for the
matter in agitation is concerning the receiving of a Member, and therefore not
to be performed without the consent of that same Church, to which the Competent
is to be joined.

Fourthly, He shows the Antiquity thereof, and that it is an Apostolical
Institution, and the practice of the Ancient Church.

He further affirms, page 28. that Piscator so understood Heb. 6. 1, 2. viz. to
mean Laying on of hands upon the Baptized; Also Beza, Paraeus, and Rivet, whose
words take as follows ^^^mpositio manuum, cujus mentio fit, Heb. 6.2. referenda
est ad solennem Baptizatorum Benedictionem, quae a Pastoribus solebat fieri,
eos in Christianismi vocationis confirmantibus: Imposition of hands, whereof
mention is made Heb. 6.2. is to be referred to the solemn Benediction of the
Baptized, which was used to be performed by the Pastors, confirming them in the
calling of Christianity. He mentions the Doctors of Leyden, showing this to be
their sense upon this Text also.

Calvin, who gives this only as the chief thing intended by the Apostle in this
place, from hence draws this remarkable Inference; wherein (says Mr. Hanmer)
he plainly declares his apprehensions concerning the Original and Antiquity of
this practice in the Church of Christ: Hic unus locus, etc. This one place
(says he) abundantly testifies that the-original of this Ceremony, viz.
Confirmation, or Laying on of hands, flowed from the Apostles, which yet
afterward was turned into a Superstition; as the World almost always
degenerates from the best Institutions into Corruption: Wherefore to this day
this pure Institution [mark] ought to be retained, but the Superstition to be
corrected. Why should Mr. Danvers presume to say these Men confess the
Scripture is but a probable ground, and that Tradition and Antiquity is the
more certain? And again that there is nothing but a faint insinuation from the
Scripture to ground Laying on of hands upon? What Men can speak more fully to a
Text?

But to proceed, he adds Hyperus, who says, Imposition of hands, Heb. 6.2. was
in the confirmation of those that had been baptized and rightly instructed,
that they might receive the Holy Spirit. He urges several other Persons of the
same mind, as Illyricus, Mr. Deering, etc.

To which I might add what Mr. Hughes late of Plymouth in his Ep. to Mr.
Hanmer's Book, mentions on this account, speaking of Heb. 6.2. It is by some
glorious Lights in the Church (says he) understood of Confirmation, in that
Phrase of Imposition of hands, annexed to Baptism, Heb. 6. Whence it is said,
that this abundantly testifies that the Original of this Ceremony flowed from
the Apostles.

Before I proceed, I might cite a passage full to the same purpose, as the
Judgment of the Learned Assembly of Divines, which take as follows, out of
their Annotations on Heb. 6.2. Laying on of hands, say they, is usually called
Confirmation; which stood first, in examining those that had been baptized what
progress they had made in Christianity. Secondly, In praying for them, that God
would continue them in the Faith, and give them more Grace, strengthening them
by his Holy Spirit, they laid their hands upon them: whence the Apostolical
Constitution was called Laying on of Hands.

Moreover, What Mr. Baxter speaks upon this account I cannot well omit,
Confirmat. p. 124, 125. If the Universal Church of Christ (says he) have used
Prayer, and Laying on of hands, as a practice received from the Apostles, and
no other beginning of it can be found; then we have no reason to think this
Ceremony ceased, or to interpret the foresaid Scripture contrary to this
practice of the Universal Church. But the Antecedent is true, ergo. And if any
say, Anointing and Crossing were ancient; I answer (says he)

First, That they were as ancient in the Popish use as the matter of a
Sacrament, or necessary Signs, is not true, nor proved, but frequently
disproved by our Writers against Popish Confirmation.

Secondly, Nor can it be proved, that they were as ancient as indifferent
things.

Thirdly, We prove the contrary, because they were not in Scripture-times,
there being no mention of them.

Fourthly, So that we bring Antiquity but to prove the continuance of a
Scripture-practice, and so to clear the practice of it: But the Papists plead
Fathers for that which the Scripture is a stranger unto.

I shall close this with Reverend Mr. Hooker: The ancient Custom of the Church
(says he, Eccles. Polit. p. 351.) was, after they had baptized, to add thereto
Imposition of hands, with effectual Prayer for the illumination of God's most
Holy Spirit, to confirm and perfect that which the Grace of the said Spirit had
already begun in Baptism: for the means to obtain the Graces which God does
bestow, are our Prayers; and our Prayers to that intent are available as well
for others as for our selves.

But to pass by this, I entreat the Reader to consider, that tho we have urged
the Testimony of several Authors, who are one with us in the main concerning
our Practice herein, yet we build not upon Men or Tradition, but on the Word of
God; neither do we suppose any necessity for us to take up new weapons to
defend so plain a Truth, since our Adversaries have been so sufficiently
worsted and put to flight by the Sword of the Spirit, as used by several
eminent Saints in times past. What we have mentioned of Authors, we have been
in part forced to by what Mr. Danvers and others have said of them. And that
leads me to what he speaks, page 40. of the Scripture-grounds on which the
Baptists have asserted this Rite (as he calls it) and founded this Practice of
Laying on of hands upon baptized Believers, as necessary to Church Communion,
as before especially held forth, Heb. 6.1, 2. tho not affirmed with that
sobriety and modesty, as the other from Probability, but rather Infallibility,
denying fellowship to any that do not receive it, etc.

CHAP. V.
Showing how, and upon what ground the Baptized Churches do assert Laying on of
hands.

HOW those learned Persons he speaks of have writ and asserted Laying on of
hands from that Text, I shall leave to the judicious Reader, by considering the
Instances forecited; and that they hold it also as necessary to
Church Communion, might I presume be made manifest, but that is not our present
work, but rather to make the thing it self appear to be an Ordinance of Jesus
Christ; and in order to this, those two Particulars, or Principles Mr. Danvers
lays down we will consider, viz.

First, That to every Ordinance of Christ there must be some plain positive
word of Institution to confirm it; and not only human Tradition, or farfetcht
Consequences and Inferences, such as the many Volumes written of Circumcision,
and federal Holiness, to assert Infants Baptism to be an Ordinance of Christ,
which no ordinary Capacity can reach, and only Men of Parts and Abilities can
trace, and follow in their Meanders.

Secondly, That to practice any thing in the Worship of God for an Ordinance of
his, without an Institution, is Will Worship and Superstition, etc.

Answ. The great Text urged for this Institution, he says, is Heb. 6.1, 2.
Therefore leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on to
perfection, not laying again the foundation of Repentance from dead Works, and
of Faith toward God, of the Doctrine of Baptisms, Laying on of hands, etc.

This is the Text affirmed, says he, to be the great Charter of the Church,
for this point of Faith and Practice; but how to find the least warrant for the
same there, he says we see not: If it was indeed said, let all baptized
Believers have hands laid upon them, with as much plainness, as let all
Believers be baptized, Mat. 28.29. Acts 10.43. or, let all baptized Believers
eat the Lord's Supper, 1 Cor. 11.24. Acts 2.41. it was something to the purpose.

Answ. First, we grant that to every Ordinance of Christ there must be some
word of Institution, and that such far-fetch Consequence, as he minds, will not
do, or be sufficient: but that every Institution must be laid down in such
plain positive Words, as he seems to affirm, viz. Let all baptized Believers
have Hands laid upon them, I deny, it being none of our Principle I judge, nor
theirs neither; since they practice such things as Institutions of Christ,
which are no where in so many plain positive words commanded, as may hereafter
be showed.

But as to the other thing he minds, we do agree with him in that matter, and
say, Whatsoever is done in the Worship and Service of God, without an
Institution, is Will Worship; and you shall see that our Principles agree and
comport with all those honest Protestant Principles concerning what we have to
say further about Laying on of hands, etc.

But to reply to what he says concerning Heb. 6. it matters not whether it be
Heb. 5.12. or Heb. 6.1, 2. or Acts 8.16, 17. or Acts 19.6. or any other
Scripture, that is the chief Text urged to prove Laying on of hands an
Ordinance and Institution of Jesus Christ; provided that the Scripture urged on
this account, will prove it so to be. But whereas he says he finds not the
least warrant for the same, I somewhat marvel at it, considering what has been
formerly written, and proved from that Text, by several worthy and able Men,
whose Books he, nor none else have ever yet answered. But it seems he would
have it said in so many plain words, Let all baptized Believers have hands laid
upon them, or else all is just nothing that is asserted.

But is it in Mat. 28.19. or Acts 10.48. said in so many plain words, Let all
Believers be baptized? it is not so read in my Bible. Nay, and I affirm, that
from Mat. 28.19, 20. none can prove that all Believers ought to be baptized in
Water, without making use of some Inference, or some other Text of Scripture to
prove it, for as much as Water is not expressed or mentioned there. Suppose a
Quaker should tell you, the Apostles had power given them to baptize with the
Holy Ghost, and that Christ commanded them to baptize all those that were
taught, or discipled, with the Spirit, and that it intends not Water in the
least; what would you say or do to refute him? Do you think you should not need
some Consequence or other, or help from some other Scripture, to prove it is
Water which is intended there?

But again, secondly; Is it said in 1 Cor. 11.24. in so many plain words, Let
all Believers eat the Lord's Supper, or in Acts 2.41, 42? The Pedobaptists say,
how can you prove by so many plain words, that Women received the Lord's
Supper? I grant it is easy to prove they did, yet when they demand such plain
Texts for it, how do you answer them? is it not by Inferences? And I see not
how such Answers do in the least betray the truth, or the justice of our Cause;
as do not our Answers to such Queries so usually brought by those that assert
Pedobaptism confute us, as you are pleased to say p. 54. for we are not in the
least against drawing of Inferences, or natural Consequences from the
Scripture. And would not you allow any Pedobaptist to urge a Text of Scripture,
and infer what he will from it for his Practice, provided it may naturally be
inferred or drawn from the Premises or Text he brings? surely you, as well as
we, will readily give him that liberty. But when Men shall mention Scriptures
to prove their Principles or Practice by, and infer this or that from them, to
the palpable wronging and wresting of the Text, it being as far from the intent
of the Spirit of God therein as the East is from the West, as the Consequences
and Inferences brought from Circumcision, and federal Holiness, to prove
Infants Baptism; they are such kind of Inferences we declare against. But we
need not trouble our selves with things of this nature, having the holy
Scriptures so plain for our Practice, as Acts 8.17. Acts 19.6. and Heb. 6.1, 2.
where it is called a Foundation-Principle of the Doctrine of Christ.

To this he says in p. 42. by way of Concession, That Laying on of hands is a
Principle of the Doctrine of Christ. But then he says, It must be such a Laying
on of hands as is somewhere taught or practiced; but such a Laying on of hands
upon all baptized Believers, we find no where taught or practiced: Jesus Christ
had no hands laid upon him by John Baptist, after he baptized him; neither did
he give one word of it in his Commission upon his Ascension; neither do we read
that the Church of the Hebrews practiced any such thing; for there is no
mention that the 120 had Hands laid on them, nor the 3000 in Acts 2. or 5000 in
Acts 4. after their Baptism, before they broke Bread; neither do we find the
least of it in any other Churches in the New Testament; neither in Samaria by
Philip, nor Corinth, Philippi, Colossia, Thessalonica, Rome, the Churches of
Galatia, the Churches in Asia, Smyrna, Thyatira, Pergamos, Sardis,
Philadelphia, no nor in Ephesus, It is true Paul laid his hands upon twelve of
their number upon another occasion, as Peter and John did in Samaria, etc.

Answ. He has said here a great deal, and refuted us with as good Arguments as
the Scotsman refuted Bellarmin: what is here more than mere Affirmations? he
acknowledges there is a Laying on of hands which is called a Principle of
Christ's Doctrine, but he says it must be such a one as is somewhere taught and
practiced; but he is bold to say, this never was.

Answ. Where is that Laying on of hands taught, which he affirms to be a
Principle of Christ's Doctrine? Not that I question it, I believe it was
taught, tho not as one of the first Oracles of God, or beginning Principles of
Christ's Doctrine; yet where does he find Laying on of hands on Officers
taught? let him not be too confident; for that Scripture, affirmed by him to be
a full Precept for it, 1 Timothy 5.22. is very doubtful Dr. Hammond says it is that
of Absolution.
what Laying on of hands is mentioned there. Mr. Confirm. and Restaurat. page
123.
Baxter says, Some think by it is meant Imposition of hands in Confirmation,
some in Ordination, and some for Absolution.

Let all Men here consider his partiality; Is this a Precept in so many words,
Lay hands on all Officers? whereas the word Officer, or Elder, is not mentioned
in the Text, or Verse, before nor after, nor elsewhere throughout that fifth
Chapter: we must therefore have recourse to other Scriptures in the case of
Officers, which are full Precedents for it, as Acts 13.3. and 6.6. as we
compare Heb. 6.2. Acts 8.15, 17. and 19.6. for the clearing the Truth we
contend for, comparing Scripture with Scripture.

But secondly, The words are rather in themselves a Caution or Prohibition than
otherwise; will he call this a full Precept? the most he can assert from hence
is this, that the words do imply that Timothy was to lay hands on some body,
otherwise no room for those Expressions; but then what kind of Laying on of
hands he intends is the question; whether it be only one sort, or more, from
hence it may be hard to decide. May we not conclude Paul's Counsel to Timothy
thus far comprehensive, viz. do not lay hands suddenly on any Man, neither to
Office, let them first be proved, 1 Timothy 3.10. nor upon Persons baptized as
such, they must first be taught, or instructed in the Truth they are about to
practice; which may be gathered from Mat. 28.20. Heb. 5.12. they must be so
taught, and the Truth so explained, that Persons may obey the same in Faith,
and with understanding.

Thirdly, This must needs be granted on all hands, that without some Inference,
or help of other Scripture, Laying on of hands for Ordination cannot be proved
from this Text, which Mr. Danvers will not admit us to do; we must have every
Principle of Christ's Doctrine in so many plain words, and from Christ's own
mouth too, or else it is no Institution.

Object. But may be, some will say, he urges other Scriptures to prove Laying
on of hands on Officers, page 54. Acts 6.6. and 13.3, etc.

Answ. Granted, yet those are only brought as Examples (for so indeed they are)
and not Precepts; and there is none urged by him to prove it commanded, save
that we have spoken to, 1 Timothy 5.22. and what can be produced save clear
Precedents on that account, I know not.

But now as to Imposition of hands on baptized Believers as such, we have not
only clear Examples, but also the Scripture shows it was taught as a positive
Command and Institution of Jesus Christ, or what was commanded by him; which I
shall fully show from Heb. 6.1, 2. where the Apostle writing of the six
Principles, or Foundation-Doctrines of Christ, uses the word (...) in the 1st
Verse, and (...) in the 2d Verse, that is Word and Doctrine; so this of Laying
on of Hands, amongst other Principles, the Apostle there, by the Spirit of God,
calls the Word and Doctrine of Christ: now the Words of Christ, and Commands of
Christ, are Terms synonymous, or of the like import; as Deuteronomy. 10.4. shows,
where the ten Commandments are called in the margin ten Words, as most suting
with the Hebrew Text. Again, John 14.21. with 23. and 24. v. compared with
verse. 21. further evinces it; He that has my Commandments, and keeps them,
he it is that loves me: In Verse. 23. If any Man love me, he will keep my
Words; and in Verse 24. called Sayings: and the Word is said in John 7.16. to
be the Father's, and Christ's Word said to be what he had from the Father. So
now, Laying on of hands, as well as Repentance, Faith and Baptism, is the Word
and Doctrine of Christ, and therefore equally to be observed and obeyed by all
the Saints, being one of the Principles, or Fundamental Truths, which the
Hebrew Church, at the Command and Word of Christ, came under the practice of,
Heb. 5.12. and 6.1, 2. Moreover this Principle is, by the said Author to the
Hebrews, called one of the Oracles of God, which he tells them they had need
again to be instructed in; plainly implying they had once been taught it, and
were in the practice thereof. Now the Oracles of God are the Commands of God;
see Acts 7.38. where the ten Commandments are called lively Oracles; compared
with Romans 3.2. Unto them were committed the Oracles of God. Methinks this might
convince any dissatisfied Person, that Laying on of hands, as well as the other
Principles, was taught and commanded by Jesus Christ.

But yet again, consider that what the Apostles wrote to the Churches as the
Word of Christ, ought to be owned by all that are Spriritual, to be the
Commands of God, 1 Cor. 14.37. But verse. 38. If any will be ignorant, let him
be ignorant. Yet not withstanding what we say on this Account, still I find
this Objection brought against this Appointment, viz.

Object. Where is Laying on of hands commanded by Christ? we find nothing of it
in the Commission, Mat. 28.

Answ. 1. Why should you make such a stir about an express Command? must it be
plainly laid down, or expressed in the Commission, or else no Divine Institution?
Does not this make as much every way against Laying on of hands upon Officers,
as against that on baptized Believers as such? We account that Man very
malicious who resolves to wound his Neighbor, tho himself be wounded thereby.

2. We have as plain Precedents for Laying on of hands on baptized Believers,
as we have on Officers, Acts 8.16, 17. and Acts 19.6. yea and more than bare
Examples for it: it is called a Principle of the Doctrine of Christ; but where
that on Officers is called so I know not: for that the Laying on of hands in
Heb. 6.2. cannot intend that on Officers, has been clearly proved by diverse
Arguments; and that it intends Laying on of hands on the Baptized for the
Spirit of Promise, and to confirm them in the Faith newly received, is not only
our light and apprehension, but has also been asserted to be the sense of that
Text by many Ancient and Modern Divines of several Persuasions, as has been
showed.

Object. But such a Laying on of hands you contend for, was no where practiced;
John did not lay hands upon Christ.

Answ. We will grant you, John Baptist did not lay hands on the Lord Jesus; it
cannot be rationally concluded he should, considering the lesser is blessed of
the greater. Baptism might be administered by John, it being a figure of
Christ's Death, Burial, and Resurrection; but the promised Spirit, which is the
end of the Ordinance of Laying on of hands, is said to be Christ's own gift,
Ephesians. 4.7. But tho John laid not his hands on Christ, being not a fit
Administrator thereof, yet I may say, the Father laid his hands upon him, and
the Spirit came down visibly in the likeness of a Dove, and rested on him just
after he came out of the Water; and this might, as many of the Learned affirm,
contain the substance of this Administration contended for.

Moreover, In this way Christ Jesus was visibly sealed by God the Father after
he was baptized: says Dr. Tailor, Confirm. p. 12. He had another, or new
Administration past upon him for the reception of the Holy Spirit, and this was
done for our sakes; we also must follow that Example: and it plainly describes
to us the Order of this Administration, and the Blessing designed to us; after
we are baptized we need to be strengthened and confirmed. And again he says
(citing a passage of Optatus) Christ was washed when he was in the hands of
John, and the Father finished what was wanting; the Heavens were opened, God
the Father anointed him, the Spiritual Unction presently descended in the
likeness of a Dove, and sat upon his Head, and was spread all over him when he
was anointed of the Father; to whom also, lest Imposition of hands should seem
to be wanting, the Voice of God was heard from the Cloud, saying, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased. I shall leave this to consideration.

Object. But further you affirm, that Christ did not lay hands upon his
Disciples.

Answ. And how do you come to know he did not? may be you will say, it is no
where written that he did. But pray where do you read that the 12 Disciples, or
Apostles of Christ, were baptized? Does it follow because we read not of their
Baptism, they were not baptized?

Obj. But you say, there is not one word of it in the Commission.

Answ. 1. There is not one word in the Commission, as I have showed, concerning
any Laying on of hands, yet you own that upon Officers to be a Principle of
Christ's Doctrine.

2. There is not one word in the Commission concerning the Resurrection of the
Dead, nor of Eternal Judgment, nor Prayer, nor Assembling together, nor other
things that are undoubtedly Gospel Truths and Institutions; yet tho they are
not expressed, they are included, as those words plainly hold forth, Teach them
to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: And surely every one may
see, unless he wilfully shut his eyes, that there are many more Precepts
implied in the words of the Commission than are expressed; for if nothing must be
received for Gospel-Institutions but what are expressed in the Commission, you
must throw away the greatest part of those Precepts you call Commands, or
Appointments of Jesus Christ.

Object. But you proceed, and say, That the Church of the Hebrews practiced no
such thing, for there is no mention that the hundred and twenty had hands laid
upon them, nor the three thousand, Acts 2.

Answ. That the Church of the Hebrews practiced this Ordinance as well as other
Churches, is plain in Heb. 6.1, 2. As they repented, believed, and were
baptized, so they were under the practice of Laying on of hands: for that is a
practical Ordinance all confess; Not laying again, says the Author, Repentance
from dead Works, etc. this plainly shows they had once laid all those
Foundation-principles.

Object. But may be, you will say, there is nothing of this signified in Acts
2. when that Church was first gathered.

Answ. It Is very clear you are mistaken; for is it not said Acts 2.42. They
continued in the Apostles Doctrine? which they could not do, if they had not
submitted to every Part or Precept of it; and is not Laying on of hands, as
well as Baptism, and those other Principles, part thereof? it is called the
Apostles Doctrine, Acts 2. in Heb. 6.2. Christ's Doctrine; not the Apostles any
other ways than they were taught it by, and received it from the Lord Jesus:
and let none conclude they were not taught Laying on of hands, because not
plainly expressed, or particularly laid down Acts 2. for we may as well conclude,
the Apostle taught them not the Resurrection of the Dead, nor Eternal Judgment,
since we read nothing there to that purpose: Doubtless Philip, Acts 8. preached
Baptism to the Eunuch, how should he else cry out, Lo here is Water, what does
hinder me from being baptized? yet we read not one word of Philip's preaching
of it to him. The Author to the Hebrews (writing to this very People) chapter 5.12.
tells us, They had need to be taught again which are the first Principles of
the Oracles of God; therefore it follows clearly, they had been taught it, and
had practiced it, as chap. 6.1, 2. proves.

Mr. Danvers goes on, and affirms, that we find not the least mention of it in
any of the Churches in the New Testament, neither in Samaria after Philip had
baptized them, nor Corinth, Philippi, Colossia, Thessalonica, Rome, Galatia,
Smyrna, Thyatira, Pergamos, Sardis, Philadelphia, no nor Ephesus.

Answ. I cannot but admire at such affirmations: but first, as to the Church in
Samaria, it is granted Philip did not lay hands on them after he had baptized
them; he being only a Deacon, it might not upon that account concern, or belong
to him to impose hands on them: and besides, God had other work for him to do,
viz. the Conversion of the Eunuch. Yet most evident it is, when the Apostles
and Brethren at Jerusalem heard that the People in Samaria had received the
Word of God, and were baptized, rather than they should lie short of any part
of their duty, especially that in which so great a Blessing is promised, they
would send Peter and John to pray and lay their hands upon them; and that it
was not for the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, has been clearly proved. And
as to the Church at Rome, it is said plainly Romans 6.17. That they had obeyed
from the heart that Form of Doctrine delivered to them: And what Form can the
Apostle intend save that in Heb. 6.1, 2? we read of no other delivered to the
Saints for their obedience. And as to the Church of Ephesus, we read of their
coming under this Ordinance when first planted, Acts 19.6.

2. And now as to some other Churches he speaks of, I grant we read not of
their practicing this Ordinance; yet what does this make against it? For where
do we read of their Repentance or Faith, of their being baptized, or their
believing the Resurrection of the Dead, or Eternal Judgment? There is nothing
spoken of several Churches as to any of these other Principles; and it is very
observable, that we read but of one or two Churches that practiced the Lord's
Supper: yet none doubt but all the Churches continued in the practice of it,
God's way being the same in every Church, 1 Cor. 4.17. If in some Scriptures it
is spoken of as the duty and practice of the Saints, tho not expressed in all
places, it matters not; for if what is the duty of one Believer as a Believer,
be the duty of every Believer, then there is no need for the Almighty to speak
of every particular Church's obedience either to Baptism, Laying on of hands,
or the Lord's Supper, etc.

One thing I cannot but call over again, owned and confessed by Mr. Danvers,
viz. That there is a Laying on of hands reckoned amongst the Principles of the
Doctrine of Christ.

Ans. It Is well he will grant this; nay, and it is one of his first Teachings,
he also acknowledges: then I hope he will allow us to say, Christ taught a
Laying on of hands as a Foundation-principle; and if he taught it, 'twas that
it might be practiced as a Foundation, or beginning Truth; and then ought not
all to yield obedience thereto? For as every Person is actually to repent,
believe, and be baptized, so each one ought to come under the practice of
Laying on of hands, it being of the same extent, nature and quality with the
other, and joined to them; and it cannot be said to be obeyed otherwise than by
practice; as in Baptism, I do not yield obedience by believing other Persons
were or ought to be baptized, but by being baptized my self. We grant that some
Act done upon, or Practice done by others, may be teaching to us, tho not
engaged in our own Persons to do the same; but then it must not be such a
fundamental Principle and Practice as this, being of the same nature with
Repentance, Faith, and Baptism; Will it serve my turn to believe it is another
Man's duty to repent? Surely no, I must repent and believe my self, or else I
neglect my duty.

Object. And whereas he tells us in page 43* of other beginning Teachings,
proper for all baptized Babes.

Answ. 1. He pretends to take the stumbling block out of the way of God's
People: But in this it is palpable he rather cast one in their way; will he make
new Foundation-Principles, or call those beginning Principles of Christ's
Doctrine, or of Church-Constitution, which God no where so calls? We say, such
only are to be accounted beginning Principles, which God's Word declares so to
be.

2. It appears as if he would make Laying on of hands for miraculous healing,
to be that in Heb. 6. which has been fully answered again and again; they
should have refuted Mr. Griffith and Mr. Rider, before they insist on this: I
think it needless on that account to speak any thing to it, and shall only
refer the Reader to their excellent Books for satisfaction. But this I must
say, that that Laying on of hands for healing belongs not to Babes as such;
strong Men, and Fathers may be sick, and have need of it, as well as others:
besides, this sort concerns not all (no, only sick Persons) and may be
practiced again and again, as often as Persons may be sick, or under bodily
infirmities; but that Principle that is one of the beginning words of Christ's
Doctrine, is only to be laid, or practiced once, Heb. 6.1. Not Laying again,
etc. 2ly. Unbelievers had hands laid upon them for healing, and therefore I
might also argue it appertains not unto Babes as such: Moreover, anointing with
Oil is left as the Ordinance for healing in the Church.

3. Mr. Danvers should make a difference between what Christ taught as a
Promise or Gift to some particular Persons, and what he taught as a general
Practice; that which is minded in Mark 16. is laid down promissory-wise to such
as should have the gift of Faith, or the Faith of Miracles Will any say, to
drink Poison, or any deadly thing, or take up Serpents, is Milk for Babes?
, and is therefore nothing to the purpose.

4. They distinguish not between the Word or Doctrine of Christ, and Miracles,
which were for the confirmation thereof, which in Mark 16.20. the Spirit does;
which causes their mistake.

But, do they not confute themselves by thus arguing? they own the Doctrine of
Laying on of hands to be a Foundation-principle of Christ; but this they speak
of here must needs be granted to be temporary, being for the confirmation of
the Word, as he himself confesses; and every Word or Ordinance of Christ, as I
have showed, was more or less confirmed with Signs, and Wonders according to
this Promise of Christ. I shall say no more to this, but proceed to his next
Objection.

2. Object. Page 44. If every one of these Principles in Heb. 6.2. are so
absolutely to be taken in by Babes, and without which we are not to esteem them
communicable, what do you say to the Doctrine of Baptisms, in the Text one of
the Principles? must all be baptized with the Baptism of the Spirit, and of
Sufferings? etc.

Answ. We answer, by distinguishing between that Baptism that is a practical
Duty, and that which is taught or laid down by our Lord Jesus to be believed:
that that is commanded, ought absolutely to be obeyed by every Babe; and it is
as necessary for every Babe to believe the Doctrine of Sufferings, which Jesus
Christ preached to all that would follow him and be his Disciples; this was
that which he taught, Mat. 20.22, 23. to the two Sons of Zebedee, that they
(and consequently all God's Children) should more or less be baptized with. In
the World (says Christ) you shall have tribulation, John 16.33. It Is necessary
every Saint should be instructed into this, and believe this, that through much
Tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts 14.22. and all those
who will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. We
say not, that every one must actually forsake House, and Lands, and Life for
Christ's sake, and the Gospel, or else be none of his Disciples, but be ready
in holy disposition so to do when called to it.

And as to the Baptism of the Spirit, that the Spirit is promised to every true
Believer, see Joel 2.28, 29. which Peter ( Acts 2.17. compared with verse. 38,
39.) applies indefinitely to all penitent baptized Persons, whether Jews or
Gentiles, as their Right by promise of the Father to receive; and not to them
of that Generation only, but also to such as should repent, and be baptized in
all succeeding Ages; this Promise is one and the same with that in John 7.38.
called Rivers of Water, implying fillings Fillings with the Spirit may be taken
in a comparative sense, God giving more or greater measures of it in the New
Testament dispensation, and since the Ascension of Christ, than before.
with the Spirit. In Acts 2.38. it is said to be the Gift of the Holy Spirit. In
Acts 11.17. like Gifts. In Acts 8.15. the Holy Spirit: which the Apostles in
the belief of the promise, Joel 2. and Joh. 14.16. Acts 2.38, prayed for. From
which Scriptures it appears, that all Believers are under the like Promises of
the Holy Ghost, on like terms of Repentance, Faith, etc. And according to the
measure of Faith given us by Christ, may our fillings with the Holy Spirit be.

And thus it is the duty of every Disciple to believe he shall receive, or be
baptized with the Spirit, (according as the Will of the same Spirit is, that
divides to every Man the particular measures thereof) having the Promise of a
faithful and never-failing God to rely upon; provided he go on in his
Obedience, as directed in the blessed Word, for the attaining of it.

Object. But if it be objected, none are baptized with the Holy Spirit, but
such as receive it visibly, and in its extraordinary Gifts.

Answ. 1. Suppose none are so baptized now, yet all the Saints are to believe
the Promise of the Spirit, and do receive it too; and does not God perform his
Promise, because none so receive the Spirit, viz. to be baptized therewith? 1
Cor. 12.13.

2. All are to believe the Baptism of the Spirit was given in the Apostles days
to confirm the Gospel or Word of Christ. And it is to be observed, that Paul to
the Ephesians (on whom he had imposed hands, Acts 19.6. and the spoke with
Tongues, and prophesied) takes no notice of those visible Gifts, but says, In
whom also after ye believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise,
Ephesians. 1.13. plainly showing it is the great Benefit received, and enjoyed by
Believers, to be sealed by the Spirit: it is not matter of rejoicing to work
Miracles, as it is to know our Names are written in Heaven. And thus we have
explained the Doctrine of Baptisms.

Now to what he says in the 3d place, p.45. That the Laying on of hands, Heb.
6.2. may respect the Laying on of hands upon the Ministry for their solemn
Investiture into their Office, whether Deacons, Elders, or Messengers, which he
says is necessary to be taught, known, and understood by all, tho all are not
commanded into the personal practice of it, for all are not Prophets, Apostles,
Teachers; and it is most remarkable, that the Doctrine, or teaching of Laying on
of hands, is all that is mentioned in this Scripture; all baptized Believers
must be taught it, that is plain, but that they are obliged therefore to
practice it, is not here or elsewhere to be found.

Answ. Before I give a further Answer to this grand Objection, I cannot but
observe how he mistakes the Text, i. e. than the Doctrine, or teaching of
Laying on of hands only is mentioned in this Scripture; why does he speak thus
of Imposition of hands only? may he not as well speak so concerning Repentance,
Faith, and Baptism, as of this Principle? i. e. they also are necessary only to
be taught and known by all, and none concerned in the personal practice of
them? Would any judge this Good Divinity? What reason can he give, seeing all
the four are practical Ordinances, that the three first should be taught so as
to be personally practiced by all, and the other only to be believed? Tho what
he says here has already been fully answered, yet I shall examine this Text
further, and make it evident, that the Laying on of hands in this Text cannot
intend or be meant that upon Church Officers, but must mean that sort now
contended for; and I am more willing to speak further to this Objection,
because this being answered, our work is done.

1. Mind that the Apostle is speaking only here of the first Principles of the
Doctrine of Christ; are they not so called? i. e. Doctrinae Christianae Initia,
seu Rudimenta; the Beginnings or Rudiments of Christian Doctrine: Or, as Beza,
Prima Christianismi Principia; the first Principles of Christianity. Now Laying
on of hands on Officers, is not a beginning Principle, nor of the Alphabet of
the Christian Religion, I think they will not affirm it so to be. May not a
Church, or People, profess and practice the first or beginning Principles of
Religion, and proceed very far in the way of Christianity, and yet have no
Officers orderly ordained amongst them?

But 2. These Principles appertain to the Foundation of God's House, being such
on which the House is built; they are all equal in kind, nature, and quality,
and one not to be without the other, God having joined them together as all of
one rank, for the bearing up this Spiritual Fabric, see verse. 1. But laying on
of hands on Officers, is an Ordinance of another rank and nature; a Church must
be first gathered, or constituted, and Persons make a considerable progress in
the Profession of Religion, before they can orderly be chosen, or ordained to
the Office of Elders or Deacons: In short, Officers are not for the being, but
well-being of the Church; and therefore such a Laying on of hands cannot be
intended here. We read of Churches who had no Officers amongst them, Tit. 1.5,
6. If a Minister were to preach unto a People what are the Fundamentals of a
Gospel Church, viz. what Persons ought to do, that so in an orderly way they
may be congregated together in the fellowship of the Gospel, or be made regular
Members of the visible Church, would he tell them Laying on of hands on
Officers is one Principle? Surely no; he would not affirm this to be one of the
Rudiments of Christian Practice (that which first of all a Christian should be
instructed in and come under, that he may have a being in God's House) nor a
Foundation-principle of Church-Constitution; but that the Laying on of hands
spoken of Heb. 6. is so, nothing is more evident: for if it be a Principle of
the Foundation, either it must be a Fundamental of Salvation, or of
Church-Constitution; but none will say of the former, therefore it wust be of
the latter.

3. That it cannot intend Laying on of hands on Church Officers, might appear
further, because it is joined to, or coupled with Baptism; why should Laying on
of hands on Officers, be by the Spirit of God laid down after this sort?
Repentance from dead Works, and Faith toward God; the Doctrine of Baptisms,
and Laying on of hands; the Resurrection from the Dead, and Eternal Judgment.
May we not safely argue, that the Laying on of hands, which follows here in
order of words, is what followed in order of practice? See Acts 8.17. and 19.6.
And is it not according to what they acknowledge sound reasoning in another case
upon Mat. 28.20. and Mark 16. that Baptism mentioned in the Commission, joined
to, and following Faith and Illumination in order of words, is what the
Apostles in order of practice, viz. after Faith and Illumination, did baptize
with? Acts 2.41. Acts 8. and 10. But that was the Baptism of Water, which
therefore is only intended in the Commission, etc. And thus by comparing
Scripture with Scripture, we may be satisfied in those things, which at first
seemed doubtful.

4. It cannot be meant here, because all the Church of the Hebrews, as well as
that in Samaria, Acts 8. (and consequently all other Churches) had laid, or
come under this Principle, as they had laid Repentance, Faith, and Baptism,
when they were Babes: Now, who can reasonably imagine, either that the whole
Church of the Hebrews were Officers, or that Officers are Babes in Christ? That
this is the Laying on of hands on baptized Believers, is easy to understand: 1.
Because taught to Babes, Heb. 5.12. 2. Babes are capable, or meet subjects
thereof. 3. Babes have need of it, as Children of Milk. 4. Babes we read were
in the practice thereof, Acts 8. and 19.5. Because it belongs to them as such,
and were at first taught it, Heb. 5. and 6.1, 2. this cannot be said of any
other sort. I shall say no more, only add something out of Dr. Jer. Tailor, of
Confirm. p. 45 -- 48. full to our purpose, which considering the learning and
worthiness of the Author, I judge may be useful; what he minds, take as
follows, speaking of Laying on of hands, called Confirmation: We have seen
(says he) the Original from Christ, the practice and exercise of it in the
Apostles, and the first Converts in Christianity: what I shall now remark is,
That this is established and passed into a Christian Doctrine; the Warranty for
what I say, is Heb. 6.1. where the holy Rite of Confirmation, so called from
the effects of this Administration, and expressed by the ritual part of it,
Imposition of hands, is reckoned a fundamental Point; and here are six
fundamental points of St. Paul' s Catechism, which he laid as the Foundation,
or beginning of the Institution of the Christian Church; and therefore they who
deny it, dig up Foundations. Now that this Imposition of hands is what the
Apostle used in confirming the Baptized, and invocating the Holy Spirit upon
them, remains to be proved; which is done, by showing, 1. It cannot intend
Absolution; nor 2. Ordination. And this is evident:

1. Because the Apostle would henceforth leave to speak of the Foundation, and
go on to perfection, that is to higher Mysteries; now in Rituals there is none
higher than Ordination.

2. The Apostle saying he would speak no more of Imposition of Hands, presently
discourses of the mysteriousness of the Evangelical Priesthood, and the Honor
of that Vocation; by which it is evident he speaks nothing of Ordination in the
Catechism, or Narratives of Fundamentals.

3. This also appears from the Context, not only because Laying on of hands is
immediately set after Baptism, but because in the very next words of his
Discourse, he enumerates and apportions to these Ordinances their proper
proportioned Effects, i. e. to Faith and Baptism, Illumination; to Laying on of
hands, the tasting the Heavenly Gift, and being made Partakers of the Holy
Spirit; by the thing signified declaring the Sign, and by hopes of the
Resurrection, tastes of the good things of the World to come: He that falls
from this state, and turns Apostate from this whole Dispensation, digging down,
and turning up these Foundations, shall never be built again; he can never be
baptized again, and never confirmed any more: If he remains on these
Foundations, tho he sins, he may be renewed (...), by Repentance, and by
resuscitation of the Spirit, if he had not wholly quenched him; but if he
renounces the whole Covenant, disown and cancel these Foundations, he is
desperate, he can never be renewed. This is the full explication of this
excellent place, and otherways it cannot be explicated; but therefore into this
place any notice of Ordination cannot come; no Sense, no Mystery can be made of
it, or drawn from it, but by the interposition of Confirmation: The whole
Context is clear, rational and intelligible. He cites Calvin, and Chrysostom,
as speaking the same things upon this place, p. 50.

To these I might add Estius on Heb. 6.1, 2. It Is (says he) undoubtedly to be
understood of that Laying on of hands, which was administered to the Faithful
presently after Baptism, of which St. Luke speaks, Acts 8. and 19. I might
produce Grotius and Heming, and other modern Authors, upon the same place: But
having upon occasion mentioned several before, I shall close this with a
passage out of Erasmus on Heb. 6.1. The first step to Christianity (says he)
is Repentance of our former Life, next that Salvation is to be hoped from God,
next that we be purged in Baptism from our filth, next that by Laying on of
hands we receive the Holy Spirit, etc.

CHAP. VI.
Opening, and further proving Laying on of hands from Acts 8.16, 17. and 19.6.
Also showing the Judgment of Ancient and Modern Writers upon those two Places.

MR. Danvers having labored to weaken the proof of our Practice from Heb. 6.1,
2. (tho all he says signifies nothing) comes p. 45. to examine Acts 8.17. and
19.6. which we affirm to be full Precedents for Laying on of hands upon
baptized Believers. The sum of his Objections, or the way he takes to
invalidate what we infer from thence, take as follows, p. 46.

Object. As to that of Samaria, it is said that several being converted in that
City, and baptized by Philip, who wrought many Miracles, and continued some
time with them, Acts 8.13. yet did not he impose hands upon them as we read of:
the Church of Jerusalem hearing that Samaria had received the Word of God, and
that the Spirit was not fallen upon any of them, viz. in a visible manner, (
which was a Phrase attributed to those extraordinary Measures frequently given
in those days, Acts 10.44. which sometimes did fall upon them before Baptism,
and sometimes after) sent Peter and John, who it seems were extraordinarily
gifted by God, so that on whomsoever they prayed, and laid their hands, the
Spirit was visibly, extraordinarily, and immediately given; and it is said they
laid their hands upon them, but how many it is not said; surely not upon all,
for Simon by his profane offer discovered he had neither lot nor part therein,
tho baptized, etc.

Answ. The first thing he hints at, as an Objection against our Practice from
this place, is because Philip laid not his hands upon them, after he had
baptized them: Which we have answered already; but this I must say now, that if
Peter and John laid their hands on those Believers in Samaria, as Men
miraculously gifted, or by virtue of their extraordinary Seize, it might
seem strange that Philip laid not his hands upon them, being (tho but a Deacon)
endowed with those extraordinary Gifts, and had wrought wonderful Signs and
Miracles in the same City before: The reason therefore why Philip did not
impose hands upon them was,

1. Because not ministerially capacitated so to do, it not belonging to him on
the account of his Office, nor his extraordinary Gifts and Endowments. This
also I might further show, because the Church at Jerusalem did not send to
Samaria Men simply endowed with miraculous Gifts, but such as had Ministerial
Power and Authority as the Servants of Christ, in his Name to complete and
perfect what was wanting among them.

It Is an Act (says Dr. Hammond on Acts 8.17.) reserved to the Rulers of the
Church, and not communicated or allowed to inferior Officers, such as Philip
the Deacon here.

2. But whereas Mr. Danvers seems to affirm, that as some in the primitive time
had the Gift of Healing, so others had the Gift or Power to give the Holy
Spirit; it is utterly denied, and the contrary has often been proved, for that
it is only the Gift of God, and Christ's blessed Prerogative; they were found in
their Duty, they prayed, and laid on their hands, and left the issue to God to
give the Spirit, according to his promise and good pleasure.

Object. But probably some may object, We read of none but the Apostles that
laid hands on baptized Believers; and tho they acted not by virtue of their
miraculous Endowments, nor had power to give the Holy Spirit, yet they might
act herein by virtue of their extraordinary call unto that Office.

Answ. I affirm that they acted in all other Ordinances, yea, and did
whatsoever they did in the Worship and Service of Christ, by virtue of the said
extraordinary Call unto the Ministry, as well as in this: But does it therefore
follow that nothing the Apostles practiced is a Precedent or Rule unto us, as
some ignorantly have affirmed, unless so called of God, and endowed as they
were?

3. Had not Matthias the same power to administer Ordinances (who was mediately
called to his Office by the Church) as the other Apostles immediately called by
Christ Jesus? and is not the End and Work of the Office (however called to it)
one and the same? viz. the work of the Ministry, the perfecting the Saints, and
edifying the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.

4. We read hardly of any that preached the Word Authoritatively, or officiated
in any Gospel-administration by virtue of their Office, besides the
extraordinary Apostles; and therefore if what they did be not a Law or Rule to
us, and to all ordinary Ministers, to the end of the World, we shall be at a
loss in many other respects: It must therefore be granted, that what they
taught and practiced as an Ordinance of Christ, and foundation-Principle of his
Doctrine, they delivered it unto faithful Men, that were their Successors, that
they might be able to teach others also, 2 Timothy 2.3. And this agrees with Phil.
4.9. Those things that you have both learned and received, heard and seen in
me, do; and the God of Peace shall be with you.

5. Had it been a Service for that Day only, and none to be Administrators
thereof but those great Apostles, it would not have been left as a standing, or
foundation principle in God's House, and been joined to Faith, and the
Resurrection.

In the 2d place, he would have us believe the end of that Administration was
for the extraordinary or visible Gifts of the Holy Spirit, which we have
clearly refuted; yet I shall say further, that by his arguing, the Apostles
resolved that all the Church at Samaria, yea and that at Ephesus, should have
the extraordinary Gifts, since they laid their hands on all that were baptized,
without exception. Nay, it follows roundly, that where ever the Apostles found
any particular Disciple, or Disciples, that had not received those visible, or
extraordinary Gifts, they were to lay their hands on them to that end: For I
presume Mr. Danvers judges, had Paul found 1200, as he found 12, at Ephesus,
who had not received, nor heard of the Holy Ghost, he would have laid hands on
them; which presupposes also, that those miraculous Gifts were promised, and
belong to every particular Member in the Church, which is directly contrary to
1 Cor. 12.4, 7, 8, 9, 29, 30. for tho (as we have proved) the Holy Spirit be
promised to every sincere Believer in the Lord Jesus, yet are not the
extraordinary Gifts promised to any in particular, being only reserved in the
bosom or breast of the Almighty, to whom, and after what manner he will
distribute them. 1 Cor. 12.4. There are diversities of Gifts, but the same
Spirit; to one is given by the same Spirit, the word of Wisdom; to another the
word of Knowledge; to another Faith; to another the gift of Healing, by the same
Spirit; to another the working of Miracles; to another Prophecy; to another
discerning of Tongues, v. 8, 9, 10. Are all Prophets? are all workers of
Miracles? have all the Gift of Healing? do all speak with Tongues? etc. Hence
nothing can be clearer than this, that tho all have right to the Spirit, yet
but very few had the extraordinary Gifts thereof in the primitive Times.

The Third thing Mr. Danvers seems to affirm, is, that all in Samaria that were
baptized, had not hands laid upon them, because it is said of Simon, he had no
part nor lot in that matter.

1. Here he begs the Question, taking for granted, that Simon had not hands
laid upon him; but why might not Simon have lot and part in that matter, if by
Lot and Part be meant the visible, or miraculous Gifts of the Spirit, since
Hypocrites may partake of them, as our Savior plainly signifies, and also does
our Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2?

2. He might come under the Ordinance, and yet his heart not being right with
God, he might not have any part or lot in the blessed Comforter, the Spirit of
Promise; which the World receives not, nor can an unsanctified Heart partake
of.

3. Their reception of the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, was partly to
convince the Apostles and Believers themselves that Christ had made good his
promise of sending the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, to them.

4. By Lot or Part in that matter, may not be meant partaking of the ritual, or
external part of the Ordinance, but rather refers to his desire of having power
to be an Administrator of it upon others, so that the Holy Spirit might be
given to those he laid his hands on. But,

5. If we should grant Simon had not hands imposed upon him, which I rather
incline to, yet would it not hurt our Cause in the least, because he might be
discovered to be a profane Wretch before it came to be his lot to partake
thereof: if therefore it appears, and may be granted, that all that were
baptized in Samaria came under this Appointment save Simon, we have as much as
we desire: And surely this cannot rationally be denied by any that read the
words, verse. 12. When they believed they were baptized, both Men and Women.
Compare this with verse. 16. that the Holy Spirit was fallen on none of them M.
Blackwood notes the emphasis to lie in this Pronoun Relative They; the
Antecedent hereunto must needs be the Baptized, etc.
only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. Must not they, and
them, mean all who are said to be baptized? So likewise when it is said ver. 13.
they laid their hands upon them; does not them intend the very same they prayed
for? and shall we think they did not pray for them all? had not all the like
need of God's Spirit? and is it not promised to all the Sons and Handmaids? Or
shall we think the Apostle did not pray for the Women as well as the Men, the
weaker Vessels, as well as the stronger? In Mat. 28.19, 20. (as it is well noted
by Mr. Fisher) it is said, Go, teach all Nations, baptizing them; and in the
words following, teaching them to observe all things I have commanded you. By
them must needs intend them all, and every of them that were made Disciples,
and baptized.

One word or two further concerning what Mr. D. objects against us from Acts
19.6. from the Effects that followed this Administration; he still arguing as
if that were the absolute End thereof: Which, as a great Doctor well observes,
is too trifling a fancy to be put in balance against so sacred an Institution.
But let us examine this Scripture a little more: Have you received the Holy
Spirit since ye believed? (says our Apostle.) They said unto him, We have not
so much as heard whether there be any Holy Spirit. Unto what then were ye
baptized? etc. Two things are here very remarkable.

1. That the Holy Spirit (according to the sense of the Apostle inquiring after
their reception of it) is the undoubted Right of every baptized Believer in
Christ Jesus, appears from these two expressions; Have ye received the Spirit
since ye believed? (No.) Unto what then were ye baptized? It seems strange (as
if Paul should say) that you having believed in Christ, and been baptized, have
not yet received the Holy Spirit, since it is the great Legacy our Lord and
Master left to every one of his Disciples?

2. It Is evident that whosoever was baptized after Christ's resurrection in his
Name was instructed into the Promise of the Holy Ghost, and consequently into
Laying on of Hands, the outward Ceremony, or Ministry of it, belonging to them
as Persons so considered. Paul seems to question their Baptism, since they were
wholly ignorant of that glorious Promise of Blessing, annexed thereto; which
considered, may fully satisfy any unbiassed Person that the extraordinary or
miraculous Gifts could not be the End of this Administration: and as touching
those Effects that followed, it is clear the like Effects followed all other
Ordinances as well as this.

Object. And whereas Mr. D. presumes to say, They were some of the Church of
Ephesus; and again, not the whole Church.

Answ. 1. Can it be thought that those were at that time Members of the Church,
and yet so ignorant of the Holy Spirit? And surely Paul would not have baptized
them again, if they had been Members of the Church before.

2. They are not called the Church, nor of the Church, nor some of the Church,
but certain Disciples; yea, and such as appears were only instructed into the
Baptism of John.

3. Tho we read but of 12 that had hands laid on them, which was the number of
the Men How many Women is not expressed, they are seldom the lesser number.
that Paul found at that time who lay short of their Duty and Privilege in that
respect; since we see the Spirit was their Right, as baptized Believers, it
follows that it is the duty of every Believer to yield obedience to this
Ordinance, as well as those twelve. The way of God touching the Administration
of Gospel-Institutions being one and the same in all the Churches of the
Saints, notwithstanding what has already been offered, may be a satisfactory
Answer to Mr. D. concerning what he minds from those two Scriptures: yet
finding so many Learned Men, both ancient and of later times, agreeing with us
in their Expositions on these two Places; and not knowing but their Words may
with some take more place than what such a one as I may speak, I Will cite a
Passage or two.

Cyprian, speaking of Acts 8.17. says, It was not necessary they should be
baptized again, only what was wanting, was performed by Peter and John, that by
Prayer and Imposition of Hands the Holy Spirit should be invocated.

Says Hierom on the Acts of the Apostles, We find another Instance of the
Celebration of this ritual Mystery, for it is signally expressed of the Baptized
at Ephesus: Paul first baptized them, and then laid his Hands upon them, and
they received the Holy Spirit. And these Testimonies are the great Warranty for
this holy Ordinance.

Eucherites is cited by Dr. Tailor p. 43. speaking, thus: The same thing now
done in Imposition of Hands on single Persons, is no other than what was done
upon all Believers in the descent of the H. Spirit.

He mentions Zanchius, saying, I wish the Examples of the Apostles and
Primitive Churches were of more value amongst Christians. It were well if they
were so, (says the Doctor) but there is more than mere Examples; these
Examples of such Solemnities, the Apostles are our Masters in them, and have
given Rules and Precedents for the Church to follow: this is a Christian Law,
and written (as all Scriptures are) for our Instruction.

Estius on Heb. 6.2. affirms that the Laying on of Hands mentioned Acts 8.17.
Acts 19.6. by St. Luke, is that of Confirmation, whereby the Spirit of God is
given to Persons baptized, wherewith with they being strengthened, confess the
Name of Christ undauntedly among the Enemies of the Faith. And again (says he)
That Hands were wont to be laid upon Persons baptized, after the example of the
Apostles, all Antiquity teaches.

Dr. Hammond also in his Annot. on Acts 8.17. says; That it was Confirmation,
may appear probable, because it so soon attended their Conversion and Baptism.
When the Apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the
Word of God, they sent Peter and John, verse. 14. Which agrees well (says he)
with that of Confirmation, which is an Act reserved to the Rulers of the
Church, and not communicated or allowed to inferior Officers, such as Philip
the Deacon here.

And then paraphasing upon Acts 19.6. he says, After this Paul by Imposition
of hands, and benediction, gave them Confirmation, by which means the Holy
Spirit came on them.

Mr. Ralph Venning in his Remains, speaking of Acts 8.17. and 19.6. gives his
understanding upon them; That it was the practice of the Apostles, after they
had baptized Persons, sooner or later, to lay Hands upon them.

Thus from what has been said, I hope it may appear to all inquiring Souls, in
opposition to what Mr. Danvers says, page 47. that these two Places are clear
Precedents and Rules for this Practice, as well as Heb. 6.1, 2. and other
Scriptures we have insisted upon, for as much as there was a Laying on of Hands
practiced immediately after Baptism, and with much certainty upon every Member,
or baptized Believer, and to such an End as is attainable in these times.

CHAP. VII.
Further showing, that Prayer, with Imposition of Hands upon baptized
Believers, remains for ever as a standing or perpetual Administration.

BUT lest any should still object, this Ordinance does not continue, neither is
the End attainable now, I am willing to add two or three Arguments, for the
further evincing of these particulars.

Arg. 1. Because the Lord was pleased to bear witness to, or ratify this
blessed Ordinance or Principle of Christ's Doctrine, with the like Signs,
Wonders, and Gifts of the Holy Spirit, as he did any other Word, Command, or
Principle of the said Doctrine. Now what was thus established, must needs
remain in full force to the end of the World as our duty: and dangerous it is
to labor to make it void; for by the same Argument may an Enemy lay waste, and
take away another, yea, and consequently every one.

Arg. 2. Because it is a Foundation-principle of God's House, or one of the
great Pillars (next to Christ) on which it is built, it must needs remain; and
very dangerous it is for any to take away a Foundation-stone.

It Is very absurd (says Mr. Blackwood on Matthew. p. 688.) to think that one of
the six Foundation-principles, commended to us by the Apostle, should cease,
and all the other remain to the end of the World: Nay, is not Imposition of
Hands placed in the midst, betwixt Faith and Repentance on the one side, and
Eternal Judgment on the other? it is fenced in on every side, there is no coming
to slight it. It Is absurd to think the Apostle would place one temporary
Principle, that was to last but a short time, amongst five perpetual
Principles, and call them all by the same name of a Foundation, etc.

Arg. 3. Because the Promise of the Spirit is very extensive; it is made to all
believing and obedient Souls to the end of the World; Matt. 28. ult. Teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with
you always to the end of the World. John 14.15, 16, 17. If you love me, keep my
Commandments; and I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth, which
the World cannot receive, etc.

Dr. Jer. Tailor, p. 53. speaks excellently concerning the perpetuity of this
Ordinance: And from this very ground, take his own words; The perpetuity of
this holy Rite appears, 1. Because the great Gift of the Holy Ghost was
promised to abide with the Church for ever: Repent, and be baptized every one
of you, and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost; not the meanest Person
amongst you but shall receive this great thing; for the Promise is to you, and
to your Children, and to all that are afar off, even so many as the Lord our
God shall call; this Promise is made to all, and unto all for ever. And
presently, speaking as to Laying on of Hands, as God's way for the ministering
of it; I say, such a Solemnity (says he) it is not easy to be supposed should
be appointed; that is, it is not imaginable that a solemn Rite, annexed to a
perpetual Promise, should be transient and temporary: for by the nature of
Relatives, they must be of equal abode; the Promise is of a thing for ever; the
Ceremony or Rite was annexed to the Promise, and therefore this also must abide
for ever.

Arg. 4. Because the Spirit which is promised, is the Comforter that leads us
into all Truth, and helps the Saints in their Testimony and Sufferings for
Christ; and it is that by which they are sealed also to the day of Redemption,
Ephesians. 1.13. Who after that ye believed, ye were sealed by that Spirit of
Promise. He speaks it to the Ephesians, who well understood his meaning, by
remembering what was done to them by the Apostle; who a while before, after he
had baptized them, laid his Hands upon them (says the Doctor) so they
received, and were sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise.

Now do not we as much need the Spirit's guidance, and to be born up in our
Testimony, Sufferings and Temptations, as the Saints of former Ages; and to be
sealed by the Spirit of Promise as they did? Why then should we not be willing
to wait on God, in the same way he has prescribed, for receiving a further
increase of it, even in which the primitive Saints did yield obedience?

Object. But some will say, We have the Spirit in as great a measure as you,
who never came under Laying on of Hands; and what greater measure have you
after your obedience thereto than before?

Ans. 1. We dare not boast of our Indowments; we are poor and needy, and
therefore willing to use all Advantages, and be found in every Ordinance, to
meet with more of Christ and his Spirit; and if you have so much, that you need
not pray, nor use the means God directs to for obtaining more, it is a rare
state you are arrived to.

2. If God be better than his Word, we will not complain; he has many ways to
convey his Spirit into our hearts; yet this is the great Ordinance for
distributing of it to baptized Believers. But may we not say with one of the
Ancients, By this rite of Imposition of Hands, God has promised, and the
Saints received the Holy Ghost? for tho (says he) the Spirit of God was given
extraregularly, and at all times as God pleased, yet this of Imposition of
Hands was (...), this was the Ministry of the Spirit; we receive Christ when we
hear, and obey his Word, we eat Christ by Faith; and yet the blessed Eucharist
is (...), the Ministry of the Body and Blood of Christ: the Lord's Supper is
appointed ritually to convey Christ's Body and Blood to us; so is Laying on of
Hands ordained ritually to give us the Spirit.

Now probably some who are against the Lord's Supper, may say, they feed upon
Christ, and have as much Communion with him, and Faith in him, as many of us
who often partake thereof; and may be can say as much on this account, as you
on the other: will you therefore neglect your Duty touching breaking of Bread?

There is a Promise of the Spirit made in Baptism; yet some may say, they have
more of the Spirit than you or I, and yet never were baptized. Cornelius, tho
he had received a large measure of the Spirit, yet was very willing to be
baptized, and to do what ever Peter, from Christ's command, enjoined him. And
thus the Objection is answered.

Object. But extraordinary Effects did accompany this Administration, and such
do not follow now; therefore the thing you plead for is ceased.

Answ. Let Dr. Tailor speak now, for I have largely answered this Objection
elsewhere, before I met with the learned Doctor: If this be all (says he, p.
57 -- 59.) that can be said in opposition to it, it is infinitely vain.

1. In the days of the Apostles, the Holy Spirit produced miraculous Effects,
but neither always, nor at all in all Men; Are all workers of Miracles? do all
speak with Tongues? etc. the Wind blows where it lists; some have Gifts
after this manner, some after that.

2. These Gifts were not necessary at all Times, any more than to all Persons;
but the Promise of the Holy Spirit did belong to all, and was performed to all,
but not in the like manner. Stephen was full of the Holy Spirit, of Faith, and
Power, the Holy Ghost was given to him, to fulfill his Faith principally;
working Miracles was but collateral, and incident: but there is also an
Infusion of the Holy Spirit to all, and that for ever, The manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every Man, to profit withal: And therefore if the Grace be
given to all, there is no reason that the ritual Ministration of that Grace
should cease, on pretense that the Spirit is not given extraordinarily.

3. Those extraordinary Gifts were indeed at first necessary; (he gives several
reasons thereof) one, because of them who could not receive the understanding
of an incorporeal Nature; that if afterward they be not so done, they may be
believed by those things which were already done: another, because of the state
of the Church. But the greater Gifts (says he) were to abide for ever;
therefore it is observable that St. Paul says, that the Gift of Tongues is one
of the least and most useless things, a mere sign, and not so much as a sign to
a Believer, but to Infidels and Unbelievers.

4. To every ordinary and perpetual Ministry, at first there were extraordinary
Effects, and miraculous Consignations: We find 3000 converted at one Sermon,
5000 at another; and Persons were miraculously cured by Prayer, at the
visitation of the Sick; and Devils cast out in the conversion of a Sinner: And
now tho we see no such extraordinary Effects, it follows not that the
Visitation of the Sick, Preaching, Sermons, etc. are not ordinary and perpetual
Ministrations; and therefore to fancy that Invocation of the Holy Spirit, and
Imposition of Hands is to cease, when the extraordinary and temporary
Contingencies of it are gone, is too trifling a fancy to be put into the
balance against so sacred an Institution, relying upon so many Scriptures.

5. He argues yet further, showing tho the Gifts of Tongues, and outward
Miracles, remain not with the Church, yet the greater, or more transcendent
Gifts of the Spirit do continue, viz. Sanctification and Power, Fortitude and
Faith, Hope and Love, etc. These are (says he) the Miracles of Grace, to throw
down the pride of Lucifer, to tread on the great Dragon, and to triumph over
our spiritual Enemies, to cure a diseased Soul, to be unharmed by the poison of
Temptation, etc. This is more than to receive the Spirit, or a power of
Miracles, and supernatural Products in a natural Matter; for this is from a
supernatural Principle, to receive supernatural Aids to a supernatural End, in
the Diviner spirit of a Man; and this being more miraculous than the other, it
ought not to be pretended that the discontinuance of extraordinary Miracles
should cause the discontinuance of an ordinary Ministration; and this is that
(says he) which I was to prove.

He proceeds to other Reasons, but I think he has said enough; and therefore I
shall return to Mr. Danvers, p. 48. who labors against the stream, and would
make us believe that the Laying on of Hands upon Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.6. and 1 Timothy 4.14. are the same; which must be rejected, since several Reasons have
been given to the contrary, that have not in the least been removed. That
Timothy had Hands laid upon him twice, it is evident; i. e. soon after his
Baptism, and when ordained to Office. One good reason for it is given by Mr.
Blackwood: Paul (says he) speaks of such Gifts, as were given by the Laying on
of his own Hands, (...); but the Imposition in Ordination was by the Hands of
the Eldership, 1 Timothy 4.14. where the Greek words are (...), signifying a
conjunction of Persons; but 2 Timothy 1.6. is (...), to denote the act of one Man.

And doubtless such an Exposition as Mr. Danvers gives, too much reflects on
the Apostle, who hated nothing more than Pride and Arrogance: Surely he would
not have appropriated to himself alone, what was done by others as well as
himself.

But again, I am persuaded our Brethren are sensible of what has been said in
respect of those Gifts Timothy received through Layings on of Hands, which have
been showed by several to be different, (one only relating to his Office, or
Ministerial Power committed to him; the other to such Gifts as are proper to
all the Saints) tho they take no notice of it.

I am loath to say, that all that Mr. Danvers has done in his small Tract, has
been to darken Counsel with words without knowledge; yet one would admire to
consider how confusedly he has writ on this Subject, who seems to blame us for
being so positive as to what Laying on of Hands is intended in Heb. 6.1, 2.
which is, as if a Master should blame his Scholar for affirming A is A, and B
is B: Surely if we have not perfectly learned our first Lesson, or Rudiments of
our Profession, we shall never be good Tutors of others: The Apostle blames the
Hebrews, chapter 5.22. for being such ill Proficients, that they had gone no
further; and you seem to blame us for going so far, as to affirm positively
what are the first Principles of the Doctrine of Christ. But give me leave to
tell you, it is as easy to know what Laying on of Hands is intended Heb. 6. as
what Baptism our Savior refers to, Mat. 28.20.

But secondly, You may be assured were we at a loss in the case, we should
never come to learn of you; for Mr. D. by his own grant, page 49. signifies he
had not attained to a certain knowledge of it, nor was able to be positive in
the case; many things being hard and difficult to be understood, which those
that are ignorant, wrest, says he, etc.

Answ. No marvel if ignorant Men are at a loss, and captivated in their
understandings, abusing and wresting those mysterious places, or things
contained in Paul's Epistles, when Men of knowledge shall lose themselves in
such a plain and easy path, I knew a Man (may be learned too) who a while ago,
knew not but that Baptism, and Laying on of hands, etc. in Heb. 6.1, 2. might
intend those legal Washings, and Laying on of Hands upon the heads of Bullocks,
sacrificed in the time of the Law. I am glad to find other Opposers of this
Truth of another Judgment. Would Men deny themselves, and not trust their own
understandings, they might soon see the way plain before them, that those first
Principles of the Oracles of God, called Milk for Babes, and not strong Meat,
are none of those things spoken of by Peter, so hard to be understood.

But since Mr. D. says, he will not leave us in the dark, but resolves to give
us his apprehension of this Text, in which he thinks he has the mind of Christ,
page 49, 50. we will proceed.

Yet this let me premise, that what he has laid down as his Judgment on this
Text, Mr. Tomlinson has very well answered in a Treatise lately printed, page
22, 23. and showed the ridiculousness of such an Exposition. I fear Mr. D. did
not implore the Throne of Grace for Light and Direction before he begun to
write on this Subject, he is so much beclouded as to the meaning of this
Scripture. He conceives, that the six Principles mentioned here, are very
comprehensive, and may take in the ten Commandments, the Lord's Supper, and
several other things: Nay he says, that Repentance and Faith may comprehend
all, both the negative and positive part of Holiness.

Answ. 1. If the whole of Religion, or Doctrine of Godliness is comprehended in
these six Principles, why should the Apostle call them first Principles? it is
improper to call those the first that comprehend all: by this Argument, when
the Foundation is laid, the whole Building is finished.

2. And if the whole of Piety, or Holiness, be included in the two first
Principles, Repentance, and Faith, there was no need to enumerate any more:
Nay, by this Argument, obedience to Christ in Baptism, and Laying on of Hands,
together with the belief of the Resurrection and Eternal Judgment, are not
comprehended in the negative or positive part of Holiness: to what purpose then
have we spent our time in writing about either of these Principles?

3. But again, as Mr. Tomlinson minds, How could it be the weakness of these
Hebrews, that they had need to be taught them again? or how could the Apostle
say, he would leave them to go on to perfection? etc, Surely if in these first
Principles all Religion be comprehended, he would not do well to leave them; it
might rather have been their perfection ever to remain there, viz. in
preaching, studying and practicing of them, and go no further; or if we must
needs leave them, we must leave all Religion and Holiness, and so turn Ranters,
Atheists, or Quakers.

4. But, if the whole Body of Religion and Holiness is comprehended in these
six Principles, then no Christian had gone further; nay, nor perfectly learned
the A B C of his Profession, and we must always be learning them* and so ever
be but Babes in Christ: and no reason had the Apostle to blame the Hebrews that
they had gone no further, since in those beginning Principles were comprehended
the whole of their Duty.

5. And since these Principles are in the Apostle's sense to be looked upon as
Milk, and for Babes; what then is the Meat? and who are the strong Men? Surely
when we have done with our Milk, the Feast is ended; and there is no
after-Dish, to speak according to the nature of this Metaphor.

Again, P. 45. as Mr. Danvers would have Repentance and Faith to comprehend
both the negative and positive part of Holiness; so he proceeds to tell us how
comprehensive Laying on of hands is; That it takes in all sorts that are spoken
of, viz. Miracles, Healings, and Gifts, that were for the Confirmation of the
Gospel, and the Investiture of Church Officers, etc.

Answ. This is as true as the former, and as good Divinity every whit; and when
he has answered our Arguments against this strange Exposition, we will argue
that Point further. But does he not hereby make Laying on of hands for
miraculous Healing a perpetual Administration, it being a part (in his sense)
of the Foundation of God's House? We have showed why it cannot intend that on
Sick Persons, nor on Officers of the Church; and as to extraordinary Gifts for
Confirmation of the Gospel, if he mean that spoken of Acts 8.17. and 19.6. we
utterly deny it, and clearly prove the contrary, that it was not the end of
that Service, etc. no more than of Assembling together, Prayer, Preaching, etc.
since such Miraculous Effects followed more or less every one of those, and
other Gospel-ministrations, as well as Laying on of hands on baptized
Believers. This considered, it is strange he should reason after this manner.

But we further say, there is but one Laying on of hands intended in Heb. 6.1,
2. because it is expressed in the singular number, Laying on of hands, and not
Layings, etc.

Mr. Danvers says This is a mere Criticism, and has nothing of truth in it.
He affirms that Laying on of hands, is as plural as Baptism. This is all the
Answer he gives; see page 51.

Answ. If a bare Affirmation may be taken for a Proof in this, we are answered,
and Mr. Danvers has done his business; what is here more? I desire to know how
he would write were he to distinguish between one Hand and several, since Hands
are in the Plural Number? The Administrator is not to lay one only, but both
his Hands: there can be no distinguishing (if this Man is not mistaken) between
one and diverse kinds; for wherever the Scripture speaks but of one sort (in our
Opponents judgment) it is express, as it is here, viz. Laying on of hands, and
so as plural: see 1 Timothy 4.14. I need not say more, only cite a Passage of a
Learned Writer upon this very Place, and Objection; It Is most palpably apparent
(says he) to such as are not asleep in their reading of that Text, Heb. 6.1,
2. that it speaks in the singular Number, of one Laying on of hands alone, and
not of Laying on of hands, as it must have been expressed, had he meant more
kinds of Imposition of hands than one: for tho Hands be the Plural Number, 'yet
[note] Laying, which is the Phrase you speak to, or else you speak nihil ad
Rhombum, is a Substantive of the Singular Number, both in the English and the
Greek.

But to proceed: Mr. D. p. 51, 52. gives us the ground of his Offense
concerning the nature or manner of our maintaining this Principle of Imposition
of Hands.

1. Negatively, he tells us wherein his offense lies not, viz. Not because we
pray for a blessing on our Brethren and Sisters, or for the practice or gesture
of Lifting up, or Laying on of hands; provided it be not urged as of absolute
necessity, etc. But,

2. When imposed as an Institution of Christ, a beginning Doctrine, or Oracle
of God, a Foundation of Christian Religion, to which every Disciple of Christ
ought to submit on penalty of Noncommunion, for rejecting a Fundamental
Principle, tho not one word of Institution, Command, Precept, or Example for
the same; and that under pretense of receiving more of the Spirit of Christ
thereby, which is a Spirit of Love, Meekness, etc. There appears the Spirit of
uncharitableness, judging. rending, and dividing the Body of Christ, and for
asserting for Doctrine and Practice, the Customs and Commands of Men: it is for
these things our Offenses lie so well founded upon Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.23. Rev.
22.18. Prove. 30.6.

Answ. 1. Could we have such a liberty as to make a holy Institution of Christ
only a formal or civil Ceremony or Gesture, or a thing indifferent, to do, or
not do; our Brethren, it seems, would not be offended.

2. Were it a true Charge he brings, he would have cause to be offended with
us; but whether it be a Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, and an Oracle of
God, or a Tradition of Men, which we contend for, let the impartial Reader
judge. Here is nothing offered by our Opponent to deserve any further Answer; it
calls more for Reprehension than Confutation. Who seemed more censorious than
Mr. Danvers, who charged his Brethren with what they most abominated, viz.
tearing and dividing the Body of Christ, Will Worship, nay being under the
dreadful Curse of Adding to the Word of God?

3. Whether we are guilty of Schism, rending and tearing the Body of Christ, or
those who neglect his Words, or Foundation-Principle of his Doctrine (I might
say reject it) is fully manifested in a late Book Entitled, The Searchers for
Schism searched, that has not yet been answered.

4. May not the Independents and others charge you on the account of Baptism,
with rending and tearing the Body of Christ, since you deny Breaking of Bread
with them, on that Consideration as some do with you about Laying on of hands,
a Principle of the same nature? Does not Mr. Wills in his Answer to your former
Book of Baptism, charge you in much like words, as you do us here? And truly,
if I mistake not, Mr. D. has cleared us from Schism, and well answered himself
in his late Reply, Page 169, 170, 171. as he says of Baptism: Mr. D 's
Innocence and Truth vindicated.
Suffer me to speak of Laying on of hands; There is nothing in the Principle it
self but what inclines to Piety and Unity: It being designed by Christ not only
to promote Sanctification, but to further Love and Peace, in the way of
Righteousness and Truth.

Why should Baptism be esteemed the whole and only Inlet into the visible
Church, when it is but one of the Six Fundamental Principles of
Church-Constitution? Why should he have a greater esteem for one than for
another Institution? Did our Brethren see Laying on of hands to be an Ordinance
of the same nature with Baptism, I might hope they would not be of the mind
some are of: it is sad when a Fundamental Principle of Christian Religion shall
be made indifferent. I have a tender respect to all that love Christ, yet dare
not violate that Holy Order left in his Word, knowing how severely he has
manifested his displeasure against such as have been negligent therein.

5. Now tho we grant Baptism an Initiating Ordinance, yet not that alone. There
are two Doors to be passed through, (says a Learned Writer) before we can come
ad adyta and intima Ecclesiae penetralia, viz. Baptism, and Laying on of hands:
whereof the latter properly and immediately gives admittance.

Mr. Hanmer, p. 22. cites some ancient Christians speaking thus: Confirmatione
protinus data plena authoritas, and jus Corpori Christi and sanguini cum
omnibus Fid^libus communicandi: that is, Confirmation (or Imposition of hands)
forthwith gives full authority and right of Communion in the Body and Blood of
Christ. And in another place says the same Person; He that was not confirmed,
was not admitted to the Eucharist.

Doubtless if the Church of Judea, first planted in the order of the Gospel, is
to be followed, or if that which was the practice of some of the Churches, was
also of every Church, then both these Ordinances, as well as the other
beginning Principles, must precede, or are prerequisite to Church Communion and
Fellowship.

Object. But does not this straiten and narrow the Interest of Jesus Christ?

Answ. Mr. Danvers's Reply to Mr. Wills about Baptism, is a very good answer:
viz. This (says he) is no other than Reformation in all Ages (since the
Antichristian defection) has been charged with, and particularly that
Reformation that has been endeavored in that other Ordinance of the Lord's
Supper; therefore the Presbyterians cry out against the Independents for sinful
Schism, Fomenters of Faction, and narrowing of Christ's Interest, in their
respective Separations, and Church-Communions. The same do the Prelates say to
the Presbyterians; and the very same do the Papists say to the Episcoparians.

If Mr. D. in the work of Reformation excels, or has more light than such he
speaks of, in respect of Church-Constitution and Communion, and resolves to
pursue his work, tho he is reproached on this account; why should he blame us,
who, according to our light, labor after a pure and perfect Reformation? or
does he judge he has got to such a degree of knowledge, that he is perfect, and
needs no more light nor instruction, and that the last Stone of Reformation and
Restoration here is laid, because Baptism shines forth in its primitive purity?
Remember him who said (such was his Humility) What I know not, teach thou me.
and Apollos, tho mighty in the Scriptures, could stoop to the Counsel and
Instruction of Aquila and Priscilla, tho much inferior to him, who taught him
the way of God more perfectly, Act. 18.26.

6. Ought not we to stand fast, and hold the Traditions we have been taught?
and is not this worthy of Commendation? what says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.2.
Now I praise you Brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep the
Ordinances as they were delivered unto you. And are we not commanded to
withdraw from every Brother that walks disorderly, and not after the Traditions
we have received? Besides, can we comfortably have Communion with such as
oppose a Command of God, nay, that make it but a Tradition of Men, and an
Antichristian Innovation? And as in all Fundamentals of Salvation, so in those
of Church-Constitution, we ought to be agreed, before we can orderly sit down
together.

7. But to say no more, I would caution all our Brethren to take heed what they
affirm on this account, I mean concerning us, and this sacred Institution,
since they seem so cloudy in their understanding about those Scriptures urged
as the great Warranty for our Practice: If God has hid (for reasons best known
to himself) this Truth of Imposition of hands from their eyes, as he has the
holy Ordinance of Baptism from the Independents, etc. it will be their wisdom
to forbear Reflections; let them not be angry, lest it be found to be a Truth
of God* and they consequently prove offended at Christ himself, who left this
as well as Baptism amongst the beginning-principles of his Doctrine. Why should
they be offended at us for having an equal love to all the Commandments of
Christ? I would hope they have reason to judge, it is from hence we so earnestly
contend with them on this account.

8. I cannot but marvel, that our Brethren should call Laying on of hands, a
Doctrine, or Tradition of Men, and render those who plead for it, guilty of
adding to the Word of God; and yet receive such into Communion at the Lord's
Table, as are in the practice of it. What uncharitable thoughts do they retain
of their Brethren? and what guilt, on this Consideration, do they bring on
their own Souls?

But let me close with one Caution more; since they know it is as sinful every
way to diminish from God's Word as to alter or add to it, let them take heed
lest they be found guilty therein.

We have now traced Mr. D. quite through, and have little more to do: In page
53. he labors to remove an Objection brought against him from Antiquity; and
since he has fairly stated it, take it in his own words.

As to the point of Antiquity, tho it is granted the Ancients, and their
Followers ever since, have erred not only in the Subject, but in diverse
Circumstances about this Rite of Imposition of hands, yet in-as-much as there
has been all along such a witness born to the thing it self, it makes for its
Apostolicalness, and confirms our Practice therein. Now take his Answer to it:
It does not appear (says he) that such a Witness has been born all along
thereto for Mr. Baxter ingenuously acknowledges that Justin Martyr, Ireneus,
and others in those times are silent about it, etc. And those Authorities that
are pretended to assert the same in the first Centuries, have been proved to be
spurious and supposititious. 2ly. That pretense of ancient Prescription,
without the Word of God to warrant it, can never justify the Divine Authority
of any Practice.

Answ. 1. We fully agree with him, viz. whatever is found in ancient
Prescriptions concerning this, or any Practice, signifies nothing, if God's
Word does not witness to it: But having such evident proof from God's Word to
warrant this Precept, we never judged it worth while to search into* Authors
concerning it; neither should we have cited any now, had we not been forced by
our Opposers. And as to what he says concerning Mr. Baxter's ingenuous
Confession, that Justin Martyr and Ireneus are both silent about it, it
signifies very little; for first, we have nothing but Mr. Baxter's say-so for
it, who may be has overlooked some places of these Authors, or probably not met
with all their Works. But,

2. Since their Silence only is pretended, it carries no great force with it;
must we of necessity produce all the Ancients expressly witnessing thereto, or
else is all nothing that is brought from Antiquity in the Case? We have
mentioned several ancient Witnesses, and some of the 2d and 3d Centuries, which
are neither spurious, supposititious, suborned Witnesses, nor Knights of the
Post, tho Mr. D. is pleased so to call them.

And now to conclude, we must say again, against what is mentioned, p. 54. that
there is a clearer Precept for Imposition of hands on baptized Believers as
such, than can be urged for that on Church Officers, or the observation of the
first Day of the Week, etc.

I have ground to conclude Mr. D. thinks it his duty to keep holy the first Day
of the Week, as the Christian Sabbath.

We gave Mr. D. no ground to say that which he did of us, viz. Reproach the
Wisdom of Christ, and slight the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, as tho we
had not a sufficient Direction therein in all parts of God's Worship. God
forbid we should be guilty of such things! Rome and others may herein justly be
charged; but our Souls witness against it as an abominable Assertion.

And that remarkable Expression of Dr. Owen's, as Mr. D. calls it, we can with
all readiness and simplicity close in with; and judge it necessary once more to
recite it, viz. This then they who hold Communion with Christ, are careful of,
they will admit nothing, practice nothing in the Worship of God, private or
public, but what they have his Warrant for: for unless it comes in his Name,
with Thus says the Lord Jesus, they will not hear an Angel from Heaven; they
know the Apostles themselves were to teach the Saints only what Christ
commanded them. Communion with God, p. 171.

The Doctor's Rule is ever to be followed, the Lord open his eyes; for how does
this clearly overthrow all his Arguments for Infant Baptism? etc. But what
injury does it do us, who can say, Thus says the Lord Jesus? it is left on
record amongst the first Principles of his Doctrine, Heb. 6. 1, 2. it is a
Command of God, if the Oracles of God be his Command, Heb. 5.12. which sure
none will deny; since the Apostle Paul, and Stephen (a Man full of the Holy
Spirit) affirm them so to be. We believe what the Doctor says, viz. that the
Apostles were to teach nothing but what Christ commanded them, to whom they
were obedient therein: and surely then all may see a Divine Institution for
this Practice; for was it not taught to the Hebrew Church? Heb. 5.12. And did
not Peter and John teach it to the Saints at Samaria? and Paul to the Disciples
at Ephesus, and to Timothy? yea, and made them obedient thereto? Acts 8.17. and
19.6. 2 Timothy 1.6.

If Laying on of hands were not an Ordinance of God, and of Divine Institution
(says Mr. Blackwood Annot. on Matthew. p. 690.) then the Apostles in the
administration thereof had practiced Will Worship; nay, which is more, had left
a Rule of Will Worship unto us, Heb. 6.1. But it is absurd to think that the
Apostle would do either of these; therefore Laying on of hands upon baptized
Persons is an Apostolical Institution.

Far be it from us, or any Christian, to harbor so uncharitable thoughts of
the blessed Apostles, viz. that they would do any thing in Christ's Name
without his Warrant. If any Man, says Paul, think himself to be a Prophet, or
Spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things I write unto you, are the
Commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14.37. Compare this with Romans 15.18. For I
will not dare to speak of any of those things, which Christ has not wrought by
me, to make the Gentiles obedient, by word or deed.

CHAP. VIII.
Containing a few Motives or Arguments, provoking and encouraging to Obedience
to the Holy Ordinance of Imposition of Hands.

BEfore I conclude, I judge it necessary to offer two or three Motives, to stir
up to Obedience such as desire to be found sincere Followers of the Lord Jesus,
and of the primitive Saints, and to walk in all the Commandments of the Lord
blameless; and to consider, whether they do not lie short of their Duty and
Privilege, whilst they omit or neglect this precious (tho despised) Ordinance
of Imposition of Hands.

Motive 1. Brethren, Consider, you have the holy Pattern of the Saints of old
to stir you up to a diligent search in the Book of God's Law, to find out what
his Mind and Will may be concerning you. How glad were the Children of Israel,
when upon enquiry they found out that long-neglected Ordinance of sitting in
Booths in the Feast of Tabernacles? Neh. 8.14, -- 17. they did not then contend
against it, or raise Objections, saying it has not been done for many years:
Samuel, David, Hezekiah, and Josiah did it not, who had glorious Light, and
were great Reformers; and we have no immediate Vision, or miraculous Appearance
of God to revive this Institution.

We find nothing of this nature stumbled them, but as they found it written,
they set about the Work, and there was great Joy: They were not like many Souls
in our days, who make Objections against Baptism and Laying on of hands; such
and such eminent Men (say they) see it not, practice it not; it is not an
Institution of Christ; if it were, sure Mr. such a one (a learned Minister and
Brother) would be for it; he is a Man of greater light and understanding than
you, etc. It Is no marvel they are thus beclouded, whilst their eyes are so fixed
on Men; and instead of walking by the perfect Light of God's Word, walk by the
Light of those that are so imperfect.

Motive 2. Consider that by a universal obedience to Christ, you will appear to
be his Disciples indeed, and of the Remnant of the Woman's Seed, Rev. 12.17.
Yea you will enter into strong bands of Alliance and Friendstip with the Lord
Jesus: You are my Friends (says he) if you do whatsoever I command you, Joh.
15.14. This also will add boldness to the Saints. Then shall I not be ashamed
(says David) when I have respect to all thy Commandments.

Mot. 3. Let the Nature of the Ordinance move you to consider your fault and
neglect herein; and as you desire that the Church you have given up your selves
to walk in the order of the Gospel with, being knit and fitly framed together,
may grow into a Holy Temple in the Lord. Be sure see there is no defect in the
Foundation, take heed it wants not one principal Pillar; and let none speak
slightingly of this Institution, lest he provoke Jesus Christ thereby. Did he
command any thing in vain? And by the same Argument you adventure to cast off
this Principle, another may do so by Baptism, and consequently all the rest;
and so in time God's Spiritual House be like unto the literal Temple, viz. not
have one Stone left upon another which will not be thrown down.

Motive 4. Consider that those blessed Promises God has made of giving the
Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, which the World cannot receive, are entailed to
the obedient Soul; if we will have the Blessing, we must be found in our Duty.
And how has God crowned this Service, as has been showed, with wonderful
manifestations thereof? Nay, consider what measure soever God has given thee of
his Spirit, by waiting upon him in other Ordinances; yet this of Imposition of
hands Christ has appointed as the Ministry thereof to baptized Believers as
such: to every particular Institution there is some special and peculiar
Blessing annexed; and it is ordained as God's ordinary way for the conveyance of
it, as I might largely show, in respect of Preaching the Word, Baptism, the
Lord's Supper, Church Censures, etc. and the like also in this of Laying on of
hands: and tho God is not tied to this or that Ordinance, yet he has tied us
to the exact observation of them: He may anticipate his own Order, and give us
the Mercy promised (in part) in some other way; yet we ought not to neglect our
Duty.

Because I have obtained Faith in some other than God's usual way for the
begetting it, shall I not hear the Word preached, for the further increasing it
in my Heart? Again, because I have remission of Sins, and other Blessings
promised in Baptism before baptized, shall I reject that Ordinance? Sure
Cornelius did not do so, Acts 10. 45, 47. And again, I feed by Faith on Jesus
Christ, and receive his Flesh which is Meat indeed, and his Blood which is
Drink indeed; shall I therefore refuse the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper,
which is appointed as the Ministry of his Body and Blood? God forbid. Even so,
let none neglect this Appointment, nothwithstanding any Gift, or Measure of the
Holy Spirit they have received, since it has pleased God to direct to it, and
left it in his House as a perpetual Ministration; Destroy it not, for a
Blessing that is in it, Isa. 65.8.

Motive 5. Consider the great need thou have of the Holy Spirit, yea and of a
further increase thereof, tho I should grant thou have received it already; for
without it none can savingly believe, nor call Jesus Lord. Yet there is a
further Promise made to thee, as thou art a Believer in Jesus Christ: and what
can a poor Saint do without the Spirit? what Temptations do thou meet with,
what Lusts and Corruptions still have thou to mortify? and what outward
Tribulations art thou (who professest the Gospel) exposed to? O therefore use
all means, and particularly this, which God injoins thee, that thou may
obtain a further measure and increase of the Spirit of God.

Motive 6. Lastly, Consider the excellent and unspeakable worth and usefulness
of the Holy Spirit; O what spiritual Profit and Advantage do the Saints of God
receive hereby!

1. It Is the Holy Spirit that enlightens the eyes of our Understandings, 1 Cor.
2. 10, 11, 12, 13. Ephesians. 1.17. we cannot see afar off, without our Eyes are
anointed with this Eye Salve: And O what Beauty do we hereby behold in Jesus
Christ! how are our Souls taken with invisible Objects! and what an empty and
nothing-World is this, when we look through the Prospect-glass of the Spirit of
God upon it!

2. It Is the Holy Spirit that revives and quickens us, and makes us lively in
the Paths of Righteousness, Joh. 6.63. Col. 2.13.

3. It Is the Spirit that leads us in the way we should walk, Romans 8.14. yea and
makes them Paths of peace and pleasantness unto our Souls, Prove. 3.17. it is he
that guides us into all Truth, and brings Christ's Words to our remembrance,
Joh. 14.26.

4. It Is the Holy Spirit that comforts us when cast down; it is from hence we
receive all Heavenly Consolation, Joh. 14. 16, 26.

5. It Is the Holy Spirit that makes us profit under the Word and means of
Grace; it is that which makes our Souls to grow and flourish in the Courts of
the Lord's House, Heb. 4.2. 1 Cor. 3.6.

6. It Is the Spirit that helps us to pray, helps our Infirmities, and teaches
us what to pray for, and gives us access at the Throne of Grace; yea makes
Intercession for us with groanings that cannot be uttered, Romans 8.26.

7. It Is by the Spirit we cry Abba Father; it is that which bears witness with
our Spirits, that we are the Children of God, Romans 8. 13, 15, 16.

8. It Is by the Holy Spirit we mortify the Deeds of the body, Gal. 5.22. it is
by that we live and stand, and are confirmed in Christ Jesus, and sanctified
throughout.

9. It Is from the Holy Spirit that all heavenly Grace and spiritual Gifts flow;
it is he that divides to every man severally as he will, 1 Cor. 12. 5, 8, 9.

10. It Is the Holy Spirit which is the Earnest of our Inheritance, and which
gives an Assurance of the purchased Possession unto our Souls, Ephesians. 1. 10, 14.

11. It Is the Holy Spirit by which we are sealed to the day of Redemption, Ephesians.
1.13.

12. It Is by the Spirit we are made strong, and enabled to overcome all
Enemies, and helped to triumph over Death, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 57. it is by the
Spirit we know that when our earthly House is dissolved we have a Building of
God, a House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. These
things considered, let none blame us that we so earnestly contend for the Holy
Ordinance of Prayer with Imposition of Hands, in which God has promised, and so
sweetly communicated, as through a Conduit-Pipe, such blessed Water of Life to
our Souls. Shall it not trouble our Spirits, when Persons labor to take away
the Childrens Bread, or spill any of their sweet and heavenly Milk upon the
ground?

CHAP. IX.
In answer to the Conclusion of Mr. Danvers's Book.

Mr. Danvers's Conclusion.
THus you have had a candid Account of the rise, growth, and progress of this
Rite of Confirmation, or Laying on of hands, from the beginning to this day,
(amongst all that have owned it) with the Authorities on which it has been
found, and imposed; together with a genuine Examination of the Grounds and
Reasons each Party have given to justify the same: And may we not upon the
whole, fairly come to the following Conclusions? viz.

1. That there does not appear to be the least Scripture - precept, or Practice
for any such Ordinance of Confirmation, or an imposing of hands upon all the
Baptized before they break bread, or are admitted into Church Communion.

2. That the Instances produced to prove it an Apostolical Tradition, are
impious Lies and Forgeries.

3. That the Authorities by which it has been heretofore enjoined, were
nothing but Antichristian Can. and Decrees.

4. That the most eminent Witnesses and Confessors that opposed the
Antichristian Usurpations and Innovations, have all along witnessed against,
and impugned this of Confirmation, viz. the Novations, Donatists, Waldenses,
Greek Churches, and Wicklissians.

All which are worthy the serious consideration of all sober and judicious
Christians, and especially recommended to them, who having rejected Infants,
and embraced Believers Baptism, do yet cleave to this Practice, with these
following Observations, viz.

1. It is most manifest that those Popes, Councils and Fathers, that have
enjoined and imposed Infants sprinkling for a Sacrament, or an Ordinance of
Christ, have enjoined this also as such.

2. That the principal Arguments pretended for the one, have been urged and
pleaded for the other also, viz. Apostolical Tradition, and pretended
Inferences and Consequences from Scripture.

3. That the famous Churches and Confessors, that have opposed Infants
sprinkling as superstitious, Popish and Antichristian, have upon the same
account opposed this also.

4. That it does not appear that any baptized Church or People, did ever in any
Age or Country own such a Principle, or Practice to this day, except some in
this Nation in these late times.

CHAP. IX.
In answer to the Conclusion of Mr. Danvers's Book.

The Conclusion of this Treatise, in opposition to his.
REider, Thou have had a faithful, and impartial Account of the rise, growth,
and progress, of this holy, tho contemned Ordinance of Imposition of hands,
from the beginning of the Gospel-Ministration to this day; and how asserted
amongst many Persuasions, with the Authorities on which it has been enjoined;
together with the grounds given by Ancient and Modern Writers to justify it:
And from the whole we also may come to these following Conclusions; viz.

1. That there appears full and ample Precept and Practice from Scripture for
this Ordinance of Imposition of hands on all baptized Believers as such, before
admitted to the Lord's Table.

2. That the Instances to prove it an Apostolical Tradition or Institution, are
the pious Sayings, and written Verities of Christ's Disciples.

3. That the Authorities by which it was at first enjoined, were none else save
Great Jehovah, Father, Son and Holy Spirit.

4. That many eminent Writers both ancient and modern, have born witness for it.

All which is worthy to be minded, and commended to the consideration of those
who having rejected Infants, and embraced Believers Baptism, do oppose a
Principle of the same nature, and annexed to it, with these following
Observations.

1. It is most manifest that those Popes, Councils, and Fathers, that have
corrupted, polluted, and changed the holy Ordinance of Baptism, and the Lord's
Supper, did also change, alter, and corrupt this of Imposition of Hands.

2. That tho the principal Arguments the Church of Rome, and others who have
drunk of the Whore's Cup, do bring to defend the Rite called Confirmation, is
humane Tradition, and far-fetched Consequences from Scripture, yet there is
plain Scripture Proof for the holy Institution of Imposition of hands upon
baptized Believers.

3. That many godly Persons in several ages have opposed Popish laying on of
hands, on the same account that we reject Popish Baptism, and not otherwise.

4. It appears not that any baptized Church in any Country, have denied
Imposition of hands upon Believers baptized, as such, to be an Institution of
Jesus Christ, nor ever writ against it, as some in this Nation have done; (no
ways for their Credit, nor Honor of the Gospel.)

These things being so, it may be enquired what ground and reason our Brethren
in this Nation had at first, or have now, to oppose this Divine Institution of
the Lord Jesus Christ.

A brief Reply to a Book called, A Treatise concerning Laying on of Hands.
Written by a nameless Author, and published in the Year 1691.
THE first Reason (he says) why they cannot own Laying on of Hands on all
Believers, is, because there must be a Command, or at least some Example for
it, page 3.

Answ. We have proved in the preceding Treatise, that we have both a Command
and Example for it, if a Command of God, and an Oracle of God, is all one: See
Heb. 5.12. That which is an Oracle of God, is a Command of God; but Laying on
of Hands, etc. is an Oracle of God, Ergo. And as to Examples, we have them
also: see Acts 8. and Acts 19.

2 ly. Because (they say) they believe neither our Lord nor his Disciples were
under it, page 4.

Answ. Our Lord, we have showed, was under it; the Father laid his Hands upon
him when he came out of the Water, and thereby sealed him; the Holy Ghost in
the likeness of a Dove rested upon him: And no doubt but our Lord laid his
Hands upon his Disciples, since he taught this Precept as a Principle of his
Doctrine, Heb. 6. 1, 2. True, we read not of their Baptism, nor of this
neither; therefore from thence they may as well say they were not baptized, as
that they had not Hands laid upon them.

3 ly. Because (say they) if the Apostles were under it, they must have an
Administrator; and who, say they, should that be? p. 4. But there is nothing
said of it, etc.

Answ. 1. Our Lord Christ might be the Administrator, who is the great Shepherd
and Bishop of our Souls, as I said before.

2. And it no more follows that they were not baptized, than that they were not
under Laying on of Hands; i. e. because there is nothing said of either.

4 ly. Their fourth Reason is the same with their first.

5 ly. Their fifth Reason is, because, they say, the Church at Jerusalem was
not under it, page 5.

Answ. Was not the Hebrew Church the Church at Jerusalem? Now they, it is
evident, were under it, or had laid it: Not laying again presupposes they had
once laid it, or were under it, as well as Baptized.

6 ly. Their sixth Reason is, because an Ordinance necessary to
Church Communion ought very plainly to be expressed, p. 6.

Answ. So is this of Imposition of Hands, Heb. 5.12. Heb. 6. 1, 2. Acts 8. and
Acts 19.6.

7 ly. Because, they say, our Lord did leave no Ordinance as absolutely
necessary to Church Communion, but such as holds forth his Death and
Resurrection, p. 9. as Baptism and the Lord's Supper, etc.

Answ. Who told them so? or does it follow that because Baptism and the Supper
are Figures of our Lord's Death, etc. therefore this must be a figure of the
same, or no Ordinance? This is not argumentative nor demonstrative.

8 ly. Because Salvation is promised on the Terms of Faith, Repentance, and
Baptism; and from hence they argue there is no need of any such Ordinance as
this of Laying on of Hands, p. 7.

Answ. Salvation is promised particularly to Faith; He that believes has the
Son, -- has Life, and shall be saved, Mark 16.16. therefore need not I be
baptized? Moreover, I deny that any Ordinance gives a right to Salvation, any
other ways than as it is an evidence of that Right or Title to our Consciences.
Our Right or Title is Christ's Righteousness, or his active and passive
Obedience only. But should a Man be convinced that Laying on of Hands,
Church Communion, Order, and Discipline, or giving to the Poor, etc. were
Duties which he omitted, would his pretended Faith, Repentance, and Baptism,
render him a sincere Christian? No, he must do all things Christ commanded, or
taught to be done, which he is convinced of, as well as those three things.

9 ly. Their ninth Reason against Laying on of Hands, is taken from those
Effects that followed this Ordinance, viz. the extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit.

Answ. The same Effects followed all other Gospel Ordinances: this we have also
answered in the precedent Treatise.

10 ly. Their tenth Reason is, because the Holy Spirit was sometimes given
without Laying on of Hands, page 8.

Answ. The Holy Spirit is promised to them that are baptized; but because some
received the Spirit before baptized, needed they not be baptized? In Acts
10.44. Cornelius received the Spirit, to confirm the Ministration of the Word
to the Gentiles before baptized, yet was commanded to be baptized; nor had he
so much of the Spirit as to need no more; and therefore came under this
Ordinance also. Besides, because God may step out of his usual way, must we do
so too? No sure.

11 ly. Their eleventh Reason is, because none but such Persons as were
eminently gifted did impose Hands, etc.

Ans. The Apostles did all they did as eminently gifted: but if they are not to
be followed by all regular Pastors, or Elders (only ordinarily gifted) in
Laying on of hands, then not in Preaching, Baptizing, nor in the Administration
of any other Gospel-Ordinance: but this is also fully answered in the preceding
Treatise.

In page 17, 18, etc. they would make the Reader conclude that the Hebrews
being said to be dull of Hearing, and so needed to be taught again the first
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, does not refer to these six Principles,
but to Matters relating to the Priestly Office of Christ, etc.

Answ. It Is true, the Apostle was about to instruct them into higher Mysteries,
viz. about Christ's Priesthood; but he found them to have need of Milk, and not
strong Meat: And most evident it is, that by strong Meat he refers to the
things which he proceeds to instruct them in; but the Milk he speaks of are
these things, viz. Repentance, Faith, Baptism, and Laying on of Hands, etc.

They hardly understood the first Rudiments or A B C of the Christian Faith:
but to suppose that Milk, or those first Principles he speaks of, is the strong
Meat, is preposterous. True, Christ is properly the Foundation; but by the
Foundation here is meant those first Principles which every Babe in Christ was
to be instructed in, and to practice, and then to go on to perfection.

Does it follow, because it is said, not laying again the Foundation of
Repentance, etc. that the Apostle only refers to Christ, who is the Foundation
of our Salvation, and of every Principle of the Christian Religion? Evident it
is that the first Principles of the Doctrine of Christ are here called the
Foundation-principles, not that they are all Fundamentals of Salvation, but of
Church-constitution: for we will not say (nor any else we hope) that none can
be saved who are not baptized, and come not under Laying on of Hands; yet every
true regular Church, and regular Member, ought to be under the practice of both
those Principles.

But I see no need to add any thing further in answer to this Treatise, it
seeming to me to have the least of Argument in it of any Book I have seen writ
against this Ordinance.

FINIS.
Postscript.
NOw tho I am fully established in this Principle of Christ's Doctrine, and do
believe it is of the same nature with Baptism, yet I am not of the opinion that
such Members in a Church, who are convinced of it, and are under it, ought to
separate themselves from the Church, because the other Members of the said
Church see it not: no, but they ought to bear one with another, until God shall
please to open their eyes. -- We all see but in part, and know but in part;
therefore ought to bear one with another. Yet let that Church who are of one
Mind and Judgment in this matter, walk as they have received; and let all take
heed how they set light by any Holy Precept and Principle of Christ's Doctrine,
much less to teach Men to break the least of his Commandments, or to cast such
under contempt and reproach, who in conscience toward God speak and write
according to the Light they have received in this and other Cases. Must we be
their Enemies for telling them the truth? Farewell.


