THE Gospel Minister's Maintenance VINDICATED.

WHEREIN, A Regular Ministry in the Churches, is first Asserted, and the
Objections against a Gospel Maintenance for Ministers, Answered.

ALSO, The Dignity, Necessity, Difficulty, Use and Excellency of the Ministry
of Christ is opened.

LIKEWISE, The Nature and VVeightiness of that Sacred Work and Office clearly
evinced.

Recommended to the Baptized Congregations, by several Elders in and about the
City of London.

2 Cor 9.14. Even so has the Lord Ordained, That they who Preach the Gospel
shall live of the Gosp^

2 Cor. 2.16. And who is sufficient for (...) things.

London Printed, and are to be sold by Jo^ (...) at the Harrow, in the Poul^
(...)

ERRATA.
PAge 2. Line 12. and 15. for Church, Read Churches. p. 3. l. 9. f. Church r.
Churches. p. 5. l. 22. r. the. p. 7. l. 11. and 14. f. the Churches Duty, she;
r. the Duty of the Churches, they. p. 8. l. 7. r. Churches, and l. 9. f. her.
r. their. p. 14. l. 2. r. Churches. p. 20. l. 1. h. is wanting. p. 20. l. 21.
s. is wanting. p. 25. f. contangle r. entangle. p. 32. l. 18. f. their r. her.
p. 41. l. 22. f. are r. do. p. 47. l. 21. f. let. r. set. p. 70. l. 26. f. and
r. or. p. 101. l. 10. r. Family. p. 105. l. 14. leave out say they.

To the Congregations of Baptized Believers in England and Wales, Grace, Mercy
and Peace be multiplied through the saving Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Beloved Brethren,
WE have read and considered of this ensuing Treatise^ and do conclude in may
be of great profit to the Churches of Jesus Christ; we fearing some
Congregations have (...) ^uly weighed and considered, of th^r ^dispensible Duty
to the Ministry; in respect of providing such a Maintenance, for those who
Labor amongst them, and are (...) them in the Lord, as they ought to do, by
which means (it may he feared that) many of them may be hindered or obstructed
in attending on their Work, in serving of Christ and his People, as the Nature
of their sacred Employment and Office requires, and the present Day especially
calls for, and as the Lord himself has also Ordained: Therefore, our earnest
Desires are, that our Brethren, both Ministers and Members, would he pleased to
get this little Book, and both Read and w^ll Weigh, what is said therein,
without Prejudice, both in Respect of a Regular Ministry, the Ministers
Maintenance, and the Greatness and Difficulty of their Work; and now, that it
may be blessed by JEHOVAH, to the Great and Good Ends it is designed, is, and
shall be, the Hearty Prayers of us, your Brethren, in the Faith and Fellowship
of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Hanserd Knollys, William Kiffin, William Collins, John Harris, George Barret,
Richard Adams, Benjamin Keach, Isaac Lamb, Edward Man, Leonard Harrison,
Hercules Collins,

London, July, 30. 1681.
The Contents of the chief Things insisted on in the ensuing Treatise.
A Regular Ministry Asserted. Page 1 Christ himself in his own Person* first
settled the Ministry in a most solemn manner. 3 Power left to particular
Congregations to choose their own Ministers. 6 Churches ought to take care that
they choose Men to Office, that are competently qualified, according to 1 Timothy
3.1,2,3. And Tit. 1.6.9: 7 8 Churches after Election and Trial of their
Ministers ought solemnly to ordain them by Prayer and Imposition of Hands. 8 9
Churches undue Proceedings in the choice of Elders, dishonorable; and an
hinderance to the Gospel. 10 11 Every Congregation that neglects their Duty in
providing a fit Maintenance for their Pastors, if able, is dishonorable, and a
scandal to Religion. 13 Ministers Maintenance Asserted strange that any should
doubt of it, 13 14 The Scriptures urged, to prove it is an indispensable Duty,
to provide a comfortable Livelihood for Faithful Ministers. 15 16 13 Arguments
to prove this Duty. 1. Christ would not have his Disciples, when he first sent
them out, waste their own Substance, whilst employed in his Work. 17 18 2. God
has positively ordained, or appointed his Ministers a comfortable Maintenance
under the Gospel. 19 20 Ministers Maintenance not now by Tithes, as it was
under the Law. 20 21 No denying or avoiding the Duty of Ministers Maintenance.
22 23 3. Ministers commanded to attend wholly upon their Work. 25 Nothing but
real Necessity, will admit him to dispense with the contrary, all his time
little enough. 26 Pastors must visit their Members, go from House to House. 27
4. Ministers that follow Trades, etc. exposes them to Reproach, therefore if
possible to be avoided. 30 31 5. Ministers Maintenance, proved by the Law and
Light of Nature, as well as by the positive Law of Christ. 32 33 Obj. Some
Ministers do not need it. Answered. 40 6 Ministers not unable to follow Trades,
some could do it, and provide for themselves, and get Estates as well as
others; therefore ought not to suffer for taking that sacred work upon them. 43
Ministers are as much bound to provide for their Families as other Men. 43 44 7
Showing what great Provision God made for his Ministers under the Law, proving
the Equitableness of the same Law remains still. 45 46 As great Reason for the
People to provide for their Ministers under the Gospel; nay, greater in some
Respects, than for them under the Law 47 8. Elders or Pastors must be given to
Hospitality; therefore, if Churches are able, and they poor, they ought to put
them into a capacity to shine in that Virtue. 47 48 9. This duty urged from the
Honourableness of it, it frees Members from the sensure of Coveteousness; one
part of that double Honor due to Elders that Labor in the Word, proved to be
Maintenance. 50 51 52 10. Argued for, from the said Effects and Inconveniences
that attends the neglect of it. 52 53 54 It lays a Discouragement in the way of
good Men, to give themselves to Study and Dedicate themselves to take part in
the Ministry. 54 55 It exposes Ministers to neglect their Work, when they are
neglected, nay, to leave it, and be blameless. 56 57 This neglect hinders
Ministers in their Study, they having not time, and so Preach no better, its
necessary for Ministers to have store of Useful Books, and Time also. 58 59 11.
Neglect to Ministers, and the concern of God's House, is a robbing of God, and
may bring a blast upon Men's Estates. 62 63 64 65 66 12. A shame to God's
People, to suffer the Heathens and Papists to do more to uphold Idolatry, than
they do to uphold the true Worship of the Living God. 71 72 13. Ministers will
be left wholly without excuse, if they do not faithfully fulfill their Ministry,
when the Congregations sufficiently provide for them, 74 75 One Minister took
off of Worldly Business, may do more in promulgating the Gospel, than several
others who are not. 76 77 Motives to press this Duty. Motive 1. Ministers
represent Christ, what done to them is done to him. 77 78 Motive 2. Ministers
being entrusted with our Souls, we ought to take care they want nothing that is
necessary for their Bodies. 78 79 Motive 3. Ministers being exposed to many
Temptations and Discouragements, a great Motive why, not to be left to serve in
wants and necessities. 80 81 Motive 4. Ministers may forbear working if they
will, provided the Church can provide for them, and they faithfully discharge
their Duty. 81 82 Quest. May a Pastor make Terms with a Church about his
Maintenance, before he take the charge of them? Answered. 82 Quest. What shall
that Church do that is not able to provide for her Pastor? Answered. 83 84 85
Quest. Have not you disclaimed against such who Preach for Hire? A Threefold
Answer given. 87 8^ Obj. Is there any Reason that Rich Men the are Pastors
should have an Allowance* Answered. 89 9^ Obj. Our Church is small, our Pastor
cannot take up all his Time in Spiritual Service. Answered. 92 9^ The Reason
why some Churches are small* may be, because Ministers are no more Labourous in
Preaching the Gospel up an^ down in the adjacent places where the^ Live, which
some cannot do because n^ in capacity. The present Liberty to b^ Improved. Idle
and slothful Minister not to be maintained. 93 94 95 96 Two Reasons of some
Pastors Remisness i^ Preaching, or Laboring no more. 97 98 Ministers may Work
with their Hands, an^ ought so to do when it will tend to the furtherance of
the Gospel. 10^ A great Harvest now, and good Weather* therefore, Ministers
ought to Labou^ hard. 101 10^ Freely you have received, freely give. Answered.
103 10^ Ministers not to Preach for Hire, i. e. to propound that as their end.
186 The Congregations ought to give the Ministers their Portion, with Respect
and Honor. 108 Ministers Work now as great and weighty as those was under the
Law, like Necessity of their Work, it is as Honorable, neglect as dangerous as
then: People now as great Benefit by the Ministry, or more; from hence, the
same Reason for their Maintenance as under the Law. 111 May he that Exercises
his Gift but now and then, expect an Allowance from the Church. Answered. 112
The Weightiness of the Ministers Work opened. 113 114 Their Work is Honorable,
they are in a high Sphere, entrusted with the highest concerns in the World.
114 They Workers with Christ. 115 May be in danger of losing the Souls of Men.
117 118 They must have a Regulur Call. 120 Ministers entrusted with the Charge
of the Church. 122 ^eir Work difficult in 5 Respects. 127, ^28, 129.
ADVERTISEMENT.
READER,
WHereas, in the 38th. Article of Religion (called, The Thirty Nine Articles of
the Church of England;) it is said, The Riches an^ Goods of Christians are not
common, as touching the Right, Title, and Possession of the same, as certa^
Anabaptists do falsely boast. We look upon o^ selves concerned to declare, (that
if there we^ in the Last Age, in Germany, or elsewhere, a^ People bearing that
Name, who Asserted any suc^ thing;) we know none called Anabaptists in England,
nor any where else, who hold that absu^ or rotten Principle; but do testify
our dislike an^ abhorrence of it, and verily believe, as it is in^mated in the
said Article, That the Goods, Riche^ and Possessions of all Christians, as
touching t^ ^ght and title of the same are their own, as t^ (...) Scripture
witnesses, Acts 5.4. Yet notwit^standing we also believe and teach, that ev^
man ought of such things as he possesses liberal^ to give Alms to the poor
according to his Abili^ as is also there asserted. Having this opport^nity, we
thought it not amiss to publish this clear our selves and our Brethren, from t^
scandal, which possibly some may cast upon (...) since these Articles (by
reason of a late Act (...) this present Parliament) are more genera^ ^own and
examined by many People.

(...)

A Regular Ministry in the Church Asserted.
GOD in his Infinite Goodness having by his present Providence, not only given
us re^ite from our former Sufferings, but ^e trust begun that great and
glorious ^ork of the Churches Deliverance (...) long the hope and expectation
of (...) that truly love and fear the Lord; ^e cannot but look upon our Selves
^ncerned to endeavor to make a due ^provement of that Mercy and Good^ss that
is attending us herein; and ^ing into consideration the Condi^n of the Church
of Jesus Christ, we ^not but be concerned with, and afflicted for the late and
present wants She lies under in respect to the Ministry, God having of late
Years removed so many able and pious Men, and seems to be near the removing
many more by. Age and Bodily Infirmities. This with other things put us upon
the Consideration how much the Honor of Christ, the reputation of his Glorious
Gospel in the World; as likewise, the Good and Well-being of the Church depends
upon a regular and orderly Ministry, and the Continuation thereof: And for the
Church to be under a supine neglect herein is very sad.

First, Either in not endeavoring after, and calling forth such a regular and
stated Ministry, according to Gospel Institution at all; or,

Secondly, to be so weak and inadverte^ as to call forth such as are not so
duly furnished and qualified for it; or,

Thirdly, Suffering such as are call'^ forth to this great Work under compete^
Abilities, to lie under unsupportable Burdens, must needs be greatly blameable
before our Lord Jesus Christ, the great Bishop and Shepherd of our Souls, as
well as highly negligent of their own Edification and Well-being.

1. To proceed, it cannot be denied but Christ has, and ought to have, a
stated and regular Ministry in his Church, according to his own Institution:
Who himself, when he entered upon his Ministry, here on Earth, did call forth
Apostles and Disciples to bear that part of the Work with him, which he called
them to, and fitted them for: See Mark, 3.13. to the ^. Christ went up into a
Mountain, ^d called to him whom he would, and ^hey came to him, and he ordained
Twelve ^at they should be with Him, and that ^e might send them forth to
Preach; to whom He gave the Name of Apostles. Mat. 10.2. Luke 6.13. Which he
did ^ith great Solemnity and Invocation (...) the Father (for he continued all
Night in Prayer to God) and when it was Day he chose the Twelve, and Named them
Apostles. After which he appointed other Seventy, and sent them forth by Two;
and Two, before His Face, to every City and Place, etc. which were laborers
with Him in the Harvest, V. 2. And He commanded them to give themselves up to
the Work he had called them to, and not take Care what they should Eat or
Drink, For the Labourer (says he) is worthy of his Hi^ Ver. to 14. Here our
Lord Jesus Christ Himself did Institute and Lay the Foundation of the Gospel
Ministry in His own Authority; and accordingly takes care for the continuance
of it after His Death and Resurrection, and actual Investiture in our Nature of
a^ Power in Heaven and Earth, Mat^ 28.18.19.20. And Jesus came an^ spoke unto
them, saying, All Power (...) given unto me in Heaven and in Earth* Go ye
therefore Teach all Nations, and^ And lo I am with you always, even (...) the
End of the World. Amen. Also after His Blessed and Glorious Ascension, and
Sitting on the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens. Heb. 8.^. Angels, and
Authorities, and Powers being made subject unto him. 1 Pet. 3. and 22. Did by
His Apostles give Commandment and Direction for the continuance hereof to the
end of the World, and his Second Coming without Sin unto Salvation. Heb. 9.28.
As Acts 14.21,22,23. After they had by their Ministry been blessed with the
Conversion of many Souls, they took care to direct them into the Duty of Church
Communion; and by their Suffrages, Ordained them Elders in every Church. So the
Apostle gives this as the Reason, Why he left Titus in Creete; (he not having
opportunity after Preaching the Gospel to them) to put things into due Order.
Tit. 1.5. That he should set in Order the things that were wanting (or left
undone by the Apostle) and Or ^e Elders in every City: that is Church in every
City, as before, Acts 14. who are called Elders, Bishops, or Pastors, and
Teachers; Names significative of the^ Authority, Office and Work.

2. Christ being now in Heaven and an extraordinary Call being ceased the
Scriptures being a perfect and standing Rule to the Church through all Ages, he
has committed this Care to her self, according to the Power given to Her, who
is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, to provide Ministers for her own
Edification, in Obedience to his Commands and Rules given in his word, as he
shall see good to Bless her with Spiritual Gifts and Abilities, in order to the
fitting them for this Work; the Father also has Covenanted to give his Spirit
in the Gifts and Graces of it, and promised that the Words he has put into
Christ's Mouth, and the spirit that is upon him, shall never depart from him,
nor his seeds seed, for ever: Likewise has according to the Circumstances of
time the Church has been under, blessed her, as with his Grace so with all
needful Spiritual Gifts. Ephesians. 4.7.11. For the perfecting the saints for the
Work of the Ministry, for the Edifying the Body of Christ. So that whilst there
is a Church Millitant, Saints on this side Perfection, any of the Members of
Christ Mystical Body on Earth, those Spiritual Gifts needful to their present
State, shall be given, and be amongst them, for the Support of the great
Ordinance of the Ministry, and for the good of the Church.

3. And as its the Churches Duty to Seek these Spiritual Abilities, and improve
them when they are given to these great and Holy Ends; so she must walk
regularly herein, in obedience to the Rules given by Christ in this Case; who
has laid down the qualifications both Negative and Positive, of all such as
ought to be called to this great work and Trust of Ministering by Office, 1 Timothy
3.1. to 9. Tit. 1.6.9. we have no warrant to put any into the Ministry
otherwise, save such as are here discribed, and competently fitted for it. For
as it was a sin of Old in the Church to put any into the Ministry, but those
whom God appointed by the Rules given to them* so it can be no less Evil for
the Church now, to call any forth into Office, but such who are qualified as
God's Word directs; and now, as Christ has made this grant of Power to the
Church of choosing her own Officers for her Edification; so he has left Rules
for her, who, and how to chose, as we said before: So likewise he has laid down
those special Duties of the Officers in the Church, who are to take the
oversight, Feed, Govern, Go in and out before them. Acts 20.17,18. 1. Pet. 5.
and 2.

4. When the Church has had a Trial of the meetness and Abilities of any
Person, or Persons, for this work and service, they are by Election and Choice
solemnly to set him, or them a part, by Prayer, and Laying on of Hands. Acts
14.21,22,23. Acts 6. By which a new relation arises of an Elder, and a Church,
a Pastor, and a Flock: This must be therefore by the mutual voluntary acts of
each other, by which the Duties of each relation becomes binding upon them,
according to the Laws of Christ: It is the Pastors Duty now to Watch, Feed, and
Govern the Flock, and to give himself up to it; It is the Churches Duty to
submit themselves to Him in the Lord; to Love, Reverence, and Administer freely
to him. 1 Pet. 5.1,2,3,4,5. Heb. 13.7.17. How greatly then must those Churches
be to blame, that unconcernedly live in the neglect of so great a Duty, upon
which the Edification of the Church, and her Well-being so much depends, as
well as Gospel Order: For although the Essence and Being of a Church depends
upon its Institution in respect both of Matter and Form: (A competent number of
Believers may by mutual agreement lay the Foundation of the Being of a Gospel
Church,) but they cannot be a Church Organical without Officers, which the Lord
has placed there for the orderly Exercis^ of his Authority committed to her;
To neglect this, is to despise the Wisdom of Christ, who best knows wha^ is for
the good of His Church, and for Her Edification in this State. 2, To slight His
Goodness in so useful and beneficial an Institution. 3, Its a contempt put upon
his Authority, as King of Saints, who has in his Sovereign Right, in and over
the Church, Ordained it so to be, for the Churches Good and Well-being.

Secondly, As there should not be a neglect of this Duty, so there should be
great care taken that we answer the Will of God herein, wherein His Name and
Honor is so much concerned, in Respect of his Love to, and Care of his Church;
therefore the greaest diligence should be taken that the Rules He has given be
duly observed, and Applications made of the Qualifications laid down, in
respect of all such that are called unto Office: The outward Call is an Act of
the Church, the acceptance of the Person so called, is an Obediential Act of
him to the Will of God; but neither of these can be regular, where there is not
at previous indication of the Mind of God, in bestowing those Spiritual Gifts
and Qualifications, as may render him competently fit to the Discharge of his
Office and Work.

Now in a Churches undue proceeding herein, they discover their own weakness,
if not Ignorance, in respect of the Rule it self, and injure the Person so
called, in laying the weight of so great a Work upon him, who is not furnished
with Spiritual Abilities to discharge it, and thereby expose the Honor of
Christ, and Reputation of His Gospel in the World, which should be dear unto us.

And we have reason to reckon that some Churches not walking so regular herein,
has been one cause of the want of that Reputation, which otherwise they might
have gained amongst the Saints, and in the World, observe what Moses said to
Israel, Deuteronomy. 4.6. Keep therefore, and do them, for this is your Wisdom and
your Understanding in the sight of the Nations, which shall hear of all these
Statutes; and say, Surely this great Nation is a wise and understanding People.
Who otherwise were the least of all Nations. We ought with far greater reason
to take heed we deviate not from the Laws of the Son of God, who deserves
greater Honor than Moses, which he has given to His Church, under the Gospel
Dispensation; If in the choice of Deacons, Acts 6.3. They were to look out from
amongst themselves Men of honest Report, full of the Holy Ghost and Wisdom, to
be set apart to that Work: How much more in the choice of Pastors or Elders
whose Work requires greater spiritual Abillities to a right discharge thereof?

For Churches therefore to be so unconcerned, whether they have Officers or
not, according to Gospel Rule, or so overly in the Choice of those they ca^
into such high stations amongst them whether they are competently qualified or
not, are greatly blameable.

Thirdly, In the next place we conclude, It is very dishonorable to God, and a
reproach to our Sacred Religion for the Churches when they have called forth
such Pastors and Ministers, who are competently qualified according to the Rule
of the Gospel, to let them lie under those unsupportable burdens, of worldly
Snares and Encumbrances, without providing a due maintenance for them,
according to the Ordaination of our Lord Jesus Christ in the New Testament.

The Gospel Minister's Maintenance Vindicated.
AND indeed, it seems to us a thing Grievous as well as Strange, that any
People should be so be clouded in their Understandings, as in the least to
doubt, whether it be Duty or no^ that the Church should allow a Mee^ and Due
Maintenance, to their Faithful Pastors and Teachers: Yet, w^ hear there are not
only some who have doubts about it, but others, who see^ to Object, and stiffly
argue against i^ as if it were Unlawful, if not Antichristian, for Ministers to
receive (...) Yearly, or Quarterly Allowance from the Churches, amongst whom
they are placed, and employed as Laborers; which Conceit cannot be without its
sad Effects and Consequences* and if they are not convinced o^ this Mistake and
Error the sooner may in a little time appear to the more palpable Detriment,
and Prejudice o^ the Gospel, and Reproach of Profession, which is indeed too
Visible or Manifest already; therefore are we stirred up in Love, to Christ and
his Blessed Interest, and as a Prevention of the Evil and Danger threatened,
upon the Account of this Defect and Remisne^ of Duty, to Write this short
Treatise.

Our main Business at this time, is not only to Assert the Minister's
Maintenance to be an Institution of Christ; but also, to prove it so to be, and
that to withold it from them by a Church, who is able comfortably to provide
for them, is a great and crying Sin, and will be attended (we fear unless
prevented by an unfeigned Repentance and Reformation) with severe Judgment from
the Holy God, who will not always bear with the Ignorant, much less, the
willful neglect of his own Holy Law, contained so expressly in his sacred Word,
and that we may do this the more effectually, we shall in the first place cite
those Scriptures, upon which we ground the Truth of what we Assert and Plead
^or.

Matt. 10.9,10. Provide neither Gold, ^r Silver, nor Brass in your Purses -- ^r
Scrip for your Journey, neither Two ^ats, neither Shoes, nor Staves, for the
^ork-man is Worthy of his Meat.

1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders who Rul^ well be accounted worthy of double Honor^
especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine. For the Scripture says,
Thou shall not muzzle the Mouth of the Ox that treads cut the Corn, for the
Labourer is worthy of his Reward.

Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate to him that teaches
him in all good Things; be not deceived, God is not mecked, for what a Man
sows, that shall he reap. v. 7.

1 Cor. 9.7. Who goes a warfare at any time at his own Charge? Who planted a
Vineyard, and eaterh not of the Fruit thereof? Who feeds a Flock, and eats
not of the Milk of the Flock? v. 9. Is it not written in the Law of Moses* Thou
shall not muzzle the Mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn, does God take
Care for Oxen? v. 10. Or says (...) it altogether for our sakes? For ou^ sakes
no doubt, this is Written, That h^ that Ploweth, shall Plow in Hope; and he
which Thrasheth in Hope, shall be mad^ partaker of his Hope. V. 11. If we have
Sown unto you Spiritual Things, is it a great Thing, if we shall Reap your
Carnal Things? v. 13. Do not you know, that they which Minister about Holy
Things, Live of the Things of the Temple; and they that wait at the Altar, are
partakers with the Altar. v. 14. Even so has the Lord ordained, that they
which Preach ^he Gospel, should live of the Gospel.

We will Appeal to all Men's Consciences in the Fear of God, whether ^here is
any Duty lies more clear and ^vident in express Words in the Holy ^cripture
than this does; and yet how ^trangly are some good Christians at a ^oss about
it, and are hardly brought ^o receive it as an indispensable Duty, ^r else to a
Faithful Discharge of their Duty herein. Our Work is before us, we shall
therefore proceed, to open (as ^he Lord may help us,) the Mind of God in these
places of Holy Scripture, and give you the Sense of them. First, (...) appears
that as soon as ever our blessed ^aviour sent forth his Ministers to Preach
(...) Gospel, as we have showed. Matt. 10. 7,8,9,10. He Discovered this part of
(...) Will and Pleasure. i. e. That they shou^ not spend, or waste their own
Substan^ they are forbid to take either Gold (...) Silver, etc. which Words
clearly i^timate, they might have both Go^ and Silver, and more Coats, and Sho^
too; but they were not to take the^ with them, in their Journey, being sent
forth to Preach the Kingdom (...) God.

Obj. But some possibly may Object (...) was but a temporary Precept, being
(...) Will of God concerning them, for that she Journey at that time.

Answ. We Answer, it seems to (...) manifestly to declare the absolute W^ and
Pleasure of Christ, that his Fai^ful Laborers should be provided for the
People with all things Necessar^ appertaining to this Life, and not of then,
but also, in all succeeding A^ and we find our Worthy Annotators (...) directly
agree with us herein, the may be, some things contained in the place might be
temporary: Take wh^ our late Annotators say upon this Text, Continuation of Mr.
Poole's Annotations.
Our Savior designed to give them (says he) an Experience of the Providence
of God, and to teach ^em to trust in it; as also, to teach People that the
Labourer is worthy of his hire, and that God expects, that his Ministers
should not live of their own, but upon the Alter, 1 which they served; so as at
once (...) taught his Disciples not to he Covetous, (...) overmuch Sollicitous,
and the People (...) provide for those who Ministered to them (...) things
Spiritual. Besides those other absolute Precepts of like Nature, gi^en forth by
the Spirit of Christ in the Apostles, contained in several Epistles, ^o
sufficiently prove this to be the Mind and Intention of our Savior in this
place

Secondly, That we may put (...) out of all doubt, We shall now come to ^sider
of the sacred Appointment of God (...) this Matter: If it appear to be no^ing
less, nor more, than what the lord has Ordained, viz. That his ^ervants who are
called forth to Preach the Gospel and take Care of his Churc^es, should have a
fit and suitable Ma^tenance (according as the State an^ Ability of the Churches
may be, (...) whom they belong, and whose Servan^ they are) than we hope there
is no^ will object or argue against it any more

And that this is the Will, and Sacre^ Appointment of the Lord, is very ev^dent
in that forecited place. 1. Cor. ^ 14. and in diverse others. Even so ha^ the
Lord ordained that they that Prea^ the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Tru^
the Lord has not Ordained that (...) Servants and Ministers under the G^spel
should have Tithes, or the Tent^ of every Members increase, as he fo^merly
appointed under the Law; ye^ nevertheless he has taken Care of the^ and
Ordained that they should live of (...) Gospel, not (unless Necessity requires^
that they should live on the Labor of the Hands, in common with other Me^ and
pray observe, it is not said (...) Church has Ordained it, nor we (...) Apostles
have Ordained it; but (...) Lord has Ordained it, or it is the Holy
Appointment or Sacred Precept of Jesus Christ, for the Support and Comfort of
his Painful and Faithful Servants; he and his People have called forth to
Preach his blessed Gospel out some may yet say, how has he Ordained it.

Answ. Pray observe, So has the Lord Ordained, let us look a little back, and
take notice of the Scope and Coherence of the place; the Apostle has a
Reference to what preceeds, Do ye not know, that they that Minister about Holy
things, live of the things of the Temple; and they which wait at the Altar, are
partakers with the Altar: So has the Lord Ordained, etc. That is, as God had a
Ministry under the Old Testament. Namely, the Priest of the Tribe of Levi; and
he Ordained and Appointed a Comfortable Livelihood (...) them, as Numb. 18.20.
Deuteronomy. 10. ^ and 18.1. So as they needed not (...) Labor (as other Men) with
their (...) to get Bread to eat; even so has the Lord Ordained and appointed,
that those who Preach the Gospe^ should have likewise a Comfortabl^ Livelihood
or Maintenance now under this Dispensation, that they may be delivered from the
Incumbrance^ of this Life, and so not hindered o^ obstructed in their Holy and
most Sacred Employment, with secular Affairs. God's Will (says our late
Annotators) is the same, under the New Testament, that it was under the Old; i.
e* It is not as to the People a matter of Liberty, so as they may choose whether
they will maintain their Ministers or no, there is an Ordinance of God in the
Case, it is the Will of God, that those who are taken off from Wordly
Employments, and spend their time in the Study, and Preaching the Gospel should
have a Livelihood from their Labors.

This also agrees with what the same great Apostle says, Gal. 6.6. Let him
that is taught in the Word, Communicate to him that Teaches in all good
Things: Is not this think ye a Precept? Is not this directly laid down, as
other great and ^dispensable Precepts and Duties are, ^e Ephesians. 4.23. Let him
that stole, steal (...) more; but rather, let him Labor with ^s Hands: Let no
corrupt Communicati^ proceed out of your Mouths, etc. and ^ain, Ephesians. 5.33. --
Let every one of ^u in particular so Love his Wife, etc. ^ou can under no
pretense avoid these ^eat Duties; nor can you plead to be ^cused; and pray does
not the same ^oly Spirit, and ever blessed God, in^n and require you (in the
same form (...) Speech) who are taught in the Word, (...) Communicate to him
that Teaches (...) all good Things. Shall such who ^ave always showed much
Zeal for the ^red Ordinances and Institutions of ^us Christ, and plead for a
Universal Obedience; justify themselves in the ^eglect of so plain a Precept,
Christ ^h, then are ye my Friends, if you do ^atsoever I have commanded you;
pray (...) this great Ordinance then be thought ^on, and have equal regard by
you; (...) a Gospel Institution and Appointment of Jesus Christ we argue for
that so you may stand complete in t^ whole Will of God: You know what David
says, then I shall not be ashamed when I have a respect to all thy
Commandments* Let him that is taught in the Word, Communicate to him that
teaches in all good things, that is, every one according a^ God has blessed
him with the good things of this World; God would no^ have his Faithful
Ministers want any good thing to make their Lives comfortable to them;) if so
be it be in the Power of those who are taught to communicate it to them. The
Precept (says our late Annotators) is concerning the Maintenance of Ministers,
which is fit^ expressed by the Term Communicate^ because, as the People
distribute to their Ministers things Temporal, so the Ministers distribute
things Spiritual: The good things here mentioned are Temporal good things such
as may be Useful to the Teacher for t^ uphold Himself and Family. The Tex^
teaches us, that it is the Will of God tha^ Ministers should be maintained at
the Charge of the Church, to which they Administer; and it is but an Act of
Justice, for they do but Communicate Temporal things, to those who Communicate
to them much more valuable things: Be not deceived, God is not mocked, etc. The
Apostle adds this (says our Annotators) to terrify those who find out vain
and false Excuses to save their Purses; he advises them not to cheat
themselves, for tho they might deceive Men, yet they could not deceive the
All-seeing, and Heart-searching God, etc.

Thirdly, But to proceed, Ministers are commanded to attend wholly, upon their
Sacred Calling in their Ministry, and are required not to contangle themselves
in the Affairs of this Life; for certainly, what Paul wills Timothy to do in
this respect, in him he requires all Ministers ^o do the like; and although
every Christian in many respects may be compared to a Soldier, yet in this
place, 2 Timothy 2.4. The Apostle only aludes to those in the Ministry, or such
who are ^piritual Officers in Christ's Army, they ought to take heed who go
forth i^ that Warfare, they entangle not themselves with the affairs of this
Life, i. ^ in Trades and Callings, which other Christians are allowed to
follow: and the reason is offered that they may pleas^ him who has chosen them
to be Soldiers. And hence it is that the same Apostle in another place exhorts
Timothy, and so all other Ministers (who the Church calls forth to that great
Work) to giv^ himself up to Reading, to Exhortation, t^ Doctrine, and to the
Study of the Word^ Meditate on these things (says he) giv^ thy self wholly to
them, that they profiting may appear to all.

Nothing, doubtless, but real necessity may dispense with the contrary, h^
whole time and strength is little enough to be employed in the Wor^ and Service
he is called to. Let the things be the business of thy Thoughts, a^ take care
of them, be in them; so it is (...) the Greek (as our Annotators observ^ Let
them be thy whole Work. He m^ says one, give himself up to the Min^stry of the
Word and Prayer, and continue in reading Meditation, etc. as a Man wholly
devoted unto Gospel Service; and is therefore by his Call to the Ministry
secluded from those ways and means of providing for his own Subsistence, as
Trades and Secular Employments of others furnish them with; that his Mind by
the cares of Wordly Business may not be diverted from the Study of God's Word,
and care of Souls, which the duty of his Station engages him to. And if he may
not expose himself to the careful Thoughts that accompany worldly Business,
though tending to his Profit; certainly it is no way meet that he should be
left to conflict with the Thorny Cares of a necessitous Condition, whilst those
he Ministers ^o, have means to prevent it: doubtless ^he Holy God Ordained the
Mini^ers Maintenance upon most weighty Grounds and Reasons; some of which,
^lessed be His Name, he has not ^oncealed or hid from us; and this we say seem
to us to be one among^ the rest, viz. That his Mind and Thought^ might not be
diverted from his Work wit^ Earthly Things.

Fourthly, And not in respect of himself upon this account only, but also to
prevent that occasion of Scandal, that we see daily is ready to attend Men who
follow Trades and Secular Employments in the World; for let Christiann Men be
never so careful and circumspect in their Callings and Commerce with Men, we
find by daily experience how subject they are to fall under the clamours of
some ungodly and envious People, they lying in wait for their halting; and if
it be a Ministe^ or Pastor of a Church that is a Trading Person, be sure they
will (if (...) be possible) watch him so that he sha^ not escape their
reproachful Tongu^ though it be not in the least deserve^ and hereby his Hands
are not ^ly made weak, but his Spirits a^ grieved, and his Ministry made (the
unjustly) contemptible. We find (...) from hence very necessary, that the
Pastors of our Churches, and Teachers too if possible, should be freed from all
such Insnarements; and cannot but observe the Wisdom of God in respect of His
Holy Ordinance: i. e. in ordaining a Support and Livelihood for His Servants
another way, so that they might not be brought under Infamy and Reproach; and
that thereby also the Word of God might the better Run and be Glorified. These
two Arguments we cannot but Judge are weighty, namely; 1. the work of the
Ministry, especially in the Hands of a Pastor, being so great, that it does
require his utmost attendance, or all his whole time and strength, as it must
needs appear to every Man who soberly and seriously considers it in its Parts:
It Is true a Man may bear that Name, and Discharge that Sacred Office in part,
nay, and as well as he can, considering his circumstances in the World, and
thereby have in part peace in his Mind; but it is another thing to discharge the
duty of this Ca^ing as he ought, and as the Sanction of the Office calls for,
to the Honor of the Holy Name of God, and Credit of Religion; for we conclude
to Preach on^ or two Sermons in a Week is the leas^ part of his Work, and the
least indeed, if his Matter be not so well prepared and digested; that he may
show himse^ a Workman that needs not be ashame^ rightly dividing the Word of
Truth, the so every one may have their portion (...) Meat in due Season; which
that Tim^thy might do, St. Paul advises him to a careful and diligent Study:
But how such poor Men can do this, who a^ forced to follow their Trades hard
e^ry Day in the Week, to get Bread for their Families, we see not? But besides
the great Work of giving themselves up to Reading, Meditation, an^ laborious
and diligent Study an^ Preaching of God's Word. There (...) another great Duty
lies upon the^ which is, Visiting the Members of the Church under their Care,
so that the may know the State of their Flock; yea' go from House to House: And
if this be not done, How can they so well know what Food to Administer or Hand
forth unto some poor Souls they have committed to their Charge? Where the
Work of Visiting is neglected, we conclude one main Part of the Pastors
Business lies undone; and what an account they will have to give of the Souls
of Men and Women to Jesus Christ, We know not, if they be remiss here: or what
an account the Church can give if they are out of a capacity to discharge this
great Trust, through neglect of their Duty to them. They (says the Apostle)
Watch for your Souls, as such as must give account. Heb. 13.17. And then
Secondly, the Credit and Honor of their Ministry, in respect of what we before
mentioned, ought to be considered; for if the Preacher has Blots and Stains
upon him, through the necessities he may be in, in respect of the things of
this World, by not having his wants supplied, but is involved in Debt, or
exposed to the breach of his Word in the way of Trading. What weight or power
think you, will his Ministry have upon the Consciences of Men? For it
necessarily makes room for the old Proverb, Physician heal thy self; and it is
as a prevention of those Evils, i. e. for the good, Health, and VVell-being of
the Souls both of Pastors and People here and hereafter. We conclude, that God
has been pleased to Ordain and so to provide for his Servants in the Ministry,
as we have showed; but this is not all; For

Fifthly, According to the Law and Light of Nature, the Church is obliged to
provide for their Ministers, as to the matter of Equity and Justice; and from
hence the Apostle argues the Point with the Corinthians* 1 Cor. 9.7. etc. Who
goes a Warfa^ at any time at his own Charge? Wh^ Planteth a Vineyard, and
eats not of the Fruit thereof? Or who Feeds (...) Flock, and eats not of
the Milk of the Flock. None that Lists an Army, expects that his Soldiers
should maintain themselves without Pay: The Ministry is a Spiritual Warfare,
undertaken at the Command of Christ, and by the Call of the Church for the
service of their Souls; and it is as reasonable that Ministers should receive a
supply of outward things from them as that a Soldier should receive Pay from
his Captain at the charge of the Commonwealth, for whose Good and Safety he
enters upon that Military Employment. Again the Apostle argues the
equitableness of it further; Shall a Man Plant a Vineyard an not Eat of the
Fruit thereof? The Preaching the Gospel is like a man planting ^ Vineyard; the
Church is compared thereto in Scripture, Isa. 5.1.2. The Plants are the Lords,
but he uses Ministers Hands in the Planting of them* and none planteth a
Vineyard but (...) expectation of some Fruit from thenc^ none Imployeth his
Servant to Plant, but he does (and it is but lust he should) uphold him with
Food and Raiment, he doing his Work. The Church also, as the Apostle intimates,
is compared to a Flock; And now who Feeds a Flock, either personally, or by
his Servants, but he eats, or allows his Servant to eat of the Milk of the
Flock, which it is his Work to keep and feed? By these three Instances
commonly known to Men, the Apostle shows the reasonableness that the
Ministers of the Gospel should be maintained by the People to whom they
Minister; he plainly intimating that it is inconsistent with common Justice to
deprive a man of the Fruit of that Vineyard which is planted and manured by his
own Labor. And such is the case between a Minister and his People; it is not
(as one well observes) your Charity that we ask for them, but Justice and
Right, which the very Light of Nature as well as God's Word clearly shows:
They are Employed in your Service, and do that Business for you in which your
Eternal Happiness is concerned; they take care to provide Bread for your Souls,
and of right therefore should live upon your charge, and you ought to see that
neither they, nor their Families want Bread, nor any thing necessary for their
Bodies: Nay, and since they Sow or Import unto you Spiritual Things, Is it a
great thing if they shall reap your carnal things? Have you not (as if the
Apostle should say) better things from them, than they partake of from you? St.
Paul (as our Annotators note) argues the reasonableness of Ministers
maintenance from their People, they giving them quid pro quo, a just
Compensation for such allowance, yea that which is of much more value; for
there is a great disproportion between things Spiritual and things Carnal; the
former much excelling the latter, so that the People have the advantage, they
receiving things far more excellent from Christ's Ministers, than his Ministers
receive of them: They communicate Gold and precious Stones, and Pearl; and do
receive from the People that which comparatively is bu^ as Brass or Copper; And
yet shall this seem a great thing? Will you, as if the Apostle should say,
Grudge them a due portion of your Temporals, when you receive so plentifully
from them of choice Heavenly or Spiritual things? How unreasonable a thing is
this?

Obj. But some may be will Object the things they communicate, viz. those
Spiritual Things, are not their own but the Lords, and imparted to them to hand
out for the good of others; And therefore the Case is different.

Answer. It is against the Apostle you raise this Objection: But will you see
how you are mistaken? Pray what more Right or Property have you to your Carnal
Things, than they have to their Spirituals? Are not their Spiritual Things
their own, as much as your Carnal Things are your own? Has the Lord made you
any other than Stewards of your worldly Things; And must not you be Accountable
to him for them, if you do not lay them out as he has Commanded you? For the
good of others come your Carnal Things, even your Wool and your Flax. Hos.
2.9. is as much the Lords, as the Ministers. Knowledge, and other Spiritual
Gifts are the Lords; and it does as much behove you to see that you Communicate
to others of your VVorldly or Carnal Things: We mean to the Poor Saints and
Ministers of the Gospel, as it behooves them to Preach or Communicate Spiritual
Things to you; and therefore the Case is not different: Besides, you forget how
your poor Ministers often times wast their strength, and consume their Bodies,
being brought to utter Weakness in their outward Man, in their painful Studies
and Labors, in Preaching the Word, thereby Communicating Spiritual Things to
you: And is not that (we mean health etc.) more in worth (and their own too)
than all you have or can Communicate to them? Sure their strength, and the
health of their Bodies together with the expense of their Time, you will say,
is as much their own, as any thing you can call yours; And is (...) then a
great thing they should be supplied from you with all things necessary for this
Life? Besides, in point o^ Equity our Savior as well as the Apostle calls
Ministers Laborers; and you all will readily say, The Labourer is worthy of
his Hire. How then is it tha^ any should seek ways, and excuses to avoid their
Duty herein to their Spiritual Harvest Men? we must tell yo^ again, it is Jesus
Christ who says it is their due, and that they are worthy of it* and He has
Ordained that they should have it; so that you cannot with h^ it from them
without Sin, nay such ^ Sin that is not only against the Law and Light of
Nature, but the express Law of Jesus Christ: And we must tel^ you, That if the
keeping back, or defrauding the Hire of your Laborers, who have Reaped down
your Corn Fields, be so great an Evil, that their Cry enters into the Ears of
the Lord of Sabbaths, and does provoke and stir up the justice of God to a
severe Vengeance, for their daring Boldness and cruel Oppression of the poor:
What think you will be the Effects of the Cry of Christ's painful Spiritual
Harvest-men, who Labor to gather in his Divine Corn, should you withhold from
them their just Right upon this Account; by which means they may be exposed,
especially some of them, to Heart Disquieting, and Soul Afflicting Snares in
the World, and their poor Families want such things as are necessary for them,
when it is in the power of the Peoples hands plentifully to supply them: We
must in discharge of our Duty at this time be plain with every Man, that we may
deliver our own Souls and theirs too, from so great a Sin as such an neglect as
that is does appear to us to be, and will to all, if seriously Considered, and
laid to Heart.

Object. May be some will Object ou^ Ministers do not need it, nor desire it of
(...) they can live without it.

Answ. So perhaps some of your Harvest-men that Reap down your Fields, may be
well to pass in the World, and can live without their Hire and Just due etc.
Yet will that be a good Plea (think you) to seek ways or means to withold
their wages from them? So, and in like manner say we, the Ability of your
pastors in respect of the things of the World, does not excuse you from the
discharge of your Duty to them, according to the Just Law of God, and
Equitableness of the Case. Yet certainly they (if of Paul's Spirit) will refuse
to receive any thing lest it should lessen their esteem in their Ministry; it is
left to their Liberty, they may choose whether they will receive it or not: But
though they may dispense with their Right if they please as Paul did sometimes
through his great Zeal and Love to the Gospel; yet cannot you dispense with
your Duty, you have no Warrant so to do: Yet we cannot but greatly commend those
Pastors of the Churches, who can and do without receiving any thing, serve
Christ and his People, and resolve (being Blessed with the good things of the
world) not to make the Gospel Chargeable, or a Burden to any; but yet we would
have you sensible of your Duty, and look upon your selves to be Debtors to
them, and esteem of them the more: But do these Pastors who are Rich, Able, and
VVilling to serve the Churches for nothing, sequester or give themselves up to
the Work of the Ministry, and faithfully discharge that Trust, as another who
is taken off of Secular Employment? But may be, though they are like other
Laborers, yet if they did receive it from you, they could Distribute it to the
Needy, or to help other poor Ministers who serve other Churches, whose Poverty
may be such, that they cannot allow a sufficient Maintenance to their Pastors
And therefore whether it may be necessary for you to with hold it from them, or
for them to refuse it, is worth Consideration.

Sixthly. But to proceed. (Since we are pleading the Case in point of Equity
and just Right, let it be Considered:) You do not choose such Men to be your
Pastors, or Ministers, who are of the lowest of the People; but such as may be
allowed to have ashare of Parts, Common Prudence, and Abilitys for Business
with other Persons: and some of them could manage Trades, or fall into other
Employments, and get Estates as well as you, if they were not Devoted to a
better Service: And must (as one observes) they needs be devoted to
Necessities and Miseries, in the same Hour that they enter upon the Ministry.
This ought not to be; GOD has Ordered the Case otherwise in his Wisdom,
Certainly (all will Confess) it is the Duty of a Minister, as well as other Men
to provide for his Family, as much as lies in him; or take Care of his Wife
and Children that they may not be exposed to a Thousand Miseries and
Temptations when he is gone: For though a Covetous raking Temper, worse becomes
a Minister of all Men in the World (yet as the Author before cited Notes) we
greatly mistake our selves to think he must divest himself of that due
Affection of an Husband to his Wife, or of a Father toward his Children; or
that those Fruits thereof which are Justly esteemed Commendable in others,
should be thought in him to be a Fault: And is it not sad (Judge you) That they
must be constrained to one of these Dialema's? i. e. Either to neglect the full
and Faithful Discharge of their Duty to Christ and his Church, or else Neglect
their poor Families by fulfilling their Ministry, and doing the work of
Pastors, according to the Nature of that Sacred Office. But as to him who is
poor (and must ge^ his Bread before he Eats it) wh^ thinks he can Discharge
both these Duties well enough, it is to be feared he does never a one of them as
he ought Moreover, it is good for him to consider the reason of that Law of the
ever Blessed God, who has otherwise Ordained. Yet let every Servant of Christ
use his own Freedom, and act and do, as he thinks may most promote the Glory of
God, and Good of the Church, and the Increase thereof; so that he may give a
good account of himself in the Day of Christ.

Seventhly, The Lord has not left me To argue this only from general
Principles of Reason, and common Equity, but to put the Matter beyond dispute
(as we have already showed) has subjoyned His express Command. And may not in
the next place, that Provision which God was pleased to make for his Ministers
in the time of the Law, be of great use to us, and full of Instruction upon
this account? Nay, and ought we not to consider it, since the Apostle argues 1.
Cor 9.13. for a Gospel Maintenance from thence. Do ye not know, that they which
Minister about Holy things, live of the Things of the Temple; and they which
serve at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? It appears this is a Duty
still; and though the mode or manner of the Maintenance of the Ministers of God
under the Law, was quite different to this under the Gospel, yet the reason and
equitableness of the thing abides: Ministers were then provided for by the
Lord; so he has ordered they should Live comfortably now under the Gospel. We
find God did then no sooner separate the Levites to the Service of the
Sanctuary, but he by Law provided for their Subsistence: And though they were
but one Tribe in Twelve, yet the Tenth of the Increase of the whole Land was
given to them, besides the first Fruits and Offerings, and diverse other
Advantages; so that their Lot and Portion might equal, yea exceed that of their
Brethrens. This indeed is Abrogated; Gospel Ministers have no Divine Right to
the Tenths of men Increase; but the Moral Equity we say does not cease; nor can
it be thought to be any Burden to provide a comfortable Livelihood for our
Ministers, were but our Senses rightly exercised to discern how Good and
Gracious God appears to us under the Gospel Dispensation, in easing our People
from those vast and great Expense and Charges which the Lord's People were
required to be at under the Law: For we shall soon perceive, if we consider,
that the charge of the Worship of God, and the Ministry, etc. now is
comparitively little or nothing, to what there was under that Dispensation;
though Men did endeavor now to come up to their duty for as one observes, he
thought he could make it appear, That the Fifth Part of their Estates was
Yearly to be Spent in Things relating to Temple Service. And we know not but he
might say right: And yet we cannot be unsensible of the excellency of the
Gospel Ministry, above the Ministry, of the Law; And what great Blessings and
Privileges upon many Accounts we have above them? One would think these things
were enough to stir up all Faithful Christians to leave their Disputings, and
heartily with a cheerful Mind be ready to contribute toward the defraying the
moderate Charge of a Gospel Ministry, in such a manner as may give Reputation
to our Sacred Profession; certainly the Labourer is still worthy of his Hire;
and every one will say, not less worthy because he Labors under the Gospel,
than they who Labored under the Law.

Eighthly, An Elder, or a Pastor of a Church, is under a special Charge to Use
Hospitality, and to let himself be a Pattern of Charity, and other good Works,
that so he may the better adorn his Profession. This is his Duty, and if he
fails herein, he loses some part of those most excellent Virtues in which he
ought to shine: but if he be Poor, and left (...) the thorny cares of this
World, and the Church not administering so to him, (...) to put him into a
Capacity to answe^ this requirement of the Gospel, when will the fault and
blame lie? Therefore* since he ought to be a pattern of Hospitality and Charity;
we argue, it is doubtless the indispensible Duty of the People to whom he
Ministers, to be conce^ned to the uttermost of their Abilities to make him
capable of giving Proof (...) this Grace, by the Exercise of it as the^ may be
Occasion.

Ninthly, We also argue for this Duty from the Consideration of the
Honourableness of it, when it is faithfully discharged* it being one of those
things, which (...) Honest, Just, Pure, Lovely, and of g^ Report, there is both
Virtue and Pr^ attends it, Phil. 4.8. First of all, Ho^ can Men think you are
the People yo^ profess your selves to be, viz. Such w^ endeavor to Walk
Blamelessly, i^ observing all the Ordinances an^ Commandments of the Lord Jesus
whilst you neglect this so plain and undeniable an Institution, even such a
one, that it is expressly said, So God has Ordained it, etc. Why are you so
Zealous for some other Precepts and Remiss here? Does not the same God who
commands you to Repent, to Believe, and to be Baptized, and to Love one
another; command you also to Communicate to your Ministers in all good things?
How is it then? that any can be so partial in the Law of Jesus Christ.

2. This will in a great measure de^iver you from that reproach of
Covetousness: What can any People ^hink should be the cause why Christi^ns
should suffer their Ministers to want what is necessary for them, when ^hey
themselves are so full? Unless it ^e from the Spirit of this World; which is a
Sin too often laid at the ^oors of the Professors of this Age: Would to God
there was no cause or ^round for it.

3. Hereby the People will also rai^ the Reputation and Honor of the^
Ministry, and show their great estee^ of them, which well agrees with the
Exhortation of the Apostle; Let t^ Elders that Rule well be accounted w^ thy of
double Honor, especially they w^ Labor in the Word and Doctrine. F^ the
Scripture says, Thou shall not M^ the Mouth of the Ox that treads (...) the
Corn: For the Labourer is worthy (...) his Reward. 1 Timothy 17.18.

By double Honor here is mean^ as some conclude, Reverence or H^nourable
Esteem for Christ's Sake^ whose Ambassadors they are said (...) be, and so
represent His Most Sacre^ Majesty.

2. Maintenance. And it is evide^ this cannot be excluded in this plac^
considering the Connextion of t^ Words following; for the ScriptU^ says, Thou
shall not muzzle the O^ that Treads out the Corn, and (...) Labourer is
worthy of his Reward. T^ Verse, says our Annotators, makes evident, That
Maintenance is part of the double Honor that is due to such as Labor in the
Word and Doctrine. This then must be granted it tends to the Honor of Christ's
Ministers; but it is as evident to all, that those Persons, let them be of what
Persuasion soever, if they should leave their Ministers to the wide World to
shift for themselves, and though Poor, take no care of them; instead of
honoring of them, they would cast a slight and contempt upon them: and hence
it is that others also for their following of some Trades, do lay them under
great reproach, which the Churches to whom they belong, if able, might and oug^
to deliver them from. We are persuaded there are some rich Members (...) most
Congregations, that would not endure that any of their near Relations should
fall under such, or the like Circumstances, or be exposed to such
Inconveniences, because of the dishonor they Judge it would be to ^em; People
knowing they are Wealthy and Great in the World, an^ able to do considerable
for such nea^ Kindred, or else all would say they have no favor nor esteem for
them* And shall Men show greater favou^ and respect to their Carnal Relations,
than to Christ's Ambassadors? Thi^ surely ought not to be.

Tenthly, Further to Evince thi^ great Duty, It may not be amiss to consider of
other great Inconveniences that (...) fellow the neglect of it. There are some
Ministers in the Churches who were brought up to Learning, and who ar^ utterly
incapable to follow Secula^ Trades and Callings: now if Provision be not made
for these Me^ What will become of them? How (...) it possible they and their
Famili^ should Live? Besides, What Inco^ragement is here given to others wh^
are Young, whom God has Grac^ously endowed with considerable Gif^ and are
willing to give up themselv^ to the Ministry? And for their bette^
Accomplishment endeavor after the Knowledge of the Tongues, etc. which we all
confess is very good and serviceable, though not of absolute necessity in a
Minister: Who will apply himself (we say) to gather, and lay up those stores of
solid Learning, which oft-times in the Defense of the Truth against Opposers,
has been found very profitable, when he can expect nothing but Poverty and
Distress thereby: Nay furthermore, may not this neglect quite deter any Godly
Young Men to exercise their Gifts, in order to serve the Churches in after
times, when Death shall call away those Laborers the Churches have ^ow amongst
them, should they see ^he present Ministry slighted, and ^ot provided for: Or
what ground ^ave we to expect a Blessing by the Providence of God, to attend
the Churches in respect of an Able and Honorable Ministry in time to come,
when His great Ordinance is slighted and neglected, which He in Wisdom ^ath
Ordained for an Encouragement upon this very account. In his own Way we may
look for a Blessing, bu^ not out of it.

Nay to be plain with you, Have not some in a few Years last past see^ to their
great trouble and grief, how this neglect and ommission of Duty has laid
(diverse hopeful young Men who were endued with excellent Gift for the Ministry)
under great Temptations, even so far as to refuse utterly the exercise of their
Gifts to the Prof^ and Edification of the Churches; lea^ in process of time
they should be called forth to a Pastoral Charge, an^ thereby be exposed to
Snares and Poverty in the World; as perhaps some poor Ministers and Pastors
have been, and may be daily still are; especially they considering and laying
to Heart the Care and Charge their Paren^ have been at with them, in putting
them forth to good Trades and Callings, whereby they knew with the Blessing of
God they might (if they gave themselves up with a due and necessary Diligence
and Industry to fol^ow those Trades) live well in the World, and sufficiently
provide for themselves (and their Wives and Children, if they saw good to
Marry) ^n aftertimes? And by this very means ^he Churches (may be to their
great ^oss and detriment) have been deprived of those great helps which a
faithful discharge of Duty to the present Ministry, may prevent for time to
^ome. Also, do we not see at this very time what a sad pass some Congregations
are come to already, for want of useful helps in the Ministry, both in City and
Country; some Pastors (nay many of them) being grown very Ancient, and almost
become unserviceable, and not like to continue ^ong: And though the Harvest is
great, yet O! how few are the Laborers amongst us, and fewer they are like to
be, if care be not taken in the discharge of this indispensible Duty to ^he
present Ministry: Nor is it a strange thing that Godly Men should fall under
such a Temptation which we before mentioned, considering this great Evil and
neglect of Duty herein: Since we find of Old in the Holy Scripture the very
same Snare and Temptation many of the Priests and Ministers of the Lord fell
under. Pray read and carefully consider Nehemiah 13.8,9. especially the 10
Verse. And I perceived that the Portions of the Levites had not been given
them; For the Levites and the Singers that did the Work, were Fled every one to
his Field. Now it is evident that through the like Evil and Neglect of the
People to the Levites and Ministers of God, in not giving them that due
allowanee or maintenance God had Ordained for them, they left their work and
service every one of them, and betook themselves to secular Employments, viz.
to labor in the Fields and manure their Land, or gather in their Corn, which
according to the Law others were to do for them. Nor did good Nehemiah (as we
can find) reprove or blame the Levites for so doing: Nor indeed, what reason
was there he should? considering it is a Moral Duty for every Man to provide for
himself and Family; and he that does not do it, the Apostle shows is worse than
an Infidel, and has denied the Faith. But he contended sharply with the
People, especially with the Rulers; saying, Why is the House of God forsaken?
That is, the Work of the House of the Lord. And he gathered them together, and
set them in their place. verse 11. They had not only injured the Levites, as
our Annotators observe upon the place, in withholding their Dues, but also
occasioned the neglect of GOD's House and Service, etc. And he gathered them
together: That is, say they, from their several Possessions in the Country, in
which they were dispersed, and restored them to the Exercise of their Office.
And Then, says the Text, brought all Judah the Tithe of the Corn, and the new
Wine, and the Oil unto the Treasuries. Verse 12. We cannot slightly pass by
this matter, for the Evil and Danger of the Sin of the Churches upon this
account, does as palpably appear in this Case, as in any we have mentioned. How
can we expect in ordinary way to have an Able Ministry raised up; or those who
are now employed in the Work of the Gospel carry on that Work, to the Honor of
GOD, Comfort of His People, and to the Credit of our Sacred Religion, if a
Gospel Encouragement be not given them? True, we may perhaps have Preachers;
some may be willing to Exercise their Gifts, but is it fit think you, to call
such to Preach publicly, who have scarcely one Hours time to prepare
themselves for the Work; or may be have not meet and proper Indowments or
Qualifications for that Holy and Sublime Service. What is it (Judge you) that
causes the Ministry to be slighted and neglected in some places, but the want
of such a Ministry that may honorably carry it on? And who shall we blame?
What would you have poor men to do, that have (may be) no time to spare to give
themselves up to the Study of the Scriptures, nor no useful Books and proper
helps to improve and assist them in their Study: or if they have, yet their
circumstances in the World will not afford them so much leisure from their
worldly Business, to read and meditate upon the Word, so as well to digest what
they have to deliver to the People. Come, think and say what you please; it is
not without diligent and continued Study, that the deep things of God can be
searched out, and so proposed, as to enrich the minds of people with clear and
solid Knowledge: He that is not endowed with the clear Light and Understanding
of Divine Truths, or the mystery of the Gospel himself, How can he Feed others
as they ought to be Fed with the Knowledge of those Sublime and Soul enriching
Mysteries? A little Knowledge and Study it is true (as one observes) may furnish
a man with such a Discourse, as may please some weak Christians that Judge of a
Sermon by the loudness of the Voice and affectionate Sentences, or can fancy
themselves to be Fed with good Doctrine, when perhaps it is but with the Ashes
of Jingling Words and cadency of Terms. But alas! (says he) the seeming warmth
of Affection that is stirred up by such means, is as short Lived as a Land
Flood that has no Spring to Feed it. He that will do the Souls of his people
good, and approve himself a Pastor after God's own Heart, must endeavor to
Feed them with Knowledge and Understanding, that the people may learn and come
to understand those things which were hid, and not opened or known to them
before; and so strive to maintain a constant Zeal and Affection in them, by
well informing their Judgments, and such an opening of the mind of God from the
Scriptures, as may command their Consciences. And this is not to be expected,
but from him that Labors in his Study, as well as in the Pulpit: But says he)
mistake me not; we know ^he success and fruit of all Studies and Labors of men
that preach the Gospel, is from the Grace and Power of the Holy Ghost, but the
assistance of the Spirit is to be expected by the use of means, and in the way
of our Duty. And now from the whole, this is that we say, It Is not to be
thought men can arrive to that degree of Light and Knowledge in the deep things
of God, and mystery of Christ, so as to preach the Gospel as they ought, unless
they dedicate and give themselves up by Prayer and Meditation to the dilligent
search and Study of the Word of GOD, which cannot be done unless some time be
spent, which diverse men cannot spare without a due Allowance for their pains
and loss of time. And this we say too, is nothing less nor more than what God
has Ordained and directly Appointed in this Matter in the New Testament, as we
have sufficiently proved: But to proceed,

Eleventhly, The great Duty of the People to contribute toward the public
Worship of God, and the Ministry may be further demonstrated and the Evil and
Sin in their neglect of it evinced, from the Consideration of that sharp
reproof, and severe Judgments of God, brought against, and denounced upon the
People of Old, upon this very account, so Mal. 3.8. Will a Man rob God? Yet ye
have robbed me: The evil of this People lay in this, i. e. In that they did not
faithfully bring into his House all those Riches and good Things, which by the
Law and Requirement of God they ought to have done, for the carrying on and
management of the Service of the Temple, and public Worship of God; they
through Covetousness, or a base Carnal and Self-seeking Spirit, did retain and
keep back part of these Tithes and Offerings for their own Use, or to enrich
themselves, and did not yield them up to the Use and End God had appointed
them: And this the People might do, i. e. rob God, viz. in withholding from
the Priests of the Lord what was appointed or ordained for them: And also this
the Priests might do, whilst they took too much, and more than what was their
due Allowance, or take the Wages, and not do the Work which was appointed for
them. However, to keep back, or retain part, or the whole, of what God has
ordained and commanded to be brought into his House, for the carrying on, and
well Management of his public Worship, The Lord calls it a robbing of him:
And certainly God has as great Care, and has made as Honorable Provision for
the Gospel Church, and his Worship and Interest now, under this Dispensation,
as he had then; and has appointed or ordained that his People bring into his
House now, so that nothing may be wanting for the Honorable management and
carrying on the Work of the Gospel, and the Ministration therefore, in any
Respect: Nor can this be done without Charge; And if the Lords People shall so
seek their own Things, as not to concern themselves for the Interest of Christ,
but retain, or through Covetousness, keep back that which his Church, Worship,
and public Interests calls for, and by which means, his blessed Interest
should sink and languish in their Hands, who were entrusted with it; certainly,
they will be, and are looked upon, as great robbers of God now, as those were
then, of whom the Prophet speaks.

Would to God this were considered; which of the Nations (as if God should say)
have robbed their Gods: But blush ye Jews, for ye have robbed me, and therefore
ye are cursed with a curse; your Sin, your Sacriledg, of which you are guilty
has so provoked me, and the curse shall abide upon you, so long as ye abide,
and continue in this sinful Course; strange that you dare Sin, whilst I am
punishing you for this Iniquity (so the Annotators) will you go on in your Sin,
whilst you are under the Judgment and Curse of your God? Bring ye all the
Tithes into my Storehouse, that there may be Meat in mine House, and prove me
now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts; If I will not open the Windows of
Heaven, and pour you out a Blessing that there be not room enough to receive
it, verse. 10. (Though we do not say) God has brought the like curse now; yet
we fear the Lords People in England, both in City and Country, are under just
Rebuke in retaining that from God, for the Use of his Public Worship, Service
and Ministry, which he Requires and Commands them to bring in, and lay up in
his Spiritual House; and hence it is he is provoked, and seems to bring a blast
instead of a blessing upon us; we fear we have Cause to say, and cry out with
our Apostle, All seek their own, and none the things that are Jesus Christ's,
Phil. 2.21. Do you think the Service of Gods House can be carried on without
any Charge, or is God less careful of his Church and Ministry under the Gospel,
than he was under the Law. The first Church that was planted after the
Ascension of Christ, were so Zealous and Piously inclined to the Service of the
Gospel, that they seemed to give up all they had for the public Interest of
Christ, and sold their Possessions, which thing you are not required to do; you
may keep your own Propriety in your Goods, Lands and Possessions; but yet,
nevertheless ought you to consider your ways, and not let the Interest of
Christ, and the Gospel to sink under your Hands: Will you dwell in your Ceiled
Houses, and let this House, i.e. The Lord's House lie wast? Especially,
considering it is the Lord's Time, we are verily persuaded in which he is a
going about to build it, and add to the glory of it; What proof have you given,
O ye Christians and Members of the Churches! that you love Jesus Christ more
than Father or Mother, yea, more than Son and Daughter? Which if you do not,
our Savior says ye are not worthy of him; and what Demonstration can we see
of this thing, whilst you thus pursue the World, and endeavor to lay up, nay,
and daily do part with so many Hundred of Pounds, to such a Son, and to such a
Daughter; and yet cannot spare the Twentieth Part thereof for Christ his Church
and Public Ministry? Our Souls mourn and grieve to see what an Earthly and
Covetous Spirit is got into the Professors of this Age, and fear that that Zeal
is much gone; for the Truth and fervent Love to Christ, which was once amongst
those who were his People; does it not appear so? Whilst some of the Churches
seem to be contented with any, nay, the meanest Gifts that are amongst them,
provided they can have them without any Charge, rather than they will seek out,
and endeavor for an Able and Honorable Ministry, because of that great expense
and cost they fear then they shall be at: As also, whilst Careless and mind not
what want of Faithful Laborers there may be abroad in other Places and
Churches, so that they are provided themselves: As likewise, do not give proper
and meet Incouragment for the raising up, and continuing of an Able Ministry
for the time to come. These things are Lamentable, and great ground of Mourning
and bitter Tears: Know ye therefore this, and believe it, that God is offended,
and may justly blast you in your Trades, and Worldly Substance, if he has not
already, because you do not lay this Evil to Heart; and that which you think ye
save this way, may bring a blast upon all you have; and while you look for
much, ye may carry in little, and that which you do gain and bring home, may be
put into a Bag with Holes, Hag. 1 6. pray Read the 6. v. Ye looked for much,
and lo it came to little, and when ye brought it home, I did blow upon it. Why,
says the Lord of Hosts? Because of mine House that is waste, and ye run every
Man to his own House. Many Persons we have amongst us, meet daily with great
Disappointments, Losses, and manifold Afflictions, diverse manner of ways, and
wonder at it, and are troubled at the Thoughts; but we fear do not lay to
Heart, nor consider from whence it is, nor the chief Cause thereof; which
possibly may be, because you have not discharged your Duty to Christ, for the
promoting of his blessed Gospel, and Interest in the World; but have showed
much more Love to, and Care of your own Houses, and Concerns than for the House
and Church of God: God may say of you, O ye Professors! you have toiled and
been at great Cost and Labor; and have expected, hoped, and promised your
selves great Increase; but you have clearly discerned, and were sensible that
it answered not your Expectation, much of it dwindled into very little; you
were loosers, and went backward still, which you have not regarded nor laid to
Heart; but have let my House lie as it were waste; nothing was too much in your
Eyes to lay out on your own Houses and Buildings, to Adorn and Beautify them;
nor did you grudge to provide Sumptuous Provision and Apparel for your Selves,
and for your Sons, and Daughters: Nay, have idly and in superfluities
expended much Treasure to gratify your Lust, and yet have let my poor Children
and Faithful Ministers want such things that were Necessary for them, and not
been concerned to encourage an able and painful Ministry, that the perishing
Souls of Sinners up and down in the Nation might have the Bread of Life; and
from hence is it that your Trades fail, and your Labors bring in but little
increase* But if once you reform your doings, and show your Zeal for the
Gospel, and Love to me, and act as becomes a People professing my Name; you
shall see you shall not be losers by it; for I will open the Windows of Heaven,
and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it:
Nay, says he, Prove me now if I do not do it.

We conclude, the Judgment on the one hand for such a great Evil and neglect of
Duty herein, and Mercies and Blessings promised on the other hand, may be a
great Argument to provoke you to a Faithful Discharge of those Obligations that
lie upon you in this matter. If you have a Desire to be blessed in your Bodies,
Souls, and Estates, take Care of God's House, and bring in your Stores, that
there may be Provision for his Poor, and for his Ministers. But if you neglect
this Duty, and pursue the World, and prefer your own Houses and Things above
those great Things of God and his Gospel, you may look for a blast.

Twelfthly, Consider the Zeal of the Heathen of Old, and that of the
Antichristian Party of latter Times; the former spared no Cost nor Pains to
Beautify and Garnish their Idols, they lavish Gold out of the Bag, etc. Isa.
46. They took it by handfuls as it were, and never told it, as some conceive,
not mattering what Cost or Charge they were at; since it was for the Adorning of
their Gods: The Goldsmith spreads it over with Gold, and casts Silver
Chains. Isa. 40.10. He is (says the Prophet) so impoverished that he has no
Oblation, that he can hardly procure Money sufficient to buy the meanest
Sacrifice for his Gods; he is so Zealous for his Idols, that he will one way or
another find Money to procure the choicest Materials, says the Annotators, and
get the help of the best Artist to make it, etc. Did they show such Zeal for,
and Love to them who were no Gods: And shall not such be ashamed and blush, who
have been so niggerly and sparing to help on the Service and Worship of the
True and Living God? They would have the best Artist, and most Curious Workman
to do their Business, though they impoverished themselves; but some of you, we
fear, can be contented with very unskilful Men, to carry on the Work of the God
of Heaven, rather than be at the Charge to distribute of your Treasure for the
better Improvement of them which you employ, or to procure such who you have
not amongst your selves; and as for the Papists, you cannot be Ignorant what
vast Treasure they have from time to time freely bestowed on their Church, and
large Revenues appointed for their Priests, etc. and have they not commonly
when they come to dye; besides all this, left large Legacies for Spiritual
Uses, as they call them, and all to carry on their filthy Idolatry. But how
little have thou, O Professor parted with to this day, for the upholding the
Church of God, and carrying on the Ministration of the Gospel of Jesus Christ?
Thou have not showed that Zeal for the True God, which some have showed for a
False One: Nor that Care of, and Love to the True Worship of God, which others
have showed for Idolatry: May not these Carnal and Antichristian Heathens one
Day rise up in Judgment against you?

Obj. But may be you will Object and say, it is no marvel the Papists give so
plentifully because they think to merit Heaven thereby.

Answ. What then? Will not you do as much for the Honor of God, and to promote
his Interest in the World, as thou will do for the Salvation of thine own
Soul? If thou have Eternal Life merely of Grace, or through the Favor and
Mercy of God, and Merits of Jesus Christ? How much the more should this lay
thee under an Obligation to be Bountiful and Liberal, to further and carry on,
and promote the Gospel, and the Glory of God in the World? or have you a mind
to betray your own Sincerity? Does not Grace teach you better Doctrine, even to
prefer the Honor of God, above whatsoever is dear to you on Earth.

Thirteenthly, This will render your Ministers inexcusable, if they do not
faithfully discharge their Duties in every Respect, to God and his People; we
mean, when you discharge your Duties to them, according to the Law of Christ,
and Rule of Justice and Righteousness: What will they have to say, to excuse
their Remissness and Omissions in a painful studying Mediation, and preaching
the Word, and in visiting the Flock, when you have freed them from all manner
of worldly Snares and Encumbrances, and comfortably provided for them all good
Things? But on the contrary, if they come forth unprepared, and feed you with
Food that has little Soul Nourishment in it: How can you blame them? or if
they never go about all the Year to know the State of the Flock as their Duty
is, have they not a ready Answer and Excuse? i. e. What shall become of our
poor Families? What can you say to them? Can you excuse them from
indispensible Duties? And say we will be contented with what Service you are
able to do, and all to save your Purses: the Lord open your Understandings, and
show you the great Evil there is in this neglect, in not complying with the
Will of God, in communicating all good Things to them, who Preach the Gospel
to you. And is it not from hence there is such a complaint in some parts of the
Country, for want of the saving Food of God's Word? We hear daily what a vast
blessing those Elders and Ministers are of to the People whereabouts they live,
who are provided for by the Churches, over what others be who are not taken off
of their secular Affairs, being not maintained by the People; one Minister may
do more than several such do or can do. Besides, when once you come to acquit
your selves, as good Christians ought in this Case; with what Comfort may you
be able to give up your Account to Christ? And with Joy and much Soul Peace lie
down, not only in your Beds; but also in your Graves, when you come to Dye.

Motives to press the Duty of the Ministers Maintenance, with an Answer to
other Objections.
1. COnsider well, and remember that your Pastors are the Ministers; nay, the
Ambassadors of Jesus Christ; such who represent his Sacred Majesty, and have
his Commission, for what they act and do in his Name, and dispenee the
Mysteries of God to you, according to their Duty; therefore the Lord Jesus will
account that done to Himself, which is done to his Ministers: He that receives
you (says he) receives me, and he that despises you, despises me, Mat.
10.40. Luke 10.16. If the Name and Authority of Christ will beget an aw in you,
or his Matchless and Unspeakable Love Influence your Souls; there is no doubt
but his word will abide upon you, and cause you to discharge the Duty we have
pressed upon your Spirits. If you acknowledge a Religious Respect and Reverence
due to the Son of God, exercise it in a humble Obedience to his word; and if
you Love him and value his Gospel, treat not his Ministers in an unworthy
manner: Have you not called them off from other Business? And are they not your
Servants? And is not from thence a Gospel Maintenance due to them from you, as
is the wages of your other Servants? Tho we fear some give more to the meanest
Servants in their House, than they to give to the Ministers of Christ.

2. It Is evident, they have a great Charge committed to their Trust, they watch
for your Souls, as they who must give an account, Heb. 13.17. And therefore you
ought to consider them, and pity them, and endeavor to assist them, and put
them into the best Capacity you are able to do, that they may make full proof
of their Ministry, and be free from the Blood of all Men; it is the Business of
your own Salvation, and concern of your precious and immortal Souls, that your
Ministers are employed in; and therefore it is much more your own Interest than
his, and from hence ought to make Conscience of your Duty; for if they cannot
give their account with Joy, that will not be profitable for you: And how can
they give an acccount of Joy concerning you, when you have neglected one great
and indispensible Duty, by which means they were rendered unable to perform
their Work, as became them? Nor can indeed the Ministry ever be effectual to
your Souls, if you be not sincere in Obedience under it: Besides, as one
observes, will you be less Careful for your Souls, and their Eternal welfare,
than for your Bodies, and the Comforts of a Temporal Life? Can you be content
to lay out your Strength and Substance to provide for these, and neglect the
other? Is it not sad, says one to consider, How many there are among
Professors, that live in this World, as if there were no Truth in the report of
that which is to come, and have the meanest esteem of the most necessary means
of Salvation? viz. The Word and Ordinances of Christ, and a Gospel Ministry;
some can expend perhaps an hundred Pounds per Annum, more or less, for
Ornaments or Delights to Adorn a frail Carcass, but will grudg half so much for
the poor Saints, or to the support of the Worship of the Gospel, and his
sinking Interest.

3. Consider how many Temptations and Soul discouraging Weaknesses your
Ministers lie under continually, both from within and without, if sensible of
the greatness of their Work; and of their own insufficiency: You know not
their Fears, their Cares, their Tears, and how hard they are put to it to keep
up in their Work, finding such strong Oppositions made against them by the
Enemy, continually, so that you had need to Strengthen, Comfort, and Encourage
them, as much as you can; and not to add to their Sorrow, and make them serve
you in wants and necessities.

4. We might tell you also what the Apostle says in respect of his Liberty as a
Minister, in forbearing to Work at all: Will any of you say your Ministers must
labor and provide for themselves, when God has Ordained the contrary; and
also when the Apostle says, he had power to forbear Working? See 1 Cor. 9.6.
Or I only and Barnabas, Have we not power to forbear Working? We certainly (as
well as the rest of Christ's Ministers) if we will run out to the utmost end of
the Line of our Liberty in things, without having regard to your Circumstances,
might forbear Working with our Hands, and expect that those among whom we
Labor should maintain it. So the Annotators render it. Now, you would think
this a hard thing, should any of your Pastors make use of their Liberty; yet if
they should do it, provided they were Faithful in their Work and Office,
knowing also your Ability, we would know whether any of you could charge them
with Sin, as we know you may and ought other Persons, who work not and though
the Apostle did sometimes Work, it was of choice, and to prevent the glorying
of those false Apostles, and for some other Reasons, which upon special
Circumstances for that time he mentions, and yet he accounts it amongst his
Afflictions.

Quest. Ought a Pastor or Minister to make Terms with the Church about his
Maintenance, before he take the Charge of them?

Answ. We assert for no such thing, he is to take the Charge freely, and of a
ready Mind: But we say there is as indispensable a Duty lies upon the People to
provide Carnal or Temporal good Things for him, as there lies upon him to
provide Spiritual good Things for them, and to give him Grounds to Believe they
will be Faithful to Christ and to him, in their duty upon that account.

Quest. But what shall that Church do, who are not able to allow a sufficient
Maintenance to their Pastor?

Answ. We have a Threefold Answer to this Question.

First, If through the Poverty of the Church they cannot provide for their
Minister, they may make their Case and Circumstance known to other Sister
Churches, and desire their Aid and Assistance herein; but if they can have
none, and the Church do their Duty to the utmost themselves, and yet they are
not able to supply his Necessities, then he must be contented to suffer with
the Church. But

2. If God Bless a Congregation with a plentiful Portion of this Worlds Good,
it is their Duty to make their Ministers a Party with them in their Flourishing
Condition (and as a late Author says) Considering the Place and Employment he
is in, and the Service he attends, it would be extremely unworthy to think they
have done enough, if his pressing Necessities be answered; whilst they
themselves abound in Superfluities. But if the Congregation be poor, and there
is no helps to he had, then their Minister must and ought to be content to be
poor with them; yea, rejoice to approve himself a Minister of Christ, (as Paul
did) by Hunger and Nakedness, if the Providence of God call him thereto; but
whilst it is in the power of their Hands to provide better for him, God expects
it from them; and let none deceive themselves, GOD is not mocked, nor will he
suffer his Commands to be slighted and evaded, without rendering a just rebuke
to the Offender, For whatsoever a Man Sows that shall he Reap. Yet necessity
is laid upon Christ's Ministers, and woe be to them if they Preach not the
Gospel.

3. It may deserve our most mature Consideration, whether a People may safely
constitute themselves into a Church State, when not able to provide for a
Ministry, especially as the Case may be circumstanced; for possibly they might
very well join themselves to another Congregation near unto them, and be a
great help to such a Church, being Imbodied with them. And this we do say, For
a People to put themselves into a Church State, is one of the most weightiest
Things in the World, and ought with as great Care and Consideration to be done;
we concluding in some places where there are many Churches near to each other,
it would be far better for some of those small and insufficient Societies to
unite themselves to some other Congregation; and by that means the weight of
those Indispencible Duties and Obligations that are incumbent on them, would
with much more ease be borne and answered, to the Honor of Christ, Reputation
of the Gospel, and their own Edification: Moreover, if all Christians ought to
consider whether they may or ought to put themselves into a Church State,
except they have Persons fitly qualified and furnished with Gifts and Graces
for the Ministry; which if they may not safely do, then by the same parity of
reason ought they to consider whether they may proceed therein, if they know
their own Insufficiency in respect of their making a Gospel Provision for their
Maintenance, unless they live remote from any other Church, and so necessity
put them upon their so doing.

Obj. But is not this to build, that which you your selves have destroyed, viz.
Have you not disclaimed against such who Preach for Hire?

Answ. We never went about we hope to destroy any Institution or Ordinance of
Jesus Christ, as the Ministers Maintenance is, as has sufficiently been proved.
But for Men to Preach for Hire, to make that their End, we mean in Preaching
the Gospel, we still utterly disclaim any such Practice, and say it is a low,
carnal, and hase End and Design, and unworthy of any Christian Man.

2. We have always disowned, or do disclaim against Tithes or the Tenths of
Men's Increase, declaring that they are not the right of any Gospel Ministers by
the Law of Jesus Christ, or the due of the Ministers of the New Testament, by
the appointment of the Lord Jesus; being only a Mosaical Rite, and that Law to
be Abrogated, as Aarons Priesthood is.

3. We have always disowned and declared against such Ministers, who use to
strive to compel Men by outward force to Pay them what they call their dues,
it looking so much like an Antichristian Spirit and Practice, and not agreeable
to the Gospel of Jesus Christ; were Love to Christ, and the sense of Duty, we
find ought to be the only prevailing Argument to excite and provoke every Man
to his Duty in this great Case. Moreover you must take heed you are not
prejudiced against your Dutys from mistaken and false Conclusions; because some
will not Preach unless you put into their Mouths, and so make a mere Trade of
Preaching. Will you not answer the requirement of God to those who are the
Faithful Ministers of his Word? Because some will not relieve their Poor,
unless they are forced to do it, Will you disown your Duty to the poor Saints,
and not relieve them, but Object and say, it is too much like the National
practice? Or, do you not like Preaching after that manner, i. e. with a Text,
Doctrine, Reasons, and Application; because such, and such do so, whom you
disown, and cannot have Communion with. Let all such weak Objections be
avoided, and mentioned no more for ever.

Object. You have we fear ever done it; for though we do belive it is the duty
of the Churches to allow to their Pastors a comfortable Maintenance, who are
low in the World, and so exposed to the distracting Cares of this Life, and
thereby hindered in the discharge of their Duty in the Ministry. Yet for rich
Men who need it not, to have an allowance, we see no reason for that.

Answ. We Answer, It is not an act of Charity (to Ministers that are poor) we
plead for, But we have proved it is an Ordinance of God, he has been pleased
to Ordain, that those who Preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel: It Is
their due as they are Christ's Ministers; He is their Portion now, as well as
formerly under the Law, and have therefore as much right to it, as you have to
your Inheritance; and from hence he willed them when he first sent them out, to
take no Money in their Purses, etc. And therefore the State of such you speak
of, cannot exempt you from that Ordinance, nor your duty to them; besides, is it
fitting (think you) that such Minister who have Estates should waste their
Substance, and injure their Children in their Faithfulness to Christ in
Preaching the Gospel, and in the services of your Souls: For their Work is
such, that it calls for all their time and uttermost diligence (in a right
discharge of their Duty therein) and therefore thereby they are prevented of
Improving what they have, for the future comfort and advantage of their
Families: Nay, and we have heard to our great trouble, how some worthy Men, who
have Labored fully to improve their Ministry (through the Peoples neglect of
their duty to them) have in process of time sunk in their Estates, and in Truth
have been brought to a low Condition; for it is rare to see a Pastor of our
Churches to abound in Riches: Tho some (Blessed be God) may be indifferent well
to pass in the World: now to expose a rich man to Poverty, or to let a poor man
shift for himself under wants and necessities, are Evils much of the like
nature: and for a prevention of both, God has ordered it so, that neither of
these things should, or ought to be. Therefore this neglect (in short) exposes
Ministers to Temptations (considering the moral Duty that lies upon them, in
common with other men to provide for their Families) namely, to content
themselves in doing but one part of their Work, viz. to Preach a Sermon or two
in the Week, etc. Now our desires are that they may all be wholly sequestered to
the Lord's Work and Service; and not be other ways employing themselves, when
they should be Preaching the Kingdom of God, but to Labor to fulfill their
Ministry they have received of the Lord, so that they may have their Accounts
to give up with Joy in the Day of Christ.

Object. But our Church is small, and our Pastor cannot take up all his time in
the Lord's Work.

Answer. We Answer, If he wants work, who will hinder him from following of his
secular Business, provided he does faithfully and fully discharge every part of
the duty of his Place and Function? But do not the Neighboring Villages, and
places adjacent want the Gospel, having no Bread for their Souls, and this too
by reason such Pastors are unconcerned in this matter? and by which means it is
doubtless that the Glorious Gospel is no more promulgated up and down in dark
and blind corners of this Nation, nor the Church increases no more; Besides do
not many poor Sinners daily perish hereby for want of Knowledge? Brethren, it is
not for our selves, but for the Lord, and his sinking Interest that we plead
for; it grieves our Souls to hear what cries there are in many parts of this
Kindom for want of Bread, some being forced, we hear, to go twelve or sixteen
Miles to hear a Sermon; now if Ministers of Churches made it their whole
Business to Preach the Word, and concern themselves for the promoting of the
Truth, it would not be as it is at this very time; nor can we think it should
be otherwise, unless we had a traveling Ministry (which we fear we shall
hardly find) unless Pastors and Teachers in the respective Churches were taken
off of all Encumbrances, and so give themselves up to the Ministry of the Word.

God has done great things for us, and has opened a mighty door, and shall not
we do some great thing for Him? The Case, Blessed be the Lord, is much altered:
You may come now into any Town and none dare forbid you, (if any one will but
entertain you) and Preach the Gospel; And shall we not take care to answer this
Mercy; and do what we can that the poor Blind World may be Enlightened, and
brought to the saving Knowledge of Jesus Christ? If the present Providence of
God be not answered by a due Improvement to his Glory, and the furtherance of
the Gospel: We may say with Solomon, Why is there a price in the Hand of a
Fool, seeing he has no Heart to it, Prove. 17.16. By this time we hope you may
more clearly understand us, and what we drive at, and earnestly desire to see
accomplished, viz. That Ministers may not only bear that Name, but with all
Faithfulness do the Work, they are called to; it is not to press our People to
Minister to such Preachers who are Idle and Negligent in their Business, whose
Hearts and Hands are in the World, and eagerly pursue their own secular
Affairs, and matter not what becomes of the Interest of Jesus Christ.

No, it is to encourage the Faithful and Labourous Person, who is willing to
give himself up to the Lord, in the Discharge of that great Turst committed to
him, and to Labor indeed in Christ's Vineyard; it is in truth ^ shame for a
Minister to receive the Lord's Wages, and not do the Lord's Work; some there
are in the World that do not deserve the Name of Mini^ers they doing the Work
of the Lord so deceitfully.

Our Churches also are it is like in some places in the Country but small, and
^re like to be smaller, if the Ministry (...) not awakened to become more
Labourous: Are there not such in some Towns, who are hardly known by the
Inhabitants to be Ministers at ^ll, they are so little concerned in Preaching,
they are better known to be Farmers, Yeomen, and Tradesman, then Preachers of
the Gospel; they are in^angled so in the Affairs of this Life, that they have
but little time to mind ^he great Work they are called to: We would ask some
Ministers, whether ^hey could not do much more, Preach oftener, and in more
Places, and take greater Pains, to promote the Gospel, and gather in Souls to
Christ, than they do? Certainly they will and must say, yea, we might; Why
what is the reason of your not doing it? Ought we not with Mary to do what we
can? We conclude, this Omission of Duty either arises from the evil of your
own Hearts, or else from the Remisness and Neglect of the People, in Respect of
their Duty to you. (1.) It may arise from the Evil in your own Hearts, in that
you have not or do not espouse the Interest of Jesus Christ, equal with, or
above your own: Can any be contented in doing a little Service for Christ, tho
his Interest sinks in their Hands; whilst they thrive in their own concerns,
and grow Rich in the World: Lord, what will become of such Ministers in the
day o^ Judgment? Can they think to loo^ Christ in the Face with Comfort, tha^
have been such slothful Servants; bu^ God forbid there should be any among us
who mind more their own trifling Affairs, than the great Work and Business of
their blessed Lord and Master? Is this the making full Proof of your Ministry
you have received of the Lord? Christ's Ministers are called Laborers, but we
fear some Labor but little, unless it be at their own work: should you be as
Remiss in your own Affairs, as possibly you are in the Lords, you would find
quickly a decay in your Estates, and be in a sinking Condition in the World;
which it is like, would soon startle you, and stir you up to greater Care and
Industry; and ought you not to be as considerate in the great concernment of
Christ, his Gospel and Churches? We take it not upon us to reprehend any of you
but in Love (as fellow Servants may do) to caution you; pray remember, you have
the most sacred Interest and Matters of Jesus Christ committed to your Trust;
it is the greatest Charge in the World, and you and we must be cal^ed to an
Account, if Souls perish in their Sins, and the Watchman gives not suitable
warning, the Blood of those Sinners God will require at the Watchman's Hands,
Zeck. 3. Ministers ought to be the Light of the World, they should shine
therefore in Life and Doctrine, to all round about where they live, that the
People may know they have a Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness amongst them. But

2. This grand fault may arise from the Peoples Remisness of Duty to their
Ministers; for hark, do we not hear many worthy and faithful Pastors crying
out? Alas Brethren, we are no more in the Lord's Work, no more in Preaching,
in Visiting, etc. Because our Families would suffer want, and what is necessary
for them; we should gladly make the Gospel our whole Business, and not only
watch over, and feed our own Flocks, but Preach the Gospel up and down in Towns
and Villages, lying near us, if we knew how our Wives and Children might be
provided for; for should we neglect that great Moral and indispensible Duty,
how would the Holy Name of God be reproached? Alas, our Souls are bowed down in
us, we must confess, we have daily calls to Preach, in this and that place,
where to this day there has hardly been any Meeting; but we are not able to do
it, and therefore, we are forced to send to London, that some Ministers might
come down into our Parts, to Answer that great Call and Cry of Men and Women,
for want of the Bread of Life.

This is a hard Case indeed, i. e. for the Servants of Christ to have the due
sense of the greatness of their work upon their Hearts, but cannot discharge it
according as they see there is a Call and Occasion, by Reason the People
neglect their Duty to them: But however, do what you can, and venture out, God
will provide for you, and move upon the Hearts of such you Preach the Gospel
to, or some other way provide for you: Improve this present Liberty, and do not
let the Lord's House lie waste: Remember, Necessity is laid upon you, and woe be
to you, if you Preach not the Gospel, be not Unbelieving, but trust the
Providence of God; great things he expects from us, who has so gloriously and
graciously appeared for us, and for the Land of our Nativity.

Nevertheless, Let none mistake us; we do not say, it is unlawful for Preachers
to Work or follow Callings; but as Preaching does not make VVorking unlawful,
neither should any VVorldly Business hinder Preaching, therefore when working
with our Hands will further the Gospel, we may Work; we have a Call so to do
(which was once Paul's Case) but when working at Trades and Callings, does
palpably tend to the hinderance of the Promulgation of the Gospel; we must give
over such VVorking, and wholly give up our selves to Preaching etc. It Is but to
make an Expediment, if the People should fail you: You know your Liberty, he
that Labored with his Hands, has by that Example set the Consciences of
Ministers at Liberty, to provide for the Necessities of this Life, by other
Employments, when they cannot Live of the Gospel; but this very thing Paul
accounted amongst his Afflictions; and certainly, it must needs be a sore Grief
and Exercise to any Godly Preacher in this Respect, i. e. when he hears People
calling him, one Day to this Town to Preach, and another Day to that, and he
finds he cannot Answer neither of their Calls, through the Necessities of his
Famly; and the truth is, all do readily grant, that no positive Duty can
Discharge a Man from the Obligations of that pure Moral and Universal Duty of
providing for his Families.

Brethren, you know when the Harvest proves catching, and the Painful and
Laborious Harvest-men are taken off of their Business, then they may do a
little Work for themselves, but when it is good Harvest weather, and the
Harvest is great, and the Laborers but few, they must stick to it and Labor
hard.

Even so when the late Storms of Persecution were upon us, many of Christ's
Spiritual Harvest-men were much hindered and taken off of their Work, and did
may be employ themselves otherwise, in their other Affairs (few being willing
to open their Doors to them;) but now the Providence of God has opened a great
Door for the Gospel, and sent us Blessed Harvest Weather, and the Laborers
alas! being also very few, though the Harvest is very great: How ought we to
stick to our Business?

There was never certainly such a Call to Ministers to Work for God as there is
now; therefore that Servant that will not do his best at such an Hour, is like
the Son (that Solomon speaks of) that Sleeps in Harvest and so causes Shame.
And as a wise Husbandman will not neglect a fit opportunity of gathering in
his Corn, upon presumption of much fair Weather to come: So ought not we to
lose the present Season for gathering in Souls to Christ, not knowing how soon
Clouds may rise, and another Storm overtake us, when we cannot Work for God as
now we may; and if you have not such Encouragement as you ought to have from
the People, yet remember when Night comes, the Lord Jesus will well reward you
for all the pains you take in his Work; yet since our Savior says the
Labourer is worthy of his Hire, we cannot think any (when they consider the
Matter a little better) will any way obstruct, or hinder you in your Business
through their neglect of Duty to you.

Object. But does not Christ tell his Disciples? As they had freely received,
so they should freely give.

Answ. We Believe this Text is not taken, or understood according to the
meaning of our Savior; for it cannot mean that Christ's Ministers should
receive neither Money, Meat, or Clothes, whilst they are employed in his Work
and Service, because in the very next Verse he bids them Provide neither Gold
nor Silver, nor Brass in their Purses, nor two Coats, nor Scrip for their
Journey; because he plainly intimates all such things they were worthy of, and
might expect them from the People to whom they Preached. Therefore it is an
horrible abuse put upon the Text, to take the Words in that Sense; as if our
Blessed Master should forbid his Servants to receive a Maintenance from the
People; for then indeed they might have said, Lord, If we must Preach so freely
as not to receive any thing, it behooves us to provide well for our Journey;
but since they were forbid to do so, it is clear that could not be our Saviors
meaning: Besides, such a Sense is directly opposite or repugnant to those other
Precepts the Lord Jesus has laid down by his Apostles in the Epistles; wherein
it is positively asserted (as you have heard) that He that is taught in the
Word ought to Communicate to him that Teaches in all good things, 1 Timothy 5.18.
And that they who Minister at the Altar should partake of the Altar; God having
Ordained that he that Preaches the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor.
9.14. Therefore we rather are of the Opinion (in respect to this Text) with a
late worthy Writer; The Doctrine (says he) they were to Preach, they were
Empowered to Confirm with Miracles; which (say they) He gives them a Charge
they should Work freely, without receiving any Reward for them; that the
Miracles might not be used to their private Profit, but to the End they were
appointed of God, which was the Confirmation of their Doctrine.

2. It may also teach us that Ministers ought not to make a Bargain with the
People, or desire to know what they shall have before they enter on their Work;
for he who would approve himself a true Minister of Jesus Christ, o^ (...) not
to Preach for Hire or filthy ^cres sake, i. e. that ought not to be the thing
he aims at; that is a low and base design, but as you know Churches provide and
ought to provide for the Poor; yet should any seek to come into your Communion
merely for a Maintenance, you would say he or she that did so, were no better
than Hypocrites, and (may say truly) yet that would not free you from
communicating to poor Faithful Christians. Even so, if some deceitful and
carnal Persons should undertake the Work of the Ministry for filthy Lucres
sake, and not in Love to Christ, and to promote his Interest and Glory, they,
doubtless act contrary to this Precept of Christ. But yet nevertheless, the
Church i^ bound to communicate and allow a comfortable Maintenance to her
Faithful Ministers; and as he freely, and of a ready Mind, and for Christ's
sake, Preaches the Gospel, and is bound so to do if he will approve himself
Faithful; so in like manner are the People and Churches of God bound freely and
of a ready mind to Minister to them, if they would show to all they are
Faithful Christians, such who have an equal respect to all Christ's Commands and
Desire, to the utmost of their Abilities, to further and not hinder the
promulgation of the Gospel in the World.

But by the way it is plain, had it not been the practice of the Gospel
Churches in the Apostles time, to allow their Pastors a Maintenance, what room
was there for the Apostle to caution any Minister or Elder not to undertake the
Work for filthy Lucres sake, but of a ready mind. Moreover, very remarkable is
it to consider how the Priests of God under the Law were to receive that
Portion Jehovah gave them: They were not (as Mr. Ainsworth notes) To receive
it after a base or servile manner, but as Gifts due to the Lord, and to them
from him: The Hebrew Canons (says he) show the Israelites were to give them
their Portion with Honor; and it was unlawful for the Priests or Levites to
snatch away the Heave Offering, or the Tithes; yea, says he, if they did but
ask their Portion with their Mouth it was unlawful. Read his Annotation on
Numb. 18. v. 12. And then on Deuteronomy. 18.3. He says again, the Priest might not
violently take the Gifts, nor ask them with his Mouth, but he received them
when they were given him with Honor.

This may teach us two things. First, that Christ's Servants ought to take heed
they show all true and real Zeal and Love to Christ, when they undertake his
Work and Service; and not to show such a servile and base Spirit as to demand
their Portion that God has Ordained for them, but leave it to the free will
Offering of the People. Secondly, It may also teach Churches to see they do
neither withhold the Ministers Portion from them, nor give it them grudgingly,
or in an unbecoming manner, but to hand out to them what they need with due
respect and honor, they being worthy of it, and are to receive it as their
part and portion from God, and as they are His Stewards and Faithful Laborers,
by Virtue of a Divine and Holy Law: Nay, and the Lord's People ought to be as
careful in discharge of this Duty to Christ's Ministers now, as the Israelites
were to the Levites; though as we have already said, their Portion is not the
Tithes of Men's Increase, nor the First Fruits, which Law is Abrogated. Yet
says Reverend Ainsworth, 'The Equity of that Law remains perpetually, as the
Apostle observes, Do you not know that they which Minister about Holy things,
live of the things of the Temple; and they that wait at the Altar, are
partakers with the Altar: Even so has the Lord Ordained, etc. 1. Cor. 13.14.
Because the Ministers of God then were enjoined to attend on His Service, he
would not have them cumbred with worldly Affairs, least (says he) they should
be hinddred from doing their Duties; as it is Written, No Man that Warreth
intangleth himself with the Affairs of this Life, that he may please him who
has called him to be a Soldier. 2 Timothy 3.4. From hence God has ordered it
thus for them.' Moreover, the Hebrews say from hence 'twas Levi was not counted
meeet to have Inheritance in the Land of Israel, or Spoils with his Brethren,
because he was separated to Serve the Lord, and to Inherit him, and to teach
his strait Ways, and his Just Judgments unto the People: therefore was he
separated from the ways of the World; they wage not War, as the rest of Israel
do, neither do they Inherit nor Earn for themselves with the Strength of their
Bodies, but they are the Lords Power (or Substance) as it is Written, Deuteronomy.
13.11. Bless Lord his Power; and the Blessed God earneth for them, as it is
Written Numb. 18.20. I am thy Part and thine Inheritance. Maim. Treat. of the
Release and Jubilee, c. 13. f. 12.

The reason of the same Law, it is evident of necessity does remain; the Work of
Ministers is great now, and it is as Holy and as Honorable as ever, and the
neglect of a Faithful discharge herein, as great a Sin as it was then; and
God's People have as great, nay, greater Benefit and Divine Profit by the
Ministry of the Gospel, than those had who lived under the Law; besides
Christ's Servants have the same need of it: moreover, our People are delivered
from other great Burdens and vast Charges that the People of Israel were
continually at; and therefore how unjust and unreasonable a thing is it to
withold a fit and convenient Livelihood from them. Nay, and we must say,
that which any withold from the Servants of God, is the Lord's, and none of
theirs; for he lays claim to part of their Substance, as that which He has
Ordained to his own special service and use of His Faithful Ministers.

Quest. May every one then that Preaches expect an Allowance, though they
Preach but now and then.

Answ. That must be left to the Wisdom and Consideration of the Church; who
ought to consider the Persons Circumstances, with the Call he has to Preach,
etc. But principally it belongs to those who are set a part to that Work, whose
Strength and Time is taken up about the great Affairs of Christ and the Gospel.

Thus we have endeavored to discharge our Duty as touching this great Work,
and have we hope Answered all the material Objections any have to bring, or
urge against the Ministers Maintenance: But since we have a little Room we
shall add some brief hints further, to show the great charge and work of a true
Gospel Minister, and so conclude; that all may see how needful a thing it is,
that every one take care to discharge their Duty in this matter to them,
whereby also the Justness and Righteousness of the Law, and appointment of God
herein, may yet further appear to all.

The Great and Weighty Work of a True Gospel Minister opened.
THE Nature and Weightiness of the Work of the Faithful Servant of Christ,
together with the necessity and difficulty of it, we shall consider in its
parts in a brief and compendious manner.

First, It Is a Holy and a sublime Office; he is placed in a very high Sphere
and Station, hence called the Ambassador of Christ; What higher Dignity can be
conferred on Man? The greatness of the Prince whose Messengers they are, sets
forth their Dignity; they are in Christ's stead Employed in the great Affairs
of His Spiritual Kingdom; and have received Authority from Him, and are also
prepared and qualified for this Sacred Work by Him, and indeed therefore ought
to be blameless, as the Stewards of God: And hence it is that those who are
said to receive them, receive Him; and those who despise them, despise Him. O!
with what Holy Fear, Dread, and Reverence ought they to enter upon this Work
and Office, least they should dishonor their great and glorious Prince and
Heavenly Sovereign, whom they represent! Is it not a weighty thing to be made
the Mouth of Christ?

2. Nay, and this is not all, they are entrusted with matters of the highest
moment in the World, Christ having committed the Management of his Glorious
Interests, and great concerns he has on Earth into their Hands; they are sent
to treat with poor Sinners about Eternal Matters, even the Eternal Life, or
Eternal Death and Damnation of their Precious and Immortal Souls, in and about
these things Ministers of the Gospel are Fellow Workers together with Christ.
2. Cor. 6.1. Though but as Instruments, serving him as the principal Agent, and
efficient Cause: He trod the Wine Press of his Fathers Wrath alone; but in the
Application of the purchase of Man's Salvation, he admits of Fellow-workers,
tho the internal Work be his, i. e. the effects of his Spirits upon the Souls
of those whose Hearts are changed; yet there is a Ministerial part which lies
on the faithful Discharge of the Minister's Duty, which consists partly in
Exhortations, Motives and Arguments, by the Ear conveyed to the Soul; and thus
Ministers may be said to be Workers together with Christ, and without him they
can do nothing, they are Workers, but they must have Christ Work with them, or
they will find that they Labor in Vain.

But is it not think you a high and most sacred Place and Office thus to be
employed? May not every one of us say, who are sufficient for these things, for
we are unto God (says the Apostle) a sweet savor of Christ in them that are
saved, and in them that perish, 2 Cor. 2. for that God whom we, serve, will not
Judge of us, nor reward us according to our Success (as a worthy Author
observes) but according to our Faithfulness and Diligence in his Work, we give
(as if Paul should say) a good savor by our Doctrine unto all, and our Labors
are a sweet savor in the Nostrils of God, whatever effects they have upon the
Souls of Men; God accepts of our Labors, as to good Men, to whom we are
Instruments of Eternal Life and Salvation; and though others despise the
Gospel, and refuse the sweet sound thereof; yet as to them also, we are a sweet
savor in the Nostrils of God, tho Israel be not saved, says the Prophet, yet
I shall be glorious; it is not through any neglect in us, as to our duty if any
perish, but from their own Willfulness and Rebellious Hearts. To the one, we
are the savor of Death unto Death, and to the other, the savor of Life unto
Life. And who is sufficient for these things. ver. 16.

As sweet smells, which are to some pleasant and comfortable (says a Worthy
Author) yet are to others pernicious and deadly; so it is with the sweet savor
of the Gospel; the report which we in all places make of Christ, to some
(through their unbelief, and hardness of their Heart, and fondness of their
Lusts) proves; but the Savor of Death unto Death, hardening their Hearts to
their Eternal Ruin and Destruction; but to such who (being ordained to Eternal
Life; believe our Report, and) embrace the Gospel, and live up to the Precepts
and Rule thereof; our Preaching proves a Cause of Spiritual and Eternal Life to
which that leads; but O how great a work is this! What Man? What Angel, is
sufficient for it? O it is a mighty Work to Preach the Gospel, as we ought to
Preach it; it is that by which Faith comes, How shall they believe on him, of
whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear, without a Preacher? And how
shall they Preach, except they are sent? Romans 10.14. i. e. Unless they have an
extraordinary or ordinary Mission, i. e. either from God more immediately
(which Call is long since ceased) or else, by the Election of the Church, and
Ordination of the Elders, or Presbytery; this is necessary in all Regular
Ministers: How else can they duly or profitably in the Name and Authority of
Christ, preach the Word of Life? Brethren, (you who are Christ's true Ministers
being orderly called to this sacred Work,) your Preaching has attendency,
either to save, or eternally to condemn the Souls of Men; and with what
trembling then, ought this Work to be undertaken and performed; you are
entrusted with Men's Souls, and must be accountable for them; especially, such
who are committed to your Charge; did we consider it, and duly ponder upon it
in our Minds, certainly, we should have little else to think upon, nor trouble
our Heads and Hearts about, it would be sure cause us to be more Serious, and
Laborious, we are persuaded, than we are: What shall we do, if through our
Neglect and Remisness in this great Work, any should die and perish in their
Sins? Mind what God says in that of Ezekiel. 3.18. Unto his Watchman, When I say
unto the wicked, thou shall surely dye, and thou give him not warning, nor
speak to warn the wicked from his way, to save his Life, the same wicked man
shall die in his Iniquity, but his Blood I will require at thine Hand; tho some
do profanely scoff and deride, yet must we speak to them, and warn them, until
it do appear they are such as will turn again and rend us, Men must be told
their Sins, and their Dangers, that so we (as Instruments in God's Hand) may
preserve their Souls, and recall them a^ once both from Sin and Death, the Man
who is not warned, will certainly die in his Sins, his Ignorance will not be
sufficient to prevent his Ruin and Damnation; but if Ministers admonish him
not, warn him not, that will involve them also under Guilt and Danger, God will
punish such Ministers and Watchmen, who possibly might have saved those
perishing Sinners, however they ought to have warned them, And

Hence how Careful was St. Paul, see Acts 20.26. that ye might be pure from the
Blood of all Men; he appeals to the Church of Ephesus, in that matter they
knowing his great Care, Faithfulness, and unwearied Industry, upon every
Respect; and shows that no Soul had been lost through his default, he having
sincerely, and in all simplicity declared to them the way of Life, and
persuaded them to walk therein, and had not kept back any part of the Will and
Mind of Christ from them, but had showed them the whole Counsel of God, and
ceased not for ^hree Years (which was all the whole ^ime he was amongst them)
to warn ^very one Night and Day with Tears. Acts 20.31. The precious Worth of
the Immortal Souls of Men lay upon the Spirit and Conscience of this Blessed
Apostle: And in this he laid forth himself as an Example for all true and
faithful Ministers, who are in^oyned elsewhere to follow his Steps. ^f one Soul
be worth more than all the World; How great is the charge of Christ's
Ministers, that have many Souls committed to their Care and Trust? But

2. This is not all, they are Entrusted with that Holy, High, and Peculiar
Interest which Jesus Christ has ^ere below, which is dearer to him ^han Ten
Thousand Worlds; He is gone into Heaven, and has left H^ great Concerns He
has here (...) Earth to them to mind and look afte^ (...) and take the care
of: For the good of which, and to carry it on, and for the perfecting of it: He
has shed His most Precious Blood, and given His Holy Spirit to them in the
Gifts and Graces of it, and appointed them a Livelihood, without being
encumbered with worldly Business; and has also promised them a Crown of Glory
at last, if they abide Faithful to the end, assuring them that they, and all
others who turn many to Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars for ever more.
Dan. 12.2,3.

3. They are not only Stewards of the Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. But also
Entrusted with the charge and care of his Churches, and Holy Doctrine of the
Gospel; Ministers are the Stewards of Christ's House: Moreover, It is required
in Stewards, that a Man be found Faithful, 1 Cor. 4.2. Especially such Servants
who are entrusted with their Masters Goods, to be dispensed out to others: Now
the Faithfulness of such Stewards lies in their giving to every one their due
Portion, according to their Masters order, and not detaining any thing from
others which he has ordered them to have; the same in quality, not Water
instead of Wine, nor Dross instead of Gold: not Men's Inventions and Traditions,
instead of his Holy Sacraments and Sacred Institutions. And the same for
quantity; not now and then a small Portion, but as Christ has provided plenty,
so they should plentifully hand forth to all His Servants: And they also must
be Faithful to cherish and strengthen the Weak, and heal with all Skill and
Tenderness the wounded and sickly Ones of Christ's Family, and every way improve
their Masters Money, and do what they can to gather in Souls to him: For one
chief End of Gospel Ministry is for the gathering together of the Saints; as
well as for the Edifying the Body of Christ; therefore in every place where
there is a Door opened for them, they must work hard whilst there are any
Sinners to be called into the Vineyard, and must not leave their Masters
Business to follow their own; especially when they know not but Christ has
much People in and about the place where they live, who are to be brought into
His Fold.

Secondly, The necessity and usefulness of their Work and Ministration is
opened by diverse other Metaphors: viz. they are called Shepherds; What would
soon become of the Sheep, if the Shepherd should be careless, they will quickly
go astray, etc. the Wolf would devour them. They are called also Guides, and of
Old Seers and Watchmen; being set to discover and give warning of approaching
danger.

The Greatness and Labouriousness of their Work, is set forth by their being
called Planters, Builders, and Laborers.

The Dignity and Honourableness of their Work and Office is set forth by their
being called Fathers, Angels, Ambassadors, Stars and Rulers: Now from the whole
it must needs appear to all, that the Ministers Work is hard and difficult: We
may well say, Who is sufficient for these things? It Is such a Work that it
caused some of God's Servants of Old, to undertake it with much Trembling; nay
it made Moses to cry out, Send by whom thou will send. Exodus 4.13,

It Is so hard and difficult, that a man with all his acquired Parts is not
sufficient for it; nay, a Saint with all his Spiritual Gifts and Graces is not
able to perform it without fresh supplies of renewed Strength every Day.

But to proceed, the difficulty of the Ministers Work lies in these respects
following.

First, In regard of themselves who are Employed in it.

1. They are but Men; Son of Man I have made thee a Watchman. And as they are
men, so commonly they are not the wisest and most learned in respect of humane
Parts and Knowledge neither. You see your Calling Brethren.

2. Man at best is but a Worm, he is but a poor dark-sighted Creature, we
(says the Apostle) know but in part.

3. Man at best with all his Accomplishments, is attended with Weakness, and
carries about with him, a Body of Sin and Death. Romans 7.

4. Man at best with all his Heavenly Graces, has but small Skill, and short
Experiences.

5. Man at best is subject to great Discouragements, and liable to many
grievous Temptations.

Secondly, The difficulty of their Business, lies in the Work it self, the
Ministers Employment is hard, and no ways easy. Because,

1. It Is a Mysterious Work, what Mysteries are greater than those a Minister
is to study, and dive into? Without Controversy, great is the Mystery of
Godliness. 1 Timothy 3.16. But we speak the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, even the
hidden Wisdom. 1 Cor. 2.7.

That which the most wise, and knowing in the same Art, can reach or understand
but part of, must needs be a great Mystery; but so it is here, for the Apostles
who had the greatest and clearest Knowledge of these Mysteries, as any ever had
in the World; yet declare, they knew but in part, and saw but in part, darkly,
as through a Glass. ver. 13.9.12. It Is such a Mystery, that he that thinks he
knows any thing, knows nothing, as he ought to know.

What a Mystery is that of the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus? That the Nature
of Man should be joined to the Divine Nature of God, and both make but one
Christ.

What a Mystery is there in the Doctrine of Faith? 1. That a Man should go out
of himself, and be carried above himself, to believe things impossible to Man's
Natural Reason, that he should seek for Justification, by the Righteousness and
Obedience of another; for a Man (as one would think) to have a great store of
Holiness, and good Works, and yet throw it (as it were) all away, and be dead
to it in point of Trust, and Dependence, is to Natural Men a strange Mystery.
2. To believe when every thing is opposite to it: To Work for Life, and oppose
some Sin, a Natural Man is ready to do; but to believe in Christ, for Life and
Holiness, to rely on his Doings, his Works, his Merits; this the Heart of Man
cannot understand, but is naturally averse to; nay, and Satan also opposes it,
and the World mocks at it, and accounts it Foolishness. 3. That a Man should
believe and not see; nay, believe as Abraham did, in hope, against hope is a
Mystery.

Yet, may be there are some greater Mysteries than this which a Minister is to
Study, in respect of Christ the Mediator; his Work, Offices, Glorious Covenant,
Ordinances, and Providence of God in the World, and therefore his Work is a
difficult Work.

2. It Is difficult, in that it calls for the greatest Care and Exactness
imaginable, every thing must be done according, to the Holy Pattern set by
Christ in the Gospel, there must be no adding to, no diminishing from, nor
altering of any thing in the least, without eternal hazard and danger.

3. It Is difficult and very hard in that it calls for the greatest strength
that the most strong in Grace and Wisdom can arrive unto, it requires all the
Powers of the whole Soul to be exerted or put forth to a right Discharge
thereof.

4. It calls not only for all our strength, but also all our Time and
Diligence; a slothful or Idle Person is not fit to be a Minister, it is a work
that must be followed continually, let the times be what they will; Preach the
Word, be instant in season, and out of season, reprove, exhort, with all long
Suffering, and Doctrine; be not Slothful, but Diligent, fear no Faces, regard
no Threats, respect no Man's Person, reprove all impartially, be no fawning nor
flattering Preacher; nor like those who rather vent their own Passion, than
pursue the end of Instruction, and Reformation of Souls; and this is a hard
Work to do.

5. It Is difficult Work, in respect of the opposition that is made against
them, and the Grand Obstructions they meet withal.

1. From their own Hearts, the Flesh is weak, tho the Spirit indeed is willing,
many times, that it is ready to say with Peter, Master, pity thy self; Why do
thou spend thy Time, thy Strength, and ware out thy poor Body at this sort?
Less may do, etc.

Besides, The Heart of a Minister (who is sensible of the Nature of his Work,)
causes him often to tremble, in Consideration of his Unfitness, and Unworthiness
for such a sacred Undertaking and Employment.

2. From Sin, in dwelling Sin, and other Humane Frailties; alas, they are Men
of like Passion and Infirmities with others.

3. From Satan, he is an Implacable Enemy to them, and to their Work; hence he
raises up all the Opposition against them imaginable, to hinder them in their
Business, or take them off of it, or make them Remiss and Negligent in doing
it, we are not Ignorant (says Paul) of his devices. 2 Cor. 2.11.

4. From the World, 1. by Reproaches and Contradictions of Ungodly Men, 2. By
Heretics and False-Teachers, with these they are forced to fight, and many
times are hard put to it, as Paul when he engaged those evil Beasts at Ephesus.

5. Lastly, By Persecutors, allways the heat of this Battle falls upon Christ's
poor Ministers; they are the Mark these wicked Archers shoot at; hence they
like Paul are often in Bonds, and Prisoners for Christ's sake.

Now, put all these things together, and is it not needful (think you) that
your poor Ministers be thought upon, and encouraged by you, as Christ has
appointed? But we shall say no more, only, conclude all with one Word to our
Fellow Laborers. Brethren, let us strive to double our Diligence, and show to
all the sense of the greatness of our work is upon our Spirits; and tho we have
not that encouragement from the People that God has Ordained; yet, remember we
serve a good Master: Besides, a Necessity is laid upon us, we must Preach the
Gospel; and let us, be contented, with that State and Portion we meet with in
the World; it is our great Business to approve our selves the Ministers of
Christ, in Labors, in Watchings, in Fastings, by Pureness, by Knowledge, by
the Holy Ghost, by Love unfeigned, by the Word of Truth, by the Power of God,
by the Armor of Righteousness, on the Right Hand, and on the Left; by Honor,
and Dishonor; by evil Report, and good Report, 2 Cor. 6.5,6,7,8. Possibly, we
may be reproached, and sensured for what we have done, and said, in this small
Tract. But should it be so, we matter it not, since we have the Testimony of
our Consciences, that our Design is the Glory of God, and the promoting his
Blessed Gospel in the Nation, and the good of his poor Churches; and also,
because we know we have the sure Word of God to confirm the Truth of what we
plead for: Wherefore, whilst we make it appear to all, it is not the Hire, the
Wages, etc. that we aim at, but contrariwise, the Honor of the ever blessed
God, and to VVitness to the Sanction of every one of his Just and most Holy
Precepts, we cannot be without Peace in our own Souls.

FINIS.

