The true Effigies of the late Reverend Divine Mr. HANSERD KNOLLIS, Aetatis
suae 93.
F. H. van Hove. sculp:
portrait of Hanserd Knollis

THE LIFE and DEATH OF That Old Disciple of Jesus Christ, and Eminent Minister
of the GOSPEL, Mr. HANSERD KNOLLYS, Who Dyed In the Ninety Third Year of his
Age.

Written with his own Hand to the Year 1672. and continued in General, in an
Epistle by Mr. William Kiffin.

To which is added, His last Legacy to the Church.

LONDON, Printed for John Harris at the Harrow in the Poultrey, 1692. (...).

FUIMUS The Right Honble. Charles Viscount Bruce of Ampthill (Son and Heir
Apparent of Thomas Earl of Ailesbury) and Baron Bruce of Whorleton
bookplate

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
IT was the special Charge God gave to his people of old, that the many signal
Provioences and Mercies that they had received from him, should by them be
recorded and left to their Childrens Children, to that end, that the memorial
of his goodness might cause them to love and fear his Name, and therefore they
are required to bless the Lord from the Fountain of Israel, from the very
beginning of all his Favors toward them; and it is no small favor the
Servants of God are made partakers of, that his people of old have left so many
testimonies of the gracious goodness and Providence of God toward them, they
being a means to strengthen the Faith of his People, in a dependency upon him
in all those variety of dispensations that do attend them in this World; that
whatever troubles they meet withal in this Life, they may know that God deals
no otherwise with them than be has done to those that formerly have feared his
Name, and may be comforted with the same comforts and supports which his
Servants formerly have received from God. The Author of these ensuing
Experiences, was that ancient and faithful Servant of God, Mr. Hanserd Knollys,
who departed this Life in the 93d. year of his Age, having bin employed in the
Works and Service of Christ, as a faithful Minister for above 60 Years, in
which time he labored without fainting under all the discouragements that
attended him, being contented in all conditions, though never so poor in this
World, under all persecutions and sufferings, so he might therein serve his
blessed Lord and Savior. I have my self known him for above 54 years, and can
witness to the Truth of many things left by him under his own hand; st is great
pity that the last 20 years of his Life cannot be found amongst his Writings,
which to the knowledge of many were attended with the same fufferings as
formerly, and with the same holy Behaviors under them; he in that time was a
Prisoner in the New-Prison for the Truths sake many months, where with great
cheerfulness he remained, comforting and encouraging all that came to visit
him, with many blessed Exhortations to cleave to the Lord; none were sent empty
away without some spiritual Instructions, and many of his Fellow Prisoners were
greatly strengthened and comforted by that heavenly Counsel that dropped from
his lsps, spending much of his time there in Prayer and Study of the Word of
God, daily preaching to them the things that concern the Kingdom of God.

He was chosen an Elder to a Congregation in London, with whom he labored for
near 50 years, under many difficulties that dsd attend him, but neither the
poverty of the Church, nor the Persecutions that attended him, were any
temptation to him to neglect his Duty toward them, but was willing to be poor
with them in their poverty, and to suffer with them in their sufferings* being
willing to labor for his own and his Families Bread, by keeping a School, when
they were not able to supply his wants, although he wanted not opportunity to have
advanced himself in the World, if he would have accepted of them; but like a
faithful Pastor he chose rather to be poor, and suffer affliction, than to
leave the Duty and Work he was called unto, in which he was employed, until he
arrived to the age of above Ninety years, and when he found weaknesses attend
him, his love and affection to that poor Church was such, that he was daily
exercising his thoughts to have an able Minister for them in his room;
declaring to several of his Friends what great satisfaction it would be to him,
to see one settled amongst them, and that he would be willing to part with
something of that little which he had (if there was need) for his Maintenance
of the Church, toward the supply of him: And it pleased God to provide one for
them, to his great satisfaction and rejoicing. And so great was his natural
affection, and tender care for his Daughter and Grandchildren, who he knew
were like to come to some distress, that he did accordingly at that great Age
again undertake the Teaching of a School, that he might do to the uttermost of
his ability to provide for them.

And having finished his Work, he fell asleep in the Lord, the 19th. of
September, 1691. That these Experiences may be of use to all those that read
the same, is the Desire and Prayer of

Thine in the Lord, William Kiffin.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mr. Hanserd Knollys.
I Hanserd Knollys was Born at Calkwell near Loweth in Lincolnshire, and was
removed thence with my Parents to Schartho near Market Grymsby in the same
County. About the sixth Year of my Age I fell into a great Pond, and was
preserved from being drowned by the water bearing up my Coats, till my Father
came, leaped in, and pulled me out. About the tenth Year of my Age I having
construed the 35th. chap. of Jeremiah in my Latin Bible to my Father, he took
occasion to dissuade me from the love and use of strong Drink, and said he
would give me 20 l. if I would drink water, but withal told me he would not
have me do it to the prejudice of my Health, and charged me to make no Vow to
God so to do for I did not understand how Sacred a thing a Vow is, and how it
did bind the Soul, and it would be Sin not to perform my Vow: whereupon I drunk
water eleven years, and never in all that time drank any Wine, nor strong
Drink. About that time my Father kept a Tutor in his House, to teach me and my
Brother, who was a godly and conscientious Young Man; He gave us good
Instructions for our Souls, and convinced us of the Sin of Sabbath-breaking,
and of Disobedience to our Parents. After my Father had preferred our Tutor to
a place of greater Profit, we went a little while to Grymsby Free School, till
my Father got another Tutor for us into his House; and one day going to the
Free School we fell out, and fought: upon which I was much convinced that we
had sinned against God, and against our Father, who had often told us we were
Brethren, and ought not to Fall out by the way: And I said, Brother, we have
sinned, come let us be Friends, and pray God to pardon this, and other our
Sins; whereupon we both kneeled down upon the plowed Land, and I prayed, wept
and made Supplication to God, as well as I could, and found so great Assistance
from God at that time, that I never used any set Form of Prayer afterward;
which done, we both kissed each other, and went to School.

Afterward I went to Cambridge, and there a godly Minister preached on Hosea
the 5th. Chap. and 17. ver. His Doctrine was, That the joining to Sin by often
committing it after Conviction of Conscience for it, did provoke God to give
over many to the power of their Corruptions, and let them alone to dye in their
Sins. I was thereby convinced that it was my Case, for I had oftentimes broken
the Sabbath after Conviction, and I had disobeyed my Parents, and had often
told Untruths. The same Lord's Day at Night, another godly Minister preached at
five a Clock upon Ephesians. 2.3. and thereby I was much more convinced of my sinful
Condition, and that I was a Child of Wrath, without Christ and Grace, etc.
which Work of Conviction remained strongly upon me above one year, under which
I was filled with great Horror, and fears of Hell, sore buffettings and
Temptations of the Devil, and made to possess the Sins of my Youth. But yet I
prayed daily, heard all the godly Ministers I could, read and searched the Holy
Scriptures, read good Books, got acquaintance with gracious Christians, then
called Puritans, kept several days of Fasting and Prayer alone, wherein I did
humble my Soul for my Sins, and begged Pardon and Grace of God for Christ's
sake; grew strict in performing Holy Duties, and in Reformation of my own Life,
examining my self every night, confessing my Sins, and mourning for them, and
had a great Zeal for God, and an Indignation against Actual Sins, both
committed by my self and others.

June 29th. 1629. I was ordained Deacon, and the next day, June 30th. I was
ordained Presbyter by the Bishop of Peterborow, having Preached above 16
Sermons before I would be Ordained, by way of Trial of my Ability for that
great Work of the Ministry.

After my Ordination, the Bishop of Lincoln gave me a small Living at
Humberstone, where I preached twice every Lords Day, and once every Holy Day:
That which made me strict and Laborious in Preaching, was partly the Work of
Conviction upon my Conscience, but more especially a Providential Acquaintance,
that I had gotten with a very godly old Widow in Gainsburgh, where I taught
the Free School, before I came to Humberstone, who told me of one called a
Brownist, who used to pray and expound Scriptures in his Family, whom I went
sometimes to hear, and with whom I had Conference, and very good Counsel.
Whilst I was at Humberstone, there lived a very Religious Widow, who falling
sick, sent for me, and charged me that I would not depart her House on the
daytime until she ended or mended, least Satan should tempt her above her
strength. The Doctor of Physic had given her over, some godly Ministers,
Friends and Relations did take leave of her as a Dying Woman. She received
nothing for several days, but a little Julep, which was put into her Mouth with
a Spoon, and ran most of it out again, lay speechless two or three days; her
Family mourning over her, and expecting her Death every Hour: I had brought
some of my Books to her House, and was studying her Funeral Sermon: and when I
had almost finished the same, the Devil set upon me with a violent Suggestion,
That the Scriptures are not the Word of God; He had suggested this Temptation
to me diverse Times before, but prevailed not: Now the Tempter assaulted me with
this Argument; Whatever you ask in the Name of Christ, God will do it, but that
Scripture was not true; and if I would put it now upon Trial, I should find it
not to be true, for if I would ask the Woman's Life in the Name of Christ, God
will not do it, and thereby I should know, the Scriptures are not true, nor are
they the Word of God, for his Word is true. To which I answered, Satan, thou
art a Liar, a Deceiver, and a false Accuser. The Holy Scriptures are the Word
of God, and the Scriptures of Truth: And seeing thou have often tempted me in
this kind, and now do assault me again, that I may for ever silence thee,
thou wicked and lying Devil, I will trust in God, and act Faith in the Name of
Christ in that very Word of his Truth which thou have now suggested. I will
leave my Study, and go and pray for her, and believe that God will hear my
Prayers through the Intercession of Jesus Christ, and restore her Life and Health,
that thou may be found a Liar: Whereupon I went into the Parlour where she
lay speechless, without any visible motion, or use of any Senses; and I locked
the Door, and Candles being in the Room, I kneeled down by her Bedside, and
prayed above half an hour, using my Voice, and then she began to stir, toss,
and struggled so much, that I was constrained to stand up, and holding her in
her Bed, still prayed over her: Satan then gave me a great Interruption, and
suggested to me she was a dying, and these were the pangs of Death upon her; I
notwithstanding this Assault of the Devil, was assisted by the Holy Spirit to
pray and believe still, and in a short time she lay very quietly, and I kneeled
down again and prayed fervently, and within half an hour, whilst I was yet
praying, she said, The LORD has healed me, I am restored to Health: Then I
returned praises to God, and she did join with me, lifting up her eyes and
hands, still saying, I am Healed. Then I rose up from my knees, and asked her
how she did: O Sir, said she, God has heard your Prayers, and has made me
whole. Blessed be his Holy Name. Then I unlocked the Door, and some of her
Kinswomen and Servants being at the Door, came in and asked me if she were
dead, to whom I answered, No. Then they asked me How she did, I bad them go to
her and ask her self. She had been speechless four days, I told them she could
speak now; and as soon as they came to her Bedside, she lift up her self and
said, I am well, the Lord has heard Prayer, and healed me, I am very weak and
sore in my bones, but I am in Health, I pray you give me something to eat; and
as soon as they brought her some broth, she sat up and eat it, and took some of
her Julep, and from that time received strength, and the next day she did rise
and walked with a Staff; which being heard of, many godly Ministers and
Christians came to visit her, and to know the truth of what was told them
touching her Recovery: I told them it was not any thing in me, but it was the
Lord that had done it for His own Glory; and to silence Satan, who was never
suffered to tempt me in that kind afterward; God bruised Satan under my feet,
and my Lord Jesus Christ made a conquest of him, and gave me the V^ctory, and
helped me to give him the Glory of it.

The next Year after this, I Married a Wife, with whom I lived 40 years, by
whom I had Issue, 7 Sons, and 3 Daughters, who was a Holy, Discreet Woman, and
a meet Help for me, in the ways of her Household, and also in the way of
Holiness; who was my companion in all my Sufferings, Travels, and Hardships
that we endured for the Gospel: She departed this Life the 30th. of April,
1671. in full Assurance of Eternal Life and Salvation.

Presently after I was Married, I was convinced of some things about the
Worship of God (which I had conformed unto,) to be sinful, to wit, the
Surplice, the Cross in Baptism, and admitting wicked persons to the Lords
Supper, whereupon I resigned my Living to the Bishop, who offered me a better
Living: I told him I could not conform any longer, and would do nothing but
preach, which he connived at for two or three Years. Shortly after I was
convinced that my Ordination received from the Bishop was not right, and tho I
had preached some years by Virtue of that Ordination, I had not received any
Seal from Christ of my Ministry; for tho many had been reformed and moralized,
yet I knew not that I had been Instrumental to convert any Souls to God: And
thereupon I renounced that Ordination, and silenced my self, resolving not to
preach any more, until I had a clear Call and Commission from Christ to preach
the Gospel. And to that end I gave my self to Prayer day and night, for several
weeks together, and at last being at Prayer in a Wood at Woodenderby in
Lincolnshire, where I had preached before, and prayed with loud cries and
tears, that Christ would count me worthy, and put me into the Ministry, and
show me how to glorify God in the Ministry; and tho I was much melted and
enlarged in Prayer at that time, yet I had no answer from the Lord: After
Prayer I walked and meditated under the Wood-side till Sunset, and then went
homeward, resolved not to preach, till the Lord made my call to that great Work
of preaching the Gospel clear to me. And as I was going home, an answer of my
Prayers was given to me in these words, Go to Mr. Wheelwright, and he shall
tell thee, and show thee how to glorify God in the Ministry; but I heard no
voice, nor did I see any Vision; only those words were plainly and articulately
spoken into my Ears and Understanding: At which I was astonished, and said,
Lord let me not be deluded, nor deceived; then was brought to my mind that
passage of Cornelius sent to Peter, who should tell him what he should do;
whereupon I was fully persuaded it was an answer of my Prayets from the Lord,
and I was filled with such joy, that I went on my way rejoicing, leaping and
praising God. The next Morning going to seek out Mr. Wheelwright, who was a
silenced Minister, whom I had heard of by some Christians, that he had been
Instrumental to convert many Souls, but I knew him not, nor did I know where he
was, but I was resolved to find him out, for I had heard that he was near
Lincoln, about 25 miles from me, where he lived privately: And as I was getting
up on Horseback, one of my Neighbors coming by asked me whither I was riding,
to whom I said I did not certainly know, I was going to Mr. Wheelwright, who
was, as I heard, about Lincoln, No, sald he, Mr. Wheelwhright and his Family
came to dwell at a Village which was but three miles from my house, for, said
he, I saw him come thither but three nights since, with his Family and household
goods in a Coach and a Wagon. Thither I rid presently, and found it so; and I
told Mr. Wheelwright, that yesternight I was praying as before, and was sent
unto him by the Lord, etc. And after he had asked me many things about the Work
of God upon my Soul, and I had told him; he said I could not glorify God
neither in the Ministry, nor in any other way or Work for I was building my
Soul upon a Covenant of Works, and was a stranger to the Covenant of Grace: At
which I was startled, troubled, and somewhat amazed, but I told him I was
assured God had sent me to him, and by his mouth I should be instructed how to
glorify God in the Ministry of the Gospel; and I did earnestly entreat and
beseech him to apply himself to give me his Counsel and directions touching
that Matter.

Then Mr. Wheelwright opened to me the Nature of the Covenant of Free Grace,
which I confessed to him I was a stranger to in a great measure, having bin
only under legal Convictions, and a Spirit of Bondage; and though I had some
discoveries of my want of Christ, yet I had sought Righteousness as it were by
the Works of the Law, and got my peace by performing duties, and rested on
them. Mr. Wheelwright desired me to consider what he had said to me, and to
come to him 2 or 3 days after: So I left him at that time, and went home
exceeding sorrowful about my Souls Condition, but I gave my self to Prayer, and
begged of God to teach me the Covenant of Grace, and to that end I searched the
Scriptures, and I heard one Mr. How preach upon Gal. 2.20. I live by the Faith
of the Son of God; whereby I saw that I had lived a Life of Works, and not of
Faith. Then I began to see a necessity of believing in Christ for pardon and
Salvation; and hearing the Minister say, that Christ was the Author, Root, and
only Foundation of Saving Faith, and that God did give the Faith of Evidence,
Heb. 11.1. in some New Covenant Promise, Gal. 3.14. and that those Promises
were given of God, 2 Pet. 1.4. I prayed that Night, and next Morning, and in
the night season, that God would give me such a promise. The next day I locked
my self in the Church, and in the Chancel, or Quire so called, I prayed very
earnestly, mourning and bemoaning my self and my Souls Condition, fearing, and
with great brokenness of Spirit, and many tears expressed my fears, that God
would leave me and forsake me, and then I should utterly perish for ever: And
then that promise, Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, was
given me, which Promise stopped me a little in Prayer, and I brake forth into
this kind of Expostulation with God, saying, Lord who am I! I am a vile sinful
Sinner, the chief of Sinners, most unworthy of Pardon and Salvation! How, Lord!
never leave me, nor forsake me? O infinite Mercy! Oh Free Grace! who am I? I
have bin a graceless Soul, a formal Professor, a legal performer of Holy
Duties, and have gone about to establish mine own Righteousness, which I now
see is but filthy Rags, etc. Then God gave me those two Promises, Isa. 43.22,
23, 24, 25. and Isa. 54.9, 10. and filled my Soul with joy and peace in
believing, so that I brake forth into praises and Thanksgiving.

The next day I went again to Mr. Wheelwright, and told him what God had done
for my poor Soul, who said unto me, now I was somewhat prepared to preach Jesus
Christ and the Gospel of Free Grace to others, having bin taught it of God, and
having heard and learned Jesus Christ my self. And he advised me to wait still
upon God in Prayer, and Christ would appear again to me by his Holy Spirit in
his Word, and show me and teach me how to preach; then I went home again, and
continued in Prayer: And one day begging earnestly of God in Prayer, that if he
had designed me to that great Work of preaching the Gospel, that then he would
give me some Testimony out of his Holy Word of his calling me thereunto;
whereupon those words were spoken by his Spirit to my Heart, Act. 26.16. I have
appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make thee a Minister, and a Witness
both of those things which thou have seen, and of those things in which I will
appear unto thee; whence I believed that now I had received a Call and
Commission from my Lord Jesus Christ to preach the Gospel of his Free Grace:
And I blessed God, and expected a further Appearance of Jesus Christ unto me.
That Night in my sleep Christ put into my mind, that the next Lords day I
should preach on that Text, Romans 8.1. And he dictated to me in my sleep, what
Doctrine I should preach from that Text. The next day I went and told all this
to Mr. Wheelwright, who said, Now my beloved Brother, and Fellow Labourer in
the Gospel of the Grace of God, Christ has given you Authority, a Call and a
Commission to preach: I pray you be humble and holy, and delay not to do your
Masters Work, or words to that effect. That Night in my Sleep the Lord taught
me more, and the third night also; and I retained it all in my Memory, and writ
it down, and searched the Scriptures, which I received in my sleep for the
Confirmation of my Doctrine: And the next day being the Lords Day, I preached
that which I had received from the Lord, and God made it useful and powerful to
Conversion, as appeared to me afterward. Thus I was night by night taught of
God to preach the Doctrine of Free Grace, according to the Tenor of the new and
everlasting Covenant for three or four years together, whereby very many
Sinners were Converted, and many Believers were established in the Faith: in
which three or four years space I preached in three several places, at
Wood-enderby, at Fulleby on the Hill, and at Wainfleel, where I was silenced,
and from thence removed to London, and thence to New England, with my Wife and
one Child.

About the Year 1636. I was persecuted, and prosecuted in the High Commission
Court, by virtue of a Warrant wherewith I was apprehended in Boston, and kept a
Prisoner in the Man's House who served the Warrant upon me: But God helped me
to convince him, and he was so greatly terrified in his Conscience, that he set
open his doors and let me go away; but before I went, I tarried so long in
London, waiting for a passage, that when I went aboard I had but 6 brass
farthings left, and no Silver nor Gold, only my Wife had 5 l. that I knew not
of, which she gave me when we came there: By the way my little Child dyed with
Convulsion fits, our Beer and Water stank, our Biscuit was green, yellow and
blew, molded and rotten, and our Cheese also, so that we suffered much
hardship, being 12 weeks in our passage; but God was gracious to us, and lead
us safe through those great Deeps, and e're we went ashore, came one and enquired
for me, and told me a Friend that was gone from Boston to Rode Island had left
me his house to sojourn in; to which we went, and two Families more with us,
who went suddenly to their Friends and other Relations in the Country, and I
being poor was necessitated to work daily with my How, for the space of almost
three weeks. The Magistrates were told by the Ministers that I was an
Antinomian, and desired they would not suffer me to abide in their Patent: But
within the time limited by their Law in that Case, two Strangers coming to
Boston from Piscattuah, hearing of me by a mere Accident, got me to go with
them to that Plantation, and to preach there, where I remained about four
years, and then being sent for back to England by my aged Father, I returned
with my Wife and one Child about three years old, and she was great with
another Child, and we came safe to London on the 24th. of December 1641. in
which Year the Massacre in Ireland broke forth, and the next Year Wars brake
forth in England between King and Parliament: I was still poor, and sojourned
in a Lodging till I had but sixpence left, and knew not how to provide for my
Wife and Child, but having prayed to God, and encouraged my Wife to trust in
God, and to remember former Experiences, and especially that Word of promise,
God had given us, and would perform to us, Heb. 13.5. having paid for my
Lodging, I went out not knowing whither Gods good hand of Providence would lead
me to receive something toward my present Subsistence. And about seven or
eight doors from my Lodging a Woman met me in the Street, and told me she came
to seek me, and her Husband sent her to tell me, that there was a Lodging
provided and prepared in his house by some Christian Friends for me and my
Wife: I told her my present Condition, and went along with her to her house,
and there she gave me 20 s. which Dr. Bastwick a late Sufferer had given her
for me, and some Linnens for my Wife, which I received, and told her and her
Husband I would fetch my Wife and Child, and lodge there: and so I returned
with great joy, and my Wife was very much affected with this Mercy and Divine
Providence, being so suitable and seasonable a supply unto us, and she said, Oh
dear Husband, how sweet is it to live by Faith, and trust God upon his bare
Word: Let us rely upon him whilst we live, and trust him in all Straits; with
many such like expressions. And after we had returned praises to God, we went
to our new Lodging, where we found all things necessary provided for us, and
all charges paid for 15 weeks, and my Wife being bruised much on Shipboard, had
sore Labor, and lay under great weakness above ten weeks, all which time two
Doctors, an Apothecary and a Chyrurgeon did daily attend her, and administered
unto her freely without any Money, and at the end of 16 weeks, we had seven
pounds that was given us by some Christian Friends; I had spoken to some of
those Friends, to get me some Scholars, and I would get me a convenient place
to teach School, for I had rather work for my Bread, than be maintained by the
Charity of good Christians: One morning came a Friend, and told me, a
Schoolmaster on great Tower Hill dyed last night, and if I would come
presently, I might probably get some of his Scholars, so I went and got three
or four Scholars that day, and there I had a great School, and continued till I
was chosen Master of Mary-Axe Free School, whither I carried sixty Scholars
from great Tower Hill, and within one year I had above seven-score Scholars,
and sixteen Boarders, which Free School and all the Benefits thereof, I left to
go into the Parliaments Army, and preached freely to the common Soldiers, till
I did perceive the Commanders sought their own things more than the Cause of
God and his People, breaking their Vows and solemn Engagements. Whereupon I
left the Army, and came to London again; shortly after the Committee for
plundered Ministers sent their Warrant to the then Keeper in Ely-House to
apprehend me, and bring me in safe Custody before them, who took me out of my
House, carried me to Ely-House, and there kept me Prisoner several days,
without any Bail, and at last carried me before the Committee: who asked me
several Questions, to which I gave them sober and direct Answers. Among others,
the Chairman Mr. White asked me who gave me Authority to preach, I told him the
Lord Jesus Christ; then he asked me, if I were a Minister; I answered, I was
made a Priest by the Pre^ate of Peterborow, but I had Renounced that
Ordination, and I did here again Re^ounce the same. They asked me by what
Authority I preached in Bow-Church, I told them, after I had refused the desire
of the then Churchwardens three times one day after another, their want of
Supply and Earnestness prevailed with me, and I went ^hither: They opened the
Pulpit-door, and I went up, and preached upon Isa. 58. and gave them such an
account of that Sermon (thirty Ministers of the Assembly of Divines, then so
called, being present) that they could not gainsay, but bad me withdraw, and
said nothing unto me, nor would my Jailer take any charge of me; for the
Committee had called for him, and did chide him, and threaten to turn him out
of his Place for keeping me Prisoner so many days. So I went away without any
blame, or paying of any Fees. Not long after I was brought before the Committee
of Examinations, being accused to them, that I occasioned great disturbance to
Ministers and People in Suffolk; which I gave so good and satisfactory an
Account of to them, that upon their Report thereof to the House of Common^,
they Ordered That I might preach in any part of Suffolk when the Minister of
that place did no^ preach: which was all I got for 60 l. which that trouble
cost me to clear my Innocence, and the Honor of the Gospel, which Expense I
put upon Christ's score, for whose Gospel, and preaching Jesus Christ upon that
Text, Col. 3.11. But Christ is all and i^ all; I was stoned out of the Pulpit,
an^ persecuted at a privy Sessions, and fetched out of the Country 60 Miles up
to London and was constrained to bring up four o^ five Witnesses of good Repute
and Credit, to prove and vindicate my self from false Accusations. Some time
after that I was summoned before a Committee in the Chamber (called the Queens
Court) at Westminster, whereof Mr. Leigh was Chairman, for preaching without
holy Orders. To which I answered, that I was in holy Orders: Some of the
Committee told the Chairman I had Renounced my Ordination by the Bishop, in the
Committee for plundered Ministers; I confessed that I did so, but I was Ordained
since in a Church of God according to the Order of the Gospel of Christ, the
Manner whereof I then declared to the Committee before Mr. Nigh and other
Ministers there present. But at last the Committee, by their Chairman,
commanded me to preach no more; I told them I would preach the Gospel both
publicly and from house to house; for it was more equal to obey Christ, who
had commanded me, than them who forbid me; and so I went away, and ceased not
to teach and preach Jesus Christ and him crucified. I was then Pastor to a
Church which I had gathered two or three years before, in the year 1645. with
whom I have walked ever since, except that I was absent from the Church
sometimes upon just Occasions, and with their leave, or forced from them by
violent Persecution; my chiefest means of Livelihood has been by Teaching
School, wherein God was pleased to make me serviceable in my Generation to
communicate liberally to the Poor of the Church, and to Strangers that stood in
need, and plentifully to provide all things necessary and convenient for my
Wife and Children, through God's Blessing upon my honest Labors: I received
from the Church always according to their Ability, most of the Members of the
Church being poor but I coveted no man's Gold nor Silver, but chose rather to
labor, knowing it is more blessed to give than to receive. And I did not
wholly neglect my Duty, as a Pastor, but preached two or three times a week,
and visited the Members of the Church from house to house, especially when they
were sick. And during twenty five years now past, the Church has continued in
the Apostles Doctrine, Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayer,
without Division and Separation of any part thereof, or Party therein: Though
some few particular Members being led away by some Error in their Judgment,
have forsaken the Assembling of themselves with the Church, as the manner of
some is, and was in the Apostles time. In the year 1660. upon Venners Rising,
and others that with him made an Insurrection in the City of London, my self
and many other godly and peaceable persons, were taken out of their own
dwelling houses, and brought to Woodstreet-Counter, and many to Newgate, and
other Prisons, though we were innocent, and knew not of their Design; at which
time I suffered Imprisonment 18 weeks, till we were delivered by an Act of
Pardon upon the Kings Coronation, unto all Offenders, except Murderers. We were
above four hundred Prisoners kept all this time in Newgate, because we refused
to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. After I was set at Liberty out
of Prison, I went to Holland, and thence up into Germany, with my Wife and two
of my Children, where we sojourned about two or three years, and in my Absence
one Col. Leg, a Bedchamber Man, and Lieutenant of the Ordnance, charged me
in the Court of Exchequer for keeping a House and Ground from the King, against
whom I stood Suit by my Attorney: But when Col. Leg could not get my House
from me by Law, he and some others brought several Red Coat-Souldiers, and took
it by force, thrust out those persons I had left in Possession, and kept
Possession by Soldiers, both of my House, Garden, and my Goods, which had cost
me above 700 l. with the Purchase, bought of the Artillery Company of London,
to whom I paid 300 l. and laid out 400 l. more in building upon the Ground,
which I had bought and paid for. I had at the same time 200 l. in Weavers Hall,
which was given away to the King, among many greater Sums of other men's Money.
I spent above 150 l. more in Holland and Germany; and when I had spent all
that, I was forced to sell all my Goods there, to bring me to England again. In
which Return I met with two remarkable Acts of Providence toward me, my Wife
and two Children. I had agreed with a Skipper at Cullen in Germany to Rotterdam
for a Sum of Money, and he was to pay all the Tolls and Licenses which he did
at two or three places, till we were come where we were Strangers, and then he
made me pay Licenses at 2 places, and at a place called Rurote, upon the River
Rhyne he made me pay both Toll and License, and kept me there two or three days
at great Charges; and my Wife being set and very sad in an Harbor or
Victualling. house, came in a Gentleman, and observing of her, asked me what
the Gentlewoman ailed, I told him she was my Wife, and he understanding the
Latin Tongue, a^ked me what the matter was; I told him all my Case, and what my
Condition was; Well, said he, if you be a Son of Abraham, God will deliver you;
and so he went into his Chamber, and sent for the Skipper and Toll Masters, and
caused him to produce our Agreement, and understanding how he had wronged one,
he being Lord, and Chief, over the Tollmasters there, he Commanded them to take
our Goods from him, and to hire us another Skipper to carry us and our Goods to
Rotterdam: And made the Skipper that had done me wrong, to allow me so much as
I had paid for Licenses all the way thither. After we were come to Rotterdam,
and my Wife, and Son, and Daughter, were come to England, God made two
Catholics in Cullen, instrumental to prevail with the Prince Dewit, to send me
by a Bill of Exchange 160 Rix-Dollers, for a House that I had Built in his
Country, and could not Sell, which I received at Rotterdam; and then came over
to England my self, and came to my Wife and Children, whom I found at a Friends
House in London. Then I set upon teaching School again, and by Gods Blessing
upon my honest Labors, have provided things Honest, Necessary, and Convenient,
for my Family. To my Eldest Son, I had given 60 l. per Annum during his Life,
which he enjoyed above 21 Years ere he Died. To my next Son, that lived to be
Married, I gave the full value of 250 l. in Money, House, School, and
Houshold-Goods, and left him 50 Scholars in his Schoal-House. To my only
Daughter then Living, I gave upon her Marriage above 300 l. in Money, Annuity,
Plate, Linen, and Household Stuff, and left her Husband 50 Scholars in the said
School-House, in Partnership with my said Son. To my youngest Son, that lived
to be Married, I gave more than 300 l. Sterling, besides it cost me above 60
pounds in his Apprenticeship, and 40 l. afterward.

Thus my Heavenly Father made up my former Losses, with his future Blessings,
even in outward Substance, besides a good increase of Grace, and Experience, in
the space of 40 years, that I and my dear faithful Wife Lived together; we
removed several times with our whole Family, whereof once from Lincolnshire to
London, and from London to New England: Once from England into Wales; twice
from London into Lincolnshire, once from London to Holland, and from thence
into Germany, and thence to Rotterdam, and thence to London again. In which
Removings, I gained great Experiences of Gods Faithfulness, Goodness, and
Truth, in his great and precious Promises: And I have gained some experience of
my own hearts deceitfulness, and the power of my own Corruptions, and the
reigning power of Christ, and his Captivating and subduing my Sins, making
Conquests of the Devil, World, and Sin, and then giving me the Victory: And
causing me to Triumph, and to bless his most Holy Name. Three things made my
latter Sufferings very easy to be endured. 1. The former Straits and Hardships,
which I had undergone with patience. 2. The present lively acts and exercise of
Grace, especially Faith, and Hope, under those latter and greater Trials. 3.
The Light of Gods Countenance, and the full assurance of his Love, and of
eternal Life. I would not want those experiences and teachings, that my Soul
has enjoyed for all that ever I suffered.

My Wilderness-Mercies, Sea-Mercies, City-Mercies, and Prison-Mercies, afforded
me very many and strong Consolations. The Spiritual sights of the Glory of God,
the Divine sweetness of the Spiritual and Providential presence of my Lord
Jesus Christ, and the joys and comforts of the Holy and Eternal Spirit,
communicated to my Soul, together with suitable and seasonable Scriptures of
Truth, have ^o often, and so powerfully revived, refreshed, and strengthened my
heart in the days of my Pilgrimage, Trials, and Sufferings, that the Sense,
yea, the Life and sweetness thereof abides still upon my heart, and has
engaged my Soul to live by Faith, to walk humbly, and to desire and endeavor
to excel in Holiness, to Gods Glory and the example of others. Though I
confess many of the Lords Ministers, and some of the Lords people have excelled
and outshined me, with whom God has not been at so much cost nor pains, as he
has been at with me. ^ am a very unprofitable Servant, but yet, by Grace, I am
what I am. In the beginning of my Ministry, I Studied in the Forenoon, and
Visited my Religious acquaintance in the Afternoon, and some of my natural
Relations. I did Preach constantly twice, often 3 times, and some Lords days 4
times; at Holton at 7 in the Morning, at Humberston at 9, at Seartho at 11, at
Humberston at 3 a Clock, all in the same day; I also Preached every Holiday
once, at every Burial, Poor or Rich. And I have most commonly Preached 3 or 4
times every Week, if in any measure of Health, for above 40 years togather,
except now and then, I got some other Godly Man to Preach for me, but rarely.
When I was in Prison, I did Preach usually every day, if well. And God was
pleased to confirm my Call unto that great Work, 1. By the Conversion of many
Sinners, who having declared the dealings of God with their Souls, testified,
God did convince them, convert them, and establish many of them by my Ministry,
through the powerful and effectual Operation of his Holy Spirit, and Word
preached by me unto them. 2. By some healing power of God, put forth upon the
sick and infirm Bodies of several persons, who were suddenly restored to
health, immediately in time of Prayer with them, or by and through Faith in
Jesus Christ, especially in this City of London, and of the Sickness called the
Plague, both in former years, and in the year 1665. Not to me, but to God, be
given Glory and praise, for in his Name, through Faith in his Name, they were
healed. 3. By inabling me, standing by me, and strengthening me, by his Holy
Spirit, and sanctifying Grace, to preach the Gospel in season, and out of
season, with all boldness, neither being ashamed, nor afraid to bear my
Testimony for Christ, his Gospel, Churches, Ministry, Worship, and Ordinances,
against the Antichristian Powers, Ministers, Worshippers, and Traditions of the
Beast, the great mystical Whore, and the false Prophet. Nor have I been
terrified by the Adversary: By virtue of the Acts of Parliament, touching
private Meetings and Conventicles, Commencing May the 10th. 1670. I was taken
at a Meeting in George-yard, and the then Lord Mayor committed me to the
Compter in Bishops gate for preaching there, but having Favor in the Eyes of
the Keepers, I had liberty to preach to the Prisoners there, twice every day of
the Week, in the common Hall, where most of the Prisoners came and heard me,
and some of them blessed God, that ever I came to that Prison. Soon after I was
set at Liberty, at the Sessions in Old Bailey, God made me his Prisoner, by a
sharp and painful Distemper in my Bowels, called the griping of the Guts, and
he brought me near to the Grave. But in time of my greatest Extremity, God
remembered Mercy, forgave mine Iniquity, healed my Disease, and restored my Life
from Death. No Tongue can express my pains, yet God gave me much patience,
wherein I possessed my Soul. I had, 1. A very clear Discovery from the Lord of
the Cause, why he so contended with me; one was the meritorious Cause of some
former Visitations, and especially of this sore Disease. 2. I saw the Sin of my
sinful Nature, which was not so Crucified, as that it was destroyed, but I
found some motions of it of late stirring in my sinful heart. The Sense of this
was a very sore burden and trouble to my Soul in this day of my Calamity, for
which I mourned in secret before the Lord, and lay at the Throne of Grace
loathing my self, and begging, that God would kill that Sin, and destroy it,
and all the rest of my Sins. And received this answer, his Grace was sufficient
for me, he had pardoned and he would subdue, and destroy that and all other
mine Iniquities, according to his everlasting Covenant of free Grace. Satan was
sometimes very busy during this time of Sickness, and tempted me sorely in the
Night season, sometimes suggesting to me, that I was but an Hypocrite, at other
times, that my Evidences for Heaven were not good, whom God helped me to resist
steadfastly in the Faith, and he fled away. Another cause why the Lord now
contended with me, was for the Trial and Exercise of my Graces, which he had
given me. It was the Trial of my Faith, and the exercise of my Patience, and
that I might be to his praise, and an example unto weak Believers, whose Eyes
were upon me, and were observing and harkening how I did behave my self, under
all the great Rebukes and Chastisements of the Lord upon me. For they had
heard, that God had taken one Grandchild away by Death, and Visited another,
who was above 16 years old with the Smallpox, and she was likely to die, and
one Son died and was Buried during my Sickness; and mine Eldest Son was dead
and Buried in the Country, whereof I was told before I was Recovered; my other
Sons Wife had sore Labor, a Dead-Man-Child, and she likely to die: And my dear
loving Wife, then began to be sorely afflicted with a pain and swelling in her
Face, of which she since Died.

But God did give a proportionable measure of Faith and Patience to me his poor
unworthy Servant, under all this his fatherly Chastisements: He did strengthen
me with strength in my Soul, and upheld me with the right hand of his
Righteousness; so that I fainted not, nor was I weary: His Rod and his Staff
did comfort me; He brought out my Will unto a free Submission, Subjection, and
Resignation to his own most wise and holy Will. Yea, my Facher's Visitations
did so preserve my Soul, that I did sing and rejoice under the sights and
smiles of Christ, even whilst I was sighing and sorrowing for my transgressions.

Two learned, well practiced, and judicious Doctors of Physic had daily
visited me, and consulted my Cure, sereral days together, and I was fully
persuaded, that they did what possibly they could to effect a Cure: And knew
also, that God did not succeed their honest and faithful Endeavors with his
Blessing. Although God had given a signal and singular Testimony of his special
Blessing by each of them unto others of their Patients, at least sixteen at the
same time; I resolved to take no more Physic, but would apply to that holy
Ordinance of God appointed by Jesus Christ, the great Physician of value, Jam.
5.14, 15. And I got Mr. Kiffin and Mr. Vavasor Powel, who prayed over me, and
anointed me with Oil in the Name of the Lord: And the Lord did hear Prayer, and
heal me. For there were very many godly Ministers and gracious Saints, that
prayed day and night for me (with submission to the Will of God) that the Lord
would spare my life and heal me, and make me more useful and serviceable to the
Lord, to the Church, and to the Saints; whose Prayers God heard, and as an
Answer of their Prayers, I was perfectly healed, but remained weak long after.
My dear Wife remained weak and full of pain, and was very greatly afflicted
with pain day and night, but the Lord gave her a great measure of Faith and
Patience even to the end; She enjoyed the Light of Gods Countenance, had full
Assurance of Gods Love, the Pardon of her Sins, and of eternal Life; And having
patiently endured six months sore pains, upon the thirtieth of the second month
called April, 1671. being the Lords Day, about four or five a clock, slept in
Jesus: I was doing my Masters Work at that time in the Congregation; and toward
the end of my Sermon, had a strong impulse upon my Spirit, That my dear Wife
was departing, and in my Prayer after Sermon was drawn forth by Faith to
commend her to God that gave her me, and blessed him for receiving her Soul
into Abraham's bosom, and placing her among the Spirits of just men made perfect
in the Paradise of God.

Since the death of my dear Wife, it has pleased God to stretch forth his Hand
upon my only Son then living, and to afflict him with a deep Consumption,
occasioned, as I judge, by Grief for his dearly loving and beloved Mother, for
he drooped ever since she first was taken ill of that Distemper of Rhume, which
fell from her Head into her Face, of which she dyed: And he has been worse and
worse ever since she dyed. And I having had great Expenses and a great Charge
of dear Relations, and owing some considerable debts, I was necessitated to
teach School again in my old Age; That I might pay my Debts, succor my dear
Relations, and not be too great a burden to the Church of God: And this I have
willingly and cheerfully undertaken, that if Persecution do come upon me again
(which I expect and prepare for) and I shall be haled to prison, or forced to
fly: It may be my Mercy and Comfort as at all other times of my many removals
in the days of my Pilgrlmage and Persecutions; That no person shall have any
occasion to come to me and say, Pay me what you owe me before you go; for I
desire to owe no man any thing but Love, and honestly to pay every man his own.
And if Death seize on my body, that I may leave enough of my own behind me to
pay all my Debts, and a little for the Relief of Gods Poor, and some of my
poorest natural Relations. I had a Summoning in June last to prepare my self
for the Grave by a sudden and sore Fit of the Wind-Cholick and Vomiting. And on
the 3d of October last, 1671. I had another Summons to be ready to depart this
life by another sudden more violent tormenting Fit of the Wind-Cholick and
Vomiting. And I am alarmed by these awakening Visitations of the Lord to
prepare and be ready; That when my Lord and Master comes or calls for me to
come to him, I may be found so doing, that he may say, Well done, thou good and
faithful Servant, enter thou also into the Joys of thy Master.

The next Trial my heavenly Father saw needful for me to be exercised under,
was the Sickness and Death of my then only living Son, my Isaac, my most loving
and beloved Son, who was translated the 15th. day of November, 1671. which
great Trial and Loss God made gain to him, and easy to me by a manifest and
powerful Work of Conversion, Repentance and Faith upon his Soul in the time of
his Sickness, which administered much Comfort to me, so that I sorrowed not for
him as one without hope, who exercised very great patience under his very great
pain, soreness, and burning Fever, whilst his flesh, marrow, and moisture
consumed, and acted Faith and Hope very lively and constantly upon Christ in
that Word, John 6.37. And him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast off:
Very often expressing his former bondage and slavery to Sin and Satan, which
he bewailed; and acknowledged often Gods free and rich Grace in giving him
Christ and Pardon and Salvation now at last, which he had neglected the Offers
and Tenders of so often. Some Combats he had, but after a manifestation of
Christ to his Soul, he dyed in Faith and Peace.

And albeit my natural Affections caused me to weep often, and the sense of
Gods Hand and Rod upon me, caused me to mourn very much in secret; yet the
Almighty by his Rod and Staff did so comfort me, that I walked through this
Valley also of the shadow of Death without fear of Evil, and was assisted and
enabled to perform the Work of my Ministry in the Congregation without any
omission or interruption. And that very Night my only Son dyed, the Lord
brought to my mind that Scripture, Mic. 7.14. Feed thy people with thy Rod;
which was made a seasonable, suitable, and powerful Word by the Teachings of
the holy Spirit unto my Soul, in my solitary Condition: Who thus administered
Food, yea and a Feast also to my Soul. For by this Rod of God, I had served
into my Soul a Dish of sour or bitter Herbs, I mean sorrow for my sins; but I
fed also on the Paschal Lamb, in whole blood I saw all my sins washed away: And
the Spirit of God witnessed with my Spirit, that I was the Child of God, and
one of those Children, with whom God will keep Covenant, and not take away his
Love from me, though he visited my Transgressions with the Rod, and mine
iniquities with stripes, Psalm. 89.28 -- 34. which Scripture was then brought
again with power upon my Heart. The next Dish of spiritual Food under this Rod
which God brought me, or sent me by his Spirit in his Word to feed upon, was
full of Love; Then that holy Scripture came to me, not in word only, Rev. 3.19,
20. but in Power and in the Spirit, and in much Assurance; wherein in he showed
me his Face, and I saw my Fathers Face in that Glass of the Gospel, Heb. 12.6,
7. which the holy Spirit held forth to me by this Rod, and shed abroad in my
heart the Love of the Father in his Son Jesus Christ. After this the next day
God gave me a Dish of spiritual Fruits by this Rod to feed upon, served up in
that holy Scripture, No affliction at the present is joyous, but grievous; but
the fruit thereof shall be peace and righteousness to them that have been
exercised therein. And after God had thus fed me, feasted me several days and
nights together with this his Rod, he very graciously pronounced his Blessing
upon me by his Rod, in these words; Blessed is the man whom thou correctest and
teach out of thy Law or Word, unto which I was helped heartily to say Amen:
It Is good for me to be, and that I have been afflicted, etc. And after God had
communed with me from his Mercy-seat, and had instructed me, I experienced such
Divine Loves, shinings, and spiritual sweetness, as Jonathan did when he tasted
a little Honeydew on the End of the Rod in his hand; and was enlightened and
refreshed. So that I was enlivened, or revived, fed and feasted by the Rod and
Word, even the Bond of Gods everlasting Covenant of free Grace, and Love.

About 4 or 5 months after the Death of my Son, his Wife married a Gentleman of
300 l. per annum, and left me engaged to receive and pay all my Sons Debts; and
to preserve his Credit and his Wife's, I borrowed 200 l. to help to pay his
Debts, and suffered the loss thereof, which necessitated me still to keep
School to pay my Debts: And I having a Granddaughter with me three years
before, she being nineteen years old, did take the Charge of my
Houshold-affairs, and of my Boarders, who managed all things with so much
discretion, that my life was very comfortable, and I had great Content. In
September. 1672. my only Daughters Husband went by her consent into the Country,
and left her.

Thus far was written with his own hand; and there we must be forced to break
off, though abruptly, the remaining part of his Life, written by himself, as this
was, being, as Mr. Kiffin mentions in his Preface, unhappily lost: which,
because it is ^mpossible to be supplied by any Hand so particularly as his own,
must be done in general, by letting the Christian Reader know, That this holy
Man's Life was all of a piece, and that he maintained his Zeal, Fidelity, and
Integrity in the latter part of it, as well as in the former, even to the end
of it. He was not very long sick; not keeping his Chamber above five weeks, nor
his Bed above ten days. All the time of his Sickness he behaved himself with
extraordinary Patience, and Resignation to the Divine Will, longing to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ; not so much to be freed from Pain and
Trouble, as from Sinning; which he expressed to one with him, with a more than
ordinary Transport of Joy. A little before his Death, he wrote the following
Epistle, which he left as his last Legacy to the Church.

Mr. Knollys's last Legacy to the Church, written a little before his Death.
To the Church whereof I am Pastor, Grace, Love, and Peace, by Jesus Christ our
Lord and Savior, Amen.
HOly Brethren, Partakers of the Heavenly Calling, I not being able to Preach
any more unto you, do take liberty by writing to give you this as my last
Counsel, and I hope the whole Church will seriously consider what I have
written, as the last words of your very aged Pastor, whose departure, as I
hope, is at hand.

First of all, I do humbly beseech my Reverend and Beloved Brother Steed, for
Christ's sake, that the fervent Love to the Church, and the watchful Care over
the particular Members of it, Expressed and Published in his little Epistle
touching Singing, may be revived; and also that the Brotherly Love of the
Ministering Brethren, and likewise of all my beloved Brethren, who are helps in
Government, may be stirred up to Help, to Assist, to provoke the rest unto good
Works, Gal. 4.18.

Now I do unfeignedly, and without vain boasting, commend many of you, my
beloved Brethren and Sisters, for continuing in the Apostles Doctrine, and
Fellowship in breaking of Bread, and in Prayer, (but as for the rest, who
forsake the assembling of themselves, with the Church on the Lords Day, I
commend them not,) especially not only in this time of Liberty, but when it was
a time of violent Persecution, when I was shut up a Year and four Months,
(blessed be God for Prison Mercies,) in New-Prison. And having mentioned that
time of Persecution, can I pass it by without commending the constant
Assembling of our Brethren and Sisters all that time, every Lords day to
worship God? And may I not with great Comfort, commend the Labor of Love of
our Ministering Brethren, in the Work and Doctrine of the Gospel, without
ceasing, (as you well know,) and among whom they still labor and faint not.
And now some of our younger Brethren, begin to improve their Gifts and Talents
for the Glory of God, and the Edification of the Church, whom I desire may be
encouraged.

Another thing very commendable in this Church, is the Charity, which they have
added to their Brotherly kindness, 2 Pet. 1.7. It was great Brotherly kindness,
which was manifested to the Church, by those Brethren who looked out our
Meeting House, and prepared it for us as it now is: And unto this, many of our
Brethren and Sisters, have added their Charity in a free and very liberal
Collection and Contribution, given into the Trustees of the Fund: And I hope
they will be ready to do the like again, when the like Necessities call for it.
Read I pray you the 8th. and 9th. Chapters of the second Epistle unto the
Church of Corinth: All this, and much more, are the Riches of Grace, which God
has freely given by our Lord Jesus Christ, unto this Church for his own Glory.

Nevertheless, I must in Love and Faithfulness to your precious and gracious
Souls, (holy and beloved,) tell you of some things, not to shame you, (for I my
self am found guilty as well as you, and more than some of you,) but to warn
you, and to counsel you, (as a Father does his Children,) and they are these.

First, That several of us are fallen in some degree, from our first Love,
cooled in our Spiritual Affections to Jesus Christ, and to the Saints. -- Must
not you and I confess, that it is not with us now, as it was in the day of our
first Espousals? God the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit remembers it.
Jer. 2.1, 2. And we should remember from whence we are fallen, and should say,
I will go and return unto my first Husband, for then was it better with me,
than now, Hos. 2.7. Rev. 2.4, 5.

Now the first part of my Counsel, which I desire to take and receive from
Christ, and to give unto you, my dearly beloved Brethren and Sisters, who are
convinced, and have confessed it before the Lord, on several days of Fasting
and Prayer.

First, I do Counsel you to Repent, Rev. 2.5. And I must tell you, Beloved,
that our assembling once in four Weeks, and spending four hours, from Eleven to
Three, in Praying and Preaching, as we have often done, is not such a Fast as
will make our Voice be heard on High, Isa. 58.3, 4. Several things are
essentially necessary to Evangelical Repentance, that it may be acceptable unto
God by Jesus Christ. -- Namely, Godly Sorrow, which works Repentance, never
to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.9, 10. A broken Contrite Spirit, Psalm. 51.17. James
4.9, 10. Isa. 66.2, 3. Isa. 57.15. Read these Scriptures, Zech. 12.10, 11.
Alas, where are our Tears of Godly Sorrow, our broken Hearts, and our afflicted
Souls? Reformation after Humiliation? Repent and do thy first Works, Rev. 2.5.
O Holy Brethren, let us do so, let you and I beg Grace, that we may both Mourn
and turn from all our Sins, to the Lord with all our Hearts.

We have cause to repent of our Formality, and Laodicean Lukewarmness,
especially for want of zeal for the House of God, Psalm. 69.9. Rev. 3.19. Col.
4.12, 13. Joh. 2.17.

Secondly, I Counsel you to be zealous: Zeal is a fervent and constant
affection of a gracious Soul, in a good thing, managed with Discretion, Gal.
4.18. If our zeal be not fixed upon a right Object, and good Matter; it may be
hot, and great, but it cannot be good. Compare the zeal of Paul, Phil. 3.6.
with the zeal of Epaphras, Col. 4.12, 13.

To guide our zeal aright, two things especially ought to accompany it. First,
The light of Knowledge, Romans 10.1, 2, 3. Read the words again and again, and as
often as you read this Paper. Many professors of the Law then, were very
zealous of Establishing their own Legal Righteousness, and many professors of
the Gospel, now, are as zealous, to establish their own Legal Righteousness,
and not Christ's. O! say some, If I could pray so, mourn so as others do; if I
were so Holy and so Humble, etc. then I would believe. O! say others, if I
could get power over my Corruptions, and strength against Satan's Temptations,
and Victory over the allurements of this present evil World, then I would
believe: But I have a Heart full of vile affections, vain thoughts and doubts,
that I cannot believe.

Consider, Are Praying, Mourning, Humbling our Souls, Gospel Duties? even so is
believing a Gospel Duty, which God Commands, 1 John 3.23. And he threatens to
Damn them that hear the Gospel preached, and will not believe, Acts 13.41.

Secondly, The Aim and End of our Zeal, must always be the Glory of God, and
guided, as I said, by Discretion: Wise as well as Warm: Greatest zeal, in
greatest Matters, and lesser zeal in lesser matters. Compare, Gal. 5.11, 13.
with 1 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15, 16. 1 Cor. 10.3. and Prove. 19.11.

My Counsel also is, and I humbly beseech our honored and beloved Elder, and
entreat our Ministering Brethren, who are Helps in Government, to join together
to set in Order these things.

I mean no other things, than those holy Administrations which Christ, his
Apostles, and Disciples, practiced in the beginning. Search these Scriptures, 1
Pet. 2.21. Philip. 3.17. Luke 14.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Acts 28.23, 24, --
28, 29, 30, 31. and 1 Cor. 14.13, 23, 24, 25, 29. 1 Timothy 4.13. Col. 4.16. 1
These. 5.27. Rev. 1.3. Consider, holy Brethren, that as Reading and Expounding
are two different Administrations, so are Prophesying and Preaching, yet both
Gospel Ordinances, Romans 12.6, 7.

Fourthly and Lastly, My Counsel to the Church is, that you will look out a
Minister of Jesus Christ, whom he has in some competent measure, qualified
with such Ministerial Gifts and Graces as may make him worthy of so great
honor, as is due to a Pastor, and Elder of the Church of God, yea, of double
honor, 1 Timothy 5.17. Both of Maintenance and Obedience, Heb. 13.17.

And now my dearly beloved Brethren and Sisters, I commit you all to the Word
of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance
among them which are Sanctified. So I remain, while in this Tabernacle,

Your Brother in the Lord Hanserd Knollys.

FINIS.
Books Printed for John Harris, at the Harrow against the Church in the
Poultrey.
A Confession of Faith, put forth by the Elers and Brethren, of many
Congregations of Christians, (Baptized upon Profession of their Faith) in
London and the Country. With an Appendix concerning Baptism. Price Bound 1 s.

A Solemn Call unto all that would be owned as Christ's Faithful Witnesses,
speedily, and seriously, to attend unto the Primitive Purity of the Gospel
Doctrine and Worship: Or, a Discourse concerning Baptism: Wherein that of
Infants is Disproved, as having no Footing, nor Foundation at all in the Word
of God. By way of Answer to the Arguments made use of by Mr. William Allen, Mr.
Sidenham, Mr. Baxter, Dr. Burthogge, and others, for the Support of that
Practice.

Wherein the Covenant made with Isarel at Mount Sinai, Exodus 20. That in the
Land of Moab, Deuteronomy. 29. As also the Covenant of Circumcision made with Abraham,
Genesis 17.7, 8, 9. Whereon so much stress is laid for the Support of Infants
Baptism, are plainly proved to be no other than three several Editions of the
Covenant of Works; and consequently, that no just Argument can thence be
deduced for the Justification of that practice.

Together with a Description of that truly Evagelical Covenant, God was pleased
to make with believing Abraham; containing the Sum of the Everlasting Gospel
then Preached unto him; since Proclaimed by the Apostles; and which now remains
to be yet further Published unto every Nation, Kindred, Tongue, and People, for
the Obedience of Faith. By Philip Carry, a Lover of Truth and Peace.

The Conviction of Worldly Vanity: Or, the Wandering Prodigal, and his Return:
In two parts.

PART I. Containing his debate with him self about his setting forward in
search of the Palace of Worldly Felicity; his harkening to the advice of Folly,
and submitting himself to her Conduct; the manner of her furnishing him out; of
the Progress he made, and the various Adventures he met with by the way: As
also the Entertainment he found at his Arrival, and his Riotous Living there;
with his Description of the Vices Reigning therein.

PART II. Giving a full Account of his miraculous Escape from the Palace of
Worldly Felicity. Or the glorious prospect he had of the Coelestical City; and
of the progress he made toward it, under the Conduct of Divine Grace: With the
manner of his proceeding, and the several Occurrences he met with by the way:
His Arrival at the Palace of Virtue and True Felicity, and his Joyful Reception
there: His Excellent Description thereof, and of the Divine and Moral Virtues
which he found therein. Both pleasant and profitable. Delivered under the
Similitude of A Wandering Youth. Illustrated with proper Cuts. Price Bound One
Shilling.

Come and Welcome to Jesus Christ: Or a plain and profitable Discourse on John
6. Verse 37. Showing the Cause, Truth and manner of the Coming of a Sinner to
Jesus Christ; with his happy Reception, and blessed Entertainment. The Third
Edition with Additions. By John Bunyan, Author of the Pilgrims Progress. Price
bound one shilling.

A Necessary Family-Book, both for the City and Country, in two parts.
Containing Exact, Plain and Short Rules and Directions, for Taking and Killing
all manner of Vermin on Land and in Water: As,

PART I. By LAND. The Fox, Polcat, Bvzzard, Kite, Weasle, Adder, Snake,
Caterpiller, Frog, Mole, Pismire, Fly, Bug, Rats and Mice, Fleas and Lice.

PART II. By WATER. The Hern, Dob-Chick, Coot, or More-hen, Cormorant, Sea-Pye,
Kings-fisher, Otter, Water-Rat, and Ospray, all great destroyers of Fish. To
which are added, many natural and artificial Conclusions, both pleasant and
profitable. The whole Illustrated with proper Figures. By R. W. Gent. Price
sttitch'd 6 d.

Instructions for Children: Or, the Child's and Youth's Delight. Teaching an
easy way to Spell and Read true English. Containing the Fathers Godly Advice;
Directing Parents in a right and spiritual manner to Educate their Children,
with a Scripture Catechism, wherein all the chief principles of true
Christianity are clearly opened, together with many other things both pleasant
and useful for the Education of Children, written by B. Keach, Author of War
with the Devil, recommended to the use of all Parents and Schoolmasters, by H.
Knollys. price 6 d.

A Just Reply to Mr. John Flavell's Arguments, by way of Answer to a Discourse
lately published, Entitled, A Solemn Call, etc. By Philip Carry, a lover of
Truth and Peace.

The Triumph-Royal, containing a short Account of the most remarkable Battles,
Sieges, Sea Fights, Treaties, and Famous Achievements of the Princes of the
House of Nassau, etc. Described in the Triumphal Arches, Piramids, Pictures,
Inscriptions, and Devices, Erected at the Hague in Honor of William III. King
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Curiously Engraven in 62 Figures on
Copper Plates, with their Histories; an Elaborate piece of Curiosity, first
done in Dutch, then into French, and now into English, Dedicated to her
Majesty. price 4 s.

A plain Relation of the late Action at Sea, between the English and Dutch, and
the French Fleets, from June 22. to July 5. last, 1690: With Reflections
thereupon, And upon the present State of the Nation. price 1 s.

The Spirit of the Church-Faction Detected, in it is Nature and Operations, etc.
Price 6 d.

Ichabod, or Five Groans of the Church, prudently foreseeing, and passionately
bewailing her second Fall, threatened by these five Dangerous, though Undiscerned
Miscarriages that caused her first: Viz. 1. Undue Ordination, 2. Loose
Profaneness, 3. Unconsionable Symony, 4. Encroaching Pluralities, 5. Careless
Non-Residence: humbly presented to her Supreme Head and Governor, the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, and his great Council, the Parliament of England. price
6 d.


