Mr. Kirkwood's PLEA Before the KIRK, And Civil JUDICATURES OF SCOTLAND.

Divided into Five PARTS.

-- Rident^^n dicere Verum.
Quid vetat?
-- Horat. Sat. 1. London, Printed by D. E. for the Author. School.

To the truly Noble and Excellently Accomplished Lady, my Honorable Patroness,
the Countess of ROXBURGH.
THOUGH it was your Ladyships Favor to me, that did give the first Birth to the
Subject contained in this Book, by listing me amongst your Servants; which, as
it did at once raise my Honor, so did it the Envy and Malice of my
Persecuters: Yet I could have satisfied my self with the humble Content of a
lower Patronage, were I not more ambitious of giving some Testimony of that
Service, which I owe You, than deriving Honor upon my self from the Glory of
Your Protection.

But though I be not acted by Ambition; yet, when I consider the Greatness of
Your Quality, and the Excellency of Your personal Accomplishments on the one
hand, and the entertainment such Addresses receive from the Censorious World on
the other, I am apt to think, men will say I design rather honor to my self,
than Service to you. But, Madam, let not the happy Necessity I lie under of
advantaging my own Credit, while I serve You, prejudice the sincerity of my
Intentions, since it is the constant Fate of all the Votaries of Greatness to be
engaged in such a Necessity. And I am the more encouraged in this, that the
Matter I relate is not altogether unknown to Your Ladyship; and that I must
make frequent and honorable Mention of You and your most Noble Family; and
that I humbly acknowledge, notwithstanding my Innocence, and the Justice of my
Cause, had I not been supported by your Goodness and Authority, I might have
sunk under the violence of that Fury and Malice, that did prosecute me. Madam,
I wish you could find as many things in the Ensuing Papers, which would deserve
your Patronage; as you will, that need it. I hope your Goodness will pardon
whatever your Judgment cannot approve in the matter of my Conduct. I will ever
value your single Approbation more, than the Applause of the Theater. But, if I
miss both, I hope you will give me leave to promise to my self pardon for the
Presumption of this Address; and to assume to my self the honorable Title of,

Madam, Your Ladyships most humble and devoted Servant, James Kirkwood.

THE PREFACE.
Courteous Reader,
YOU are not here to expect a complete and exact Account of every particular
relating to this Plea, in regard, as y^u will see in its place, the Judges,
contrary to Law, have denied u^ the use of many Papers, that contain some very
material Points, which, no doubt, you will be most desirous to know. At also,
because this whole Affair is not yet put to a close, especially the Civil Part.

And though we had all the Papers at Command, so that we could give a full
relation of every Point, yet it might justly be thought a very wild and
extravagant thing to see a Piece of this Nature appear in the World in the form
of a great Volume; for certainly such would it be* if every thing were set down
at large; no less, as is Computed, if not far beyond all the twenty Books of
Buchanan's Chronicles.

Some Papers we have given you at large, lest the Adversaries should think
themselves wronged by too short Account, of Matters: Others are so contracted,
that you have only their Sum; as Instruments, or Protestations, of which there
are about seventy, all scarcely extending to the length of a single one. And,
if any doubt of this brief Account he may have a sight of the Principal Copies.

But though we call this Work imperfect, yet know, that this very thing does
exceedingly add to its greater Perfection and Ornament; for this being a
Monstrous-kind of Piece, its very Deformity becomes its chiefest Beauty. As in
all monstrous Creatures the greater be the Multipicity, or Defect of Members;
and the more strange kind of misplacing, or transforming of parts, that makes
them appear (if we may so speak) the more comely and beautiful in their kind
and liker to what truly they are; or, at least, should be. Such will you find
this little Piece of Work; but by far the most wonderful sort of Monster, that
ever was to be seen in this World. In all other Monsters Heads are always
Heads, Tails Tails; but here you will see the Head in a trice turn Tail; Tail
Head; Hand Foot, Foot hand. This we promise to repr^sent to you in a most
lively manner by a Judicature, which sat at Kelso, 24 September. 1695, where the
Judges, in the twinkling of an eye, transformed themselves into Witnesses; and
Witnesses into Judges: But above all the rest, there was one Member of that
Judicature, who was wonderfully well expert in the Art of Legerdemain. This
person acted his Part to the life, that it was not possible for the Spectators
to discern the Change; he doing it with such admirable Nimbleness, that neither
their eye, nor their ear was able to follow the motion. He performed four
several Offees at one instant, being a Party, a Judge, Clerk, and Witness; but
the last two wonderously well: for calling his Name among the rest of the
Witnesses, he answered with the same breath, I Am here; and this he did with a
great deal of case, viz. by hitching a little up his back-parts, and continuing
the motion of his Tongue, he performed the Jobb.

But the most astonishing thing of all, by far, is the Descent one of these
Judges made to Hell with a Boy in his arms, whom in a violent manner he had
dragged out of the bosom of the aged Father, and carried him down to the
regions below, and showed him those unquenchable Flames, where with Devils and
damned Spirits are to be tortured for ever. This, This business alone may
justly strike you with horror and amazement, and make you to quake like an
Aspen-leaf. By relating this passage Mr. K. made the Committee of Bills at
Edenb. when they were all in a Flame, as if they had been going to devour him,
to become as still and calm as Salt. Of which Affair in its place. As to the
truth of things here given account of, we hope few or none will question it,
except perhaps Parties, or such as are biased with Prejudice, Interest,
Opinion, or some such selfish Motive. And the more to assure you of it, know,
that Mr. K. was so exact and punctual in this wh^le Affair, that he never
appeared before a Judicature, or had Conference with Persons, to whom he
thought he might give credit, but he always before he slept, set down in
writing as faithfully as his Memory could serve him, every Particular, that
passed relating to this Plea. If this he had failed to do, it can hardly be
imagined, that any Memory on earth could have retained the tenth Part of the
Passages here recorded with their due Circumstances. At least his, he
confusses, could not have done it; and he humbly conceives it to be none of the
worst. And yet know, that there are many hundreds of things for brevities sake
here omitted, which he had set down in his Minutes.

As to his Veracity, or Faithfulness in r^lating Matters, know that he is very
far from bidding you take things upon his bare Word. No; E^^uire narrowly into
them, and you shall find them to be certain Truths, being almost all matters of
Fact, which can be made appear, as the light of the Sun at midday.

Yet we must ^ere g^ve y^^ some little Caution. You Will see Judicatures and
Persons accused of a vast number of gross Faults, and acts of Inj^s^^^^^
besides many lesser failings. Now, suppose some of these Faults and acts of
Injustice, or lesser Failings cann^t be (...), as the strictness of Law
requires; yet it is sufficient, that a great number of them can be infallibly
instructed. We need not much stand, tho we should fail in a legal probati^n of
this or that particular, having abundance to come and go on. (...) is in this
Case, as if you should accuse a Person of many horrid Crimes; such as,
Witchcraft, Bestiality Sodomy, Incest, Sacrilege, Adultery, Robberies,
accompanied with many Murders, besides a good number of lesser Faults. Now,
grant, we say, that the Accuser cannot make good a^^ these Crimes; yet if he
does sufficiently prove one, two, or three deserving death, he gains his Point.

Or yet, suppose one were accused, as guilty of having committed four or five
Murders, and only one or two can be evidently made appear, it is enough:
neither is there much necessity to make strict enquiry after the rest, unless
perhaps upon some other account, than to put to Death the guilty Person. If two
or three sufficient Witnesses depone that this or the other man murdered his
Father or Elder Brother, that he might enjoy their Estate, you will hardly
doubt, if one famous witness depone that he saw him murder a stranger for his
Purse.

We shall not he^^ make application, the thing being pat and plain^id it self.

H^w ^e^s^^us a busines^ this (...) been: How intricate and abstruse: What
variety of strange Passages have occurred, (...) the (...) s^ an^^^er: What a
vast number of Judges; diversity of Judicatures, multitudes of Witnesses: How
narrow and (...) into things: What illegal, informal, unjust and wicked Acts
have been comm^^^^^ (...) the ^^^^rence ^f (...), by the Malice and Envy of
others: What wild and extravagant; what ridiculous and foolish; yea, what (...)
and dreadful things have been done, no man can know, till after he has perused
the following Sheets.

This Busines^ has been before all the Church Judicatures of Scotland; the
Kirk-Session, Presbytery, six or seven Synods, (...) ^f their Committees and
Sub-committees, two General Assemblies, their two Grand Committees, of Bills
and Overtures, besides their Sub-committees, two Commissions of the General
Assembly, and their Committees; the Bar^n, Sheriff, and Commissary Courts; the
Lords of Session, and lastly, before the Lords of His Majesty's most honorable
Privy Council.

^^c^^e you may see, that there are many hundreds, or rather thousands of
Judges in this Plea; and yet perhaps not so much as one of all these does fully
under^tand the true State of Matters. This Mr. K. finds to be infallibly true
from his frequent and most intimate Converse with some of the most judicious
and intelligent among them, and who have ^^ad by far the best occasion to know
Matters; yet they ingenuously d^ acknowledge, that they are ignorant of a great
(...) ^^st necessary and material Points for, say they, this Plea cons^sting of
such a vast number of various Heads and Clauses, and a^l these so confused and
interwoven one within the other, that our Mem^ries can hardly retain the tenth
part of them. And if it be thus with judicious and knowing Men, who have made
it their work to enquire after the true State ^f matters; Can a great many
young Men, lately (...) from the College, and admitted into Orders, be supposed
sufficientl^ on a^^^^d to judge and determine in such matters. (...) this! how
readily may a very innocent and honest Man by the Votes of such Persons, be
turned out of doors, beggard and disgraced, he and his for ever? For, if they
judge aright, (...) rather by Chance; than Choice. But how easily are such men
corrupted, and drawn aside by the influence of one or two leading Members, who
are, it may be, themselves possessed with Prejudice, Interest, or some other
Bias.

If this Piece be seriously read, and duly considered with all its
Circumstances, it will certainly be found to be the strangest Business in its
kind, that ever fell out in this Kingdom.

That Conflict, which Mr. K. had some Years ago with the Town-Council of
Lithgo, was indeed a mighty s^re Bout; yet nothing in compare of this. There he
fought with the Bulls of Bashan, twenty seven Gods, as they they style
themselves in onn of their Informations given in to the Lords of Council and
S^ssion; Here with the Beasts of Ephesus, a Company of Savage and Wild Boars.
There, these mighty Giants, before they came out to battle, were strongly fed
on the fat of the Land, the public Stock of the good Town: For it cost not
them one Farthing, but rather they made advantage by it, more being allowed
them, than their ordinary Expense. Here these wild Creatures have tear'd out
and devoured his very Bowe's, consuming by eating and drinking, what he and his
Family should have (...) on, as shall be made appear in its place. There he
fought in a fair and open Plain, in view of the World, where he could not be
attacked at a disadvantage: Here things were carried on in secret; yea his very
Accusers sat with the Judges, while he was kept without doors. There, his
Judges neither winners nor l^sers; Here, Parties, mightily byas^ed both as to
Credit and Interest. There were Persons of Honor, Integrity, Knowledge and
Experience; Here (for most part) mean, ignorant, and unexperienced. There, when
a Point was manifest and clear, an Interloquitor passed in his Favor assoiling
him from that Particular; but Here, tho Matters be as clear as the Sunbeam at
midday, yet no Exculpation can be had from the pretended Crime: Yea, after a
whole Libel, consisting perhaps of 30 or 40 several Heads or Points is
considered again and again, may be, in 20 or 30 Judicatures, and no ground
found for a Sentence; yet no Absolviture can be obtained; but new Libels
received in.

A thousand very strange things might be here adduced, were it not fitter that
you should have them in their proper places.

We shall now draw near to an End of this Business, leaving to your
Conjectures, (for know you cannot) after you have seriously perused this little
Work, What Hurt and Damage you think Mr. K. has, and still does sustain upon
these following Accounts.

1. By detaining from him the Casual Profits arising from the Office of
Session-Clerk and Precentor, which, they say, with the fifty Merks payable by
the Kirk-Session, amount to about fifteen Pounds sterling. a Year.

2. What may be his loss^ly breaking his School, which he can demonstrate to be
above fifty Pounds sterling. a Year (as to his Part, besides the Vshers
Proportion) worse than, when Mr. J. came to Kelso.

3. What vast Expense he has been put to in the Defense and Pursuit of a great
Number of Pleas before so many Judicatures, at a great distance one from
another.

4. (Which is by far the most considerable of any) What toil of Body; what
vexation of Spirit; what Trouble and anxiety of Mind he has endured, God only
knows; nor can it be well expressed in words.

If he had not been ^f a strong and wholesome Constitution of Body, blessed be
God for it; firm and resolute in what he undertakes: Had he not been active and
diligent in this whole Affair; If he had not, whereby to do his business; and a
heart to part with it; Had he not been innocent of these hellish Calumnies laid
to his Charge by wicked Men; If he had not had a great many Friends, the prime
and most Honorable of the Nation, and some very worthy Gentlemen, and reverend
Brethren among his Judges, who did often curb the carrier of the furious
Multitude. If these, or any one of these Circumstances and Qualifications, or
rather Acts of God's Favor and Goodness to him, had been wanting, he had been
swallowed up quick, long before he wrestled through the tenth part of this
Process. In plain terms, he had been in his Grave; his Family beggard and
disgraced for ever.

To conclude, we hope, there is no indifferent Person, but he will think, it is
most rational and just thus to publish to the World the following Account of
Matters of Fact; seeing that such vast numbers of most horrid and abominable
Lies, gr^ss and manifest Falsehoods, most dreadful and hellish Calumnies, have
not only by Word and Writing, been spread abroad very ^hereby malicious and
wicked Men; but are standing on Record in the Registers of all the Judicatures
of the Kirk of Scotland.

Mr. Kirkwood's PLEA, WITH THE Kirk Session AND Presbytery of Kelso.
PART the FIRST.
SECT. I.
MR. Kirkwood having lived in Lithgo, as Schoolmaster 15 Years, free of any
stain whatsomever on his Reputation, was immdiately after the Election of
Magistrates by Pole in that Burgh ( April 1689.) threatened by them, being all
Biggotly Presbyterian, either to forsake the public place of Worship, and go
with them to the Meeting House which was then kept in the Provost's-Hall and
Kitchen; otherwise he might expect to be turned out of Doors.

He being persuaded in his Judgment, that the then established Government of
the Church was Lawful; and convinced in Conscience, that it was his Duty to
comply therewith, till the Powers of the Land ( viz. The Convention of Estates
then sitting) should make an alteration in the external Policy of the Church,
which in his judgment is indifferent: And though there may be a better, and
worse; yet if neither be sinful, it is the duty as he thinks of private Persons,
not only for Peace, but Conscience sake to comply: for, though in its own Nature
it be indifferent, yet it ceases to be so, when settled by Law.

For this Reason he positively refused to go with them to their Meeting House,
whatever might be the event; yet he was not wanting to use all Lawful and fair
means to dissuade them from forceing him to act contrary to his Conscience: And
therefore he not only promised by word, once and again; (for many Communings he
had with them) but to assure them of his sincerity, he gave under his hand, in
a Letter, written to Walter Stuart of Pardivin, then Provost, that he would
cheerfully Concur with whatever external Government of the Church the Powers of
the Kingdom should be pleased to settle, judging it his Duty to follow, and not
to run before the Laws in matters indifferent.

By the way, It Is most astonishing to see a body of People this day crying out
against the severity of Rulers, and complaining, that they have not liberty to
serve God according to their Consciences; and yet to morrow, when they get the
Power in their own hands, they become guilty of that same fault which they
blamed so much in others, forgetting that great Principle of Religion, Do as
you would be done to.

That we may return again to our purpose; know, that the Magistrates did not
fail in what they had threatened; for within a very little time, contrary to all
Law and Justice; contrary to the express Sentence of the Lords of Session, they
caused their Officers, Four rude Fellows, in a most Barbarous manner to drag
him out of his own House, and shut him up in close Prison, as if he had been a
Malefactor: At that same time also, they turned to the door his Wife and Seven
young Children in the cold of Winter; of which business a particular account
was given in a Printed Information and Libel to the Lords of His Majesty's
Privy Council, Sept. 1692.

Now, that the Magistrates of Lithgo were highly Blameworthy in this matter,
is evident from the Sentences of the two most Sovereign Courts of this Kingdom;
the Civil part of this Plea being frequently debated before the Lords of
Session, and always determined in Mr. K's. favor, and the Riots before the
Lords of Privy Council, by whom the Magistrates, were Fined in 4000 Marks
Scots, for his behalf.

2.
AFter a long and Expensive Plea, M. K. in the cold of Winter, came with his
Family to Edinburgh, where he lived above a Year without any Employment, except
that it pleased the most noble and worthy Members of the Committee of Schools
and Colleges so far to Honor him, as to cause him to sit with them, and give
his advice in matters relating to his Profession: where his carriage was such,
that it moved some of them, and other Gentlemen to be very earnest with him to
take their Children under his Care; to which at length he consented, and within
a short while he came to have the greatest private School, that ever was in
Edinburgh, and certainly by far the most gainful.

When he was, we may say, at his height this way, having about 140 Scholars,
almost all Noble Men and Gentlemen's Sons, the Countess of Roxburgh as Curatrix
for the Earl her Son, sent for him, and gave him the offer of the School of
Kelso, with all the Profits and Advantages, that ever was possessed by any in
that place. He heartily thanked her Honor for the Offer; but told her he could
not embrace it, having to do with so many Worthy Gentlemen, who were mighty
discreet, and bountiful to him; especially considering, that he was much in
their Debt, they always paying before hand; and a great many of them having
only put their Sons to his School a few days before, some that very same day:
And therefore he could not be so base, as this day to receive Money, and go
away to morrow; and he knew very well, that these Gentlemen would not receive
back their Money. The Countess pressed, that he might immediately accept, and go
South, in regard the Place had wanted a Schoolmaster a whole half year; with
much difficulty he got 8 days to think upon it, before he gave an Answer.

It Is not far off the Road to show here, that he had at that time very many
considerable occasions in his Offer; one in Virginia to be Professor of Greek
and Latin, in an University to be erected there in James-Town; another to a
Free School in Ireland The Viscount of Star was very earnest to have him in the
West to a place his Lordship had Interest in. Mr. William Tulladaf (of whom
hereafter) Principal in St. Andrews was no less desirous to have him Professor
of Humanity there, and sent a Gentleman from the Patron to him for that end;
and to pass others, none was more pressing, than the Worthy Lady Hilton, who
brought with her own hand into his School at Edinburgh, a Call subscribed by
several Persons of Honor to be Schoolmaster at Duns.

After that he had considered all Circumstances, and advised with some friends
(tho most were against his leaving Edinburgh) at last he resolved to accept the
Call to Kelso, the Earl and Countess being Persons of great Honor; and (he was
confident) both willing and able to do him acts of kindness, he himself* being
born under them, and most of his Relations their Fewars, Vassals, or Tennants
in and about Dunbar: His present Charge at Edinburgh, very uncertain, the
Magistrates having power to turn him out at Pleasure; and the Masters of the
Public Schools envying him, nor had he any fixed Sallary, and paid Yearly
above 300 Marks for his Lodging and School, besides what he gave to 2 or 3
Doctors or Ushers. And falling on a way to satisfy Parents for what was to run
of any Quarter-wages, which he had received; viz. That his Successor should
Exact nothing, till the said Quarters run out, according to a Paction made
between them. Upon these, and several other considerations, he returned to the
Countess at the time appointed, and told her Ladyship, that he was at her
service.

3.
IMmediately the Countses sent an Express to Sir William Ker of Greenhead, and
others concerned in Kelso, to acquaint them, that Mr. K. had accepted: for this
had been their communing the former week at a Meeting about settling a
Schoolmaster; at which Meeting the Honorable William Hay of Drummellier
proposing M. K. as a person fit for that Charge: All that were present did most
willingly consent, and humbly begged her Ladyship would be pleased to commune
with him upon that head; which, as you have heard, was done.

The Town returned her Ladyship most hearty thanks for her diligence in that
affair, sending two of their number ( William Anchram and Lancelot Brown) with
an Obligation subscribed with their Hands, bearing, that they should Yearly pay
200 Marks Scots, as their proportion of Mr. K's Sallery. The Heretors pay other
two, and the Kirk Session 50; which with the Casualties of Baptisms, Marriages,
and Testimonials, is all that Mr. K. has of Sallary, out of which he is obliged
to pay his Doctors, as he and they agree: All which particulars are expressly
contained in a most formal Contract Subscribed by the Earl, and his Lordship's
Curators, with other Heretors, and such of the Town, as are in use to Subscribe
at the like occasion.

Now, the Ground of the Plea between the Kirk-Session, and Mr. K. is about the
said 50 Marks, and the Casualties of the Church, to which he lays claim by
virtue of his Call; and in prospect whereof he accepted the Office. The
Heretors found their Right on the uninterrupted Constitution and Custom of the
place, past memory of Man; it having always been in their power to present a
Schoolmaster and Session-Clerk in all the Governments of the Church since the
Reformation; and the said Schoolmaster, being always Session-Clerk, still had
a Sallary from the Session.

This Right and Property of the E. of Roxburgh, and others concerned in the
Parish cannot be taken from them, but by the Sentence of a Civil Judge: And is
it not, think you, very strange, that the Members of a Kirk-Session, being all
Parties, should assume to themselves, Brevi manu, forsooth, the Power to
dispose of the said Office, and the Profits arising therefrom.

Mr. K. will by no means cede from his Right ^o for that were to give occasion
to alter the Ancient and Laudable Constitution of the place, and to encroach on
the Right of the Earl and others, and to wrong his Successors: Of which things
more hereafter. Only it is not impertinent to show here, that their being a
half Years vacancy of the School before Mr. K's. Entry, the Members of the
Presbytery and Elders in Kelso, having licked their fingers with the said
Profits, during the said Half-year, were loath to part with them: But of this
you will get a more full Account in its proper place, Part 4. Sect. 13. Parogr.
12.

4.
SOme few Days after Mr. K. was come to Kelso with his Family, Geo. Pringle
Bailyff there, sent for William Christy, one of the Elders (who was appointed
Collector of the said Casualities) to Geo. Handiside's House, and there, in
presence of the said Geo. and Mr. K. and Mr. Colvil, School-Doctor, did, in
Name of the Earl and others concerned, intimate to the said Wm. that conform to
Ancient Custom, and the Call given to, and the Contract made with Mr. K. by the
E. of Roxburgh and others, the said Mr. K. was to enter to the said Casualities
and 50 Marks out of the Session-Box; and to officiate as Session-Clerk, etc.
Or, if he pleased to substitute the said Mr. Colvil to precent and perform the
other Offices within the Church. And therefore, said the Bailyff, You are
henceforth to desist from Collecting any of the said Profits, this Mr. K. will
do himself; I shall acquaint the rest of the Elders, replied the said Wm. and
give you an Answer.

Several Weeks passed, and yet no return given, though both the Bailyff and Mr.
K. frequently pressed to have it: The Presbytery was to be consulted, and the
said Wm. protracted as long as he could; for, if he had no advantage from the
real Profits, yet he was now and then receiving Perquisites, sometimes 2 or 3
Scots Pints of Ale, when a Bridegroom came with his Bride to give up their
Names. Michael Fisher also, another Elder, who officiated as Session-Clerk, was
at no loss by his Employ; for, if he took not Money, as he said one day to Mr.
K. for Testimonials and Absolvitures, he got not a few Pints of good Ale and
Nogans of Brandy.

By the way know, that Mr. K. had agreed with the said Mr. Colvil for 100:
Marks a Year, that he should officiate as Precentor in his room; and did
actually pay it, as his acquittance can make appear; though he did never once
officiate not Mr. K. Receive one farthing of the Casualities.

5.
THis attempt by word of mouth made to the Elders, proving ineffectual, one of
another kind is tried.

Jan. 1693. A Petition subscribed by the said Bailyff in Name of the Earl and
others is given into the Presbytery, then sitting in Kelso Kirk, out of the
Bailyff's own hand; which Petition being but short, and the first made use of
in this affair; and especially, because it contains some very material points
of the following Process, we have thought fit to set down at large.

Unto the Right Reverend the Moderator, and other Reverend Brethren and Members
of the Presbytery of Kelso.
Whereas past memory of Man, the Schoolmasters of this place have always
precented in the Church, and performed the other Duties belonging to that
Office; and therefore the Heretors and others, who have the power of calling a
Schoolmaster to this Burgh, being sufficiently informed, not only of Mr. K's
Qualifications and Abilities to perform the Offices of Schoolmaster; but of
his orderly Carriage and Compliance with the present Church Government, did for
his greater Encouragement, promise and engage to him all Emoluments and Profits
whatsomever any of his Predecessors had before him; of which the Casualities of
the Church are a Part; and in prospect whereof he accepted the place: And since
at this present time there is no settled Minister here, to whom application
ought to be made in this Affair, we have thought it our Duty to apply to you
the Reverend Members of this Presbytery, to see him settled in the said Office.
And in Name of the rest, I, as Bailyff of this Burgh have subscribed with my
hand these presents at Kelso, the day of Jan 1693.

Sic. subscribitur, Geo. Pringle.

After some debate in the Presbytery, the B. being called in, was told, that
they were not competent Judges in that Affair; it belonging to the Minister and
Elders of the place.

It Is fit here, that you know, that the Presbyteries of Jedburgh and Kelso at
this time were joint. and sat both as one; and hence it was, that Mr. Gabriel
Semple, Minister at Jedburgh (who is Instar Omnium) being that day present,
made use of this Argument, viz. To delay the settling of Mr. K. is a good mean
to hasten the settling of a Minister in Kelso.

6.
It Is most pertinent here to give a particular Account of some very odd
Passages, which fell out by an Encounter between Mr. S. and Mr. K. who had
never seen one another till that day.

The matter is as follows, Mr. Semple before he went into the Presbytery, came
up to Mr. K. walking in the Churchyard with two Gentlmen, and said, Which of
you is Mr. K.? What Is your will with me? Answered Mr. K. I would gladly spend
half an hour with you; replied Mr. Semple I Will wait on you Sir, when and where
you please: said the other, I shall call for you after Dinner, answered Mr.
Semple and thus they parted.

Business, it seems, not suffering him to call that Night; next day he sent for
Mr. K. to the Lord of Thirleston's Lodging; where he began the following
Dialogue. Mr. K. said he, I have sent for you, that I may know the ground of
that Plea between the Magistrates of Lithgo and you: I hear much talking of it
every where. Did you never, Sir, answered Mr. K. see the Printed Information,
and the Libel, which I gave unto the Lords of Privy Council against them?
Never, replied M. Semple but I would be glad to see them; I was lately,
continued he, in the West country, about Glasco; where I saw the Provost of
Lithgo, who is now denounced Rebel and Fugitive upon your account: Poor Man!
He Is the only person, that has suffered in this Government. You must excuse me,
Sir, answered Mr: K. to think, and say, otherwise, Ten thousands besides him
have suffered hard things, whether justly, or not, it is not my business to
enquire; but, as to the Provost, what he suffers, it is most just, unless you
say, that the Lords of Privy Council have committed Iniquity. Would you not be
content to be reconciled with him? Said Mr. Semple I would be a very bad
Christian, answered Mr. K. if I refused to do that, but, I hope, you will
confess, that he ought to satisfy me for the injuries he has done me.

Come, Mr. K. Let us leave this point, said Mr. Semple I have another thing to
ask you. Tell me, what power Magistrates have in the matter of turning out
their Schoolmaster. Sir, replied Mr. K. I must first know whether these
Magistrates be the sole Patrons of the School, or joint with Heretors, If
joint, the one cannot act without the other.

But the chief thing I would know, is the Nature or Tennor of the Contract
between the Patrons and their Schoolmaster, whether joint, or not, is one and
the same thing: If the Contract be express, and positive for a certain number
of years only, when these are expired, no question it is in the Patron's option
to remove him, or not; providing he get a legal warning. But if the contract be
Ad vitam vel culpam, o^ yet, if the Call be in general terms, viz. to be
Schoolmaster in this or that place; (which, they say, is equivelant to the
former) the Patrons, whether sole Heretors, sole Magistrates, or Joint, have
not power to turn out their Schoolmaster; unless he be guilty of a Fault, and
that a relevant one, deserving Deprivation. And therefore, if that
Schoolmaster perceive; yea, suspect partiality in his Judges (who in effect
are Parties) he may by an Appeal, Advocation, or Suspension, carry the matter
to a higher Judicature: for who knows not, how often a leading Person in Burgh,
or Country has for his own sinistrous ends, so influenced his fellow Judges,
that by their Vote, poor innocent people have been most unjustly turned out of
doors, disgraced and beggared they and theirs for ever.

What you say, Mr. K. seems very rational, replied Mr. Semple and can hardly be
denied. I am informed, continued he, that a Schoolmaster in Jedburgh was
turned out for sleeping in the Kirk. A very odd reason indeed, replied Mr. K.
but, pray Sir, tell me, whether that was the sole Cause; or that with other
reasons? I cannot give you a particular account of matters, answered Mr. Semple
I only heard the thing in general: And with these words he arose, saying, It
was time for him to go home.

7.
MR. K. convoying him to the Boat, where he was to cross Tweed (about 200 paces
distant) said to him on the way; Sir, you have been pleased to ask me several
Questions; I hope, you will also give me liberty to speak to you about things,
wherein I am concerned. And, first, I must tell you, Sir, that the Answer the
Presbytery gave yesterday to the Petition given in by the Bailyff in the name
of the Earl and others, was very ill taken: and some blame you for it. It will
hasten the settlng of a Minister among you, answered Mr. Semple that your
business be delayed till that be first done. Excuse me, Sir, to differ from
you, replied Mr. K. It will rather retard the thing, for your refusing to
satisfy a just desire, does irritate persons concerned, and makes them averse
to concur with you in other matters. Do you not think, Mr. K. answered Mr.
Semple but the Minister and Elders are much concerned to know the
Qualifications of that person, who is to be their Clerk and Precentor? No man
of common sense will deny, but they are exceeding concerned in that matter,
replied Mr. K. Yea, it is the great concern of the whole Congregation to know
that he be every way duly Qualified for his respective Offices. And yet, what
you say makes nothing against the business in hand. It having been, I say, in
the power of the E. of Roxburgh and others in the Parish of Kelso, past Memory
(not to mention prescription) to present a Schoolmaster and Session-Clerk,
these two Offices being always lodged in one and the same Person; if he be
every way legally Qualified, it is not in the option of the Minister and Elders
to accept, or not accept: And to settle another in that Office, is to encroach
on another man's Right. And, Sir, give me leave to tell you, that the Minister
and Elders are very incompetent Judges in this Debate, being Parties, and so
Judges in their own Cause; and cannot, but be supposed to act partially in this
affair: For you know, Sir, how Ambitious Men are to have power to place, and
dis-place others at pleasure; yea, as the Poet says, even to kill their
Neighbor, tho they do not desire to do it.

-- Et qui nolunt occidere quenquam.
Posse volunt.
Juv. Sat. 10. But that, which I mainly urge, is, that this Plea under debate
is a Civil business, at least as Civil and more than the Right that Patrons had
to present Ministers to Churches, which would have continued to this day, if
King and Parliament had not determined otherwise.

And, Sir, to conclude this Point; Let matters go as they will, by God's
assistance, I shall do nothing that may either give occasion to alter the
Ancient Custom of this place, or to encroach on the Right of my Worthy Patrons;
nor that may tend to the prejuidce of my Successors.

By this time they were come to the River, and therefore Mr. S. made no reply;
only he said, No man indeed can blame you to seek all that is contained in your
Contract; and I think they who Contracted with you, are obliged to see you get
it: Farewell. Fail not to send me that Information and Libel about your Plea
with the Magistrates of Lithgo: And thus they parted.

8.
MR. K. returned home, musing what might be Mr. Semple's design to enquire
about his business in Lithgo, and the power of Magistrates in the matter of
turning out their Schoolmasters; time, the best Interpreter of Secrets, soon
discovered that Mystery; for within a few days he heard, that a Libel was
raised against Mr. Hamilton, Schoolmaster of Jedburgh: And that one of the
ARTICLES was his Sleeping in the Kirk in time of Divine Service.

At last the poor old Man was turned to the door, whether justly, or unjustly,
God knows; and Time, at least Eternity will discover. At present know, that Mr.
James Daes, Lord of Cowdenknows, a very Judicious Man, and a great Lawyer,
openly said in the face of the Synod at Kelso (March 1694.) that it was loudly
talked through the Country, that Mr. Hamilton met with Jedburgh Justice.

To return to our purpose, Mr. K. according to his promise and Mr. Semple's
desire, sent him on Tuesday thereafter the above mentioned Printed Information
and Libel, enclosed in a sealed Letter.

In this Letter, after a brief touch of the business in Lithgo, he sub-joyns in
manner of a Postscript some things relating to what past between them in that
communing they had, while they were going toward the said River: And at the
close, he beggs liberty to tell, that it was neither Decent, nor Orderly, that
Weavers, Tailors, and Livery-Men should be set up to Officiate as Precentors;
and in the mean time Masters of Arts, whose Right it is to be there, kept down.
He adds also to this purpose; That it gave just ground of offense to the
people, that two different persons, the one a weaver brought from Yettam, six
Miles distant, the other a Master of Arts living in the place; should both at
one minute take up two different tunes, the Weaver Stilt-tune, the other
London, making indeed a sweet Melody, each of them with the help of their own
Consorts, crying and sqweeking aloud, to drown the voice of their opposites.

Nor was the Minister wanting in his part, for he pretty severely gave the
Master of Arts a Rapp on the pate, and snatched the Book out of his hand.

Those in the Church, that were Neuters, did Laugh very heartily; a great
number run out of doors, as if fire had been amongst them. Some English
Officers (for Sir John Lanier's Regiment was then lying in Kelso) cried out
with a loud voice, The People are all gone Mad; The Devil's in the Minister.

This was remedied the next day, wherein that Minister Preached, there being no
singing at all.

By the way know, that Mr. K. was very averse to give this particular account
of what past between Mr. Semple and him, but he could not get by it, being a
most necessary Introduction to a very strange Passage, that followed thereon. A
Mystery indeed! A very deep and hidden Mystery, which neither M. K. nor those
concerned in him are able to dive into. A juggling trick it is. A mere Cheat, if
ever their was one: but where it lies, who the Hocus-pocus, who Art and Part,
there is the Mystery.

9.
YOu are not to expect a full account of this matter: for if that could be
given, it would not be a Mystery. You must resolve to live in the dark with Mr.
K. and his party you may perhaps have it from the other side; especially if you
be a Brother.

The business is as follows; Mr. Semple having received Mr. K's Letter, carried
it the very next day into the Joint Presbytery of Kelso and Jedburgh: If this
was a discreet act in him to produce a private Letter in a public Judicature,
without first acquainting the Author, let the world judge.

This Letter was read again and again, and no little debate and heat about it.
What moved Mr. Semple to carry it in, what design he had in the matter, what
words past among the Brethren, who were Pro, who Con, Mr. K. can give no
certain account: only he heard in general, that there was a very warm debate on
both sides, and thus it came to his ears.

James Thomson and William Christy, Elders in Kelso; being present at that
Joint Presbytery met at Jedburgh, were removed before reading of the said
Letter, and so knew nothing of the contents thereof. A pretty while after, two
or three Elders of other Parishes were turned out also: These had heard and
seen much of the Contest, that was amongst the Brethren within.

As soon as they were come out, Pray, said one of them to Kelso Elders, What
sort of a Man have ye for your Schoolmaster? I cannot well tell, replied one
of them. He Is a Man sharp enough; but, etc.

He must be a strange kind of man, said that other; for he Hectors all the
Ministers at a wonderful rate in a Letter, which he has written to Mr. Semple
But tell me, continued he; Whom have ye for a Precentor? Sometimes the Minister
Precents, sometimes another Person, replied James Thomson: Yond Letter, said
the other, bears, that Weavers, Tailors, and Livery Men Precent in your Church;
and sometimes two several Persons in a most unseemly manner take up different
Tunes at one instant; yea, and that at other times you have no Singing at all:
So that the Worship of God is Defective and Imperfect amongst you.

This made Kelso Elders look one to the other, as if their Noses had been
bleeding: They knew the Weaver and Tailor, but could not imagine who was the
Livery-Man; though they had seen him about 10 days before officiating, as
Precentor, having Blew Livery; viz. Mr. S's own Servant, his Master Preaching
at Kelso that day. Follows the Main point, for which all the rest are adduc'd.

A very strange Passage.
10.
AFter a hot and long Conflict about the Contents of Mr. K's Letter, at last an
Act passes in his Favor relating to the Petition given in to the Presbytery at
Kelso by the said B. And Mr. Gaudy Minister at Sprouston was appointed to
acquaint Sir Wm. Ker of Greenhead, that such an Act was past. Accordingly Mr.
Gaudy went and informed Sir Wm reading the Act to him; and desired he would be
pleased to cause Mr. K. either to come himself, or to send another for its
Extract. Immediately Sir W. crosses the River to Kelso, and informs Mr. K. He
without delay sends the abovementioned Mr. Colvil with a Letter to Mr. Gaudy
which when he had read, he desired Mr. Colvil to tell Mr K. that since he had
been with Sir W. Ker he had met with Mr. Tho. Thomson Minister in Ednim, who
told him, that there was some little demur in the business. You may write so
much to Mr. K. answered Mr. Colvil. There Is no need to write, replied Mr. Gaady
I have nothing else to say but what I have told you; and that you may easily
report by word of Mouth. You must excuse me, Sir, answered Mr. Colvil, I will
not carry your Message by word: I think, seeing Mr. K. wrote to you; discretion
obliges you to write back to him. Mr. Gaudy being thus pressed, wrote as above
related. Know also that he read the said Act to Mr. Colvil.

Mr. K. was astonished at the receipt of Mr. Gaudy's Letter, not knowing the
ground, or reason of the demur; He thought the world was turned Topsy-Turvy,
that no person was thereafter to be believed.

Very opportunely he meets with Sir W. Ker who asking if he had got the Extract
of the said Act. Yes, Sir, replied Mr. K. and lo there it is, delivering to Sir
Wm. Mr. Gaudy's Letter.

What he thought, how he looked, what he said, you may easily conjecture. It Is
not fit we repeat his words, only know, that immediately, without so much as
turning him about, he went strait on foot to Sprouston, a large Mile distant,
and ne^^'d Mr. Gaudy and his Brethren most severely; We for bear to mention his
words, because, it is no hard business to guess what they were.

Now, we leave to any indifferent Person, what to think of this Affair;
certainly there is juggling in the Matter: and the most innocent of them all
cannot but be conscious of the Intrigue of the Business; and in so far Art and
Part of the Enormity of the Fact.

Mr. Borleans, a Member of the said Presbytery, as honest and plain-dealing a
Man as perhaps is amongst them, paying M. K. his old Acqua^n^ance, a Visit,
being desired to unfold this Riddle, shook his Head, but positively refused to
open his Mouth about that Matter.

If M. K. alone were concerned in this Affair, there would be less Ground of
Wonder. But to see Men in their Circumstances met together, in a most solemn
manner, sitting and acting as Judges, yea, the Messengers of Jesus, and
Ambassadors sent from God; Men, who ought to be Examples to others, of plain
and candid Dealing; to see, we say, these Men treat in a most juggling and
deceitful manner Persons of the greatest Honor and Dignity in the Kingdom, is
not only an Act of the greatest Indiscretion and Rudeness imaginable, but the
very height of Madness and Folly.

And that which mightily aggravates the thing, is, that they never sent any of
their number to make an Apology to Sir W. Ker an Honorable and Worthy
Gentleman, a Person of Honor, the chief Factor and Overseer of the Earl's
Affairs in that place, Principal Bailyff of the Burgh, and next Heretor to the
Earl: Now, think you not, but that a Person of his Quality and Circumstances
ought to have received some satisfaction for the Indignity that was done him?

But in effect that would have laid open to the World the Intrigue of the whole
business; and so discovered the Imperfections (to say no worse) of some
Reverend Brethren: It was, by far, greater Wisdom to observe the Proverb, which
we confess is more significant than cleanly. The more you trample on a Turd, it
becomes the broader. And thus ends that nasty business.

11.
THe next thing worth our notice, happened the Twenty Sevent of April
thereafter, and is as follows.

John Brown M^rchant in Kelso, a Leading Man, and one of good Repute amongst
the Presbyterians, came to M. K. and said, Sir, truly in my judgment you are
very much wrong^d in that you ^e out of the Kirk-Profits. Your Predecessor was
not so treated. He was deprived indeed, ab Officio; but not a Beneficio: For I
being then Kirk-Treasurer, paid him out of mine own hand: And therefore I Will
go and interpose my power with the Elders, that this wrong may be redrest; and
within a few days I shall return, and give you an Account of my Diligence.

The 3d. of May, he returns with this Commission; I am desired by the Elders,
said he, to tell you, That if you will give under your Hand, that you have the
said Casualities, as a Gra^uity from them, and that during their pleasure; and
that they shall be Collectors thereof, and to pay you Monthly or Quarterly, as
you please; you may have them. Which words being repeated over again by the
said John Brown, M. K. holding out one of his fingers, said, he would rather
that a Joint were cut off it, than subscribe such a base Paper. He was not so
weary of his Noble Patron, the E. of Roxburgh, as to make such a pitiful
change. And besides, to subscribe that Paper, were to own a gross Falsehood;
yea, a horrid Lie: for it is not in the power of the Elders so to dispose of the
said Profits. After some discourse to this purpose, they parted.

Certainly some Leger-Demain Trick lurked under this Message. And that During
pleasure, say they. Pray, what is this, but to turn him off the very next day?

From this time nothing was done, till the 28th. of April 94. On which day M.
K. by advice took Instuments against the above mentioned William Christy,
Collector of the said Profits, protesting that he, and his Constituents should
be liable to make good to him all the said Casualities, or Profits.

By the way, it is fit here that you know, that about this time the said Joint
Presbytery made an Act, that these Profits should not come in to M. K. So that
the Members of the Presbytery are the Constituents here mean'd.

This is a most material Point, and of great Consequence, as you will find
hereafter in its proper places, particularly Sect. 13. Parogr. 12. and Sect.
24. Part 4.

From the 28th. of April 94. to M. Jaque's Entry the 24th. of Jan. 95. Matters
were very peaceable and calm: so that we shall make what is past the first Part
of this Plea; wherein you have only seen a few Preparations for War, a little
Brandishing, as 'twere, of Weapons: At most some Light Skirmishes, without
Effusion of Blood. But you may assure your self, hereafter you shall see
terrible Fights; many Bloody and Cruel Battles; such as never before were to be
seen in Christendom; far less acted within the Walls of the House of God.

The Second Part. Commencing at Mr. Jaque's Entry, the 24th. of June, 1695.
SECT. I.
YOu have heard in the former part, how Mr. Kirkwood was called to his Office,
and therefore we think it not amiss here to give some account of the way of M.
Jaque's Entry; especially, because he has published to the world in several
Papers, that it was most Regular and Legal: Whereas it is certain, that it was
most Irregular, and Illegal, being neither conform to the Laws of God, nor Man.

The truth of this Assertion will evidently appear to any indifferent person,
that shall take but a transient view of what follows; the particulars whereof
can be instructed to a demonstration in Law, being all matters of Fact.

We begin with that very pertinent Censure given in Face of the General
Assembly ( Jan. 96.) to the Synod Book of Mers and Tiviotdale by the Ministers,
that got it to revise. Amongst several other faults, said he, who made report,
there^s one that is very remarkable: (Page) A Blank Call is put into the hands
of the Synod by the Heretors and others in the Parish of Kelso; and (Page) this
Blank Call is filled up with the name of Mr. Guttry Minister at Oxnam; and
(Page ^) Mr. Jaque Minister at Biggar is put in Possession of the Pulpit, and
no reason given, why the one is past, and the other placed in his room. At
which report the Assembly being not a little astonished, Mr. Law, Minister in
the High-Church of Edinburgh, said, I remember, this business coming in before
the Commission of the General Assembly was, approved and ratified by them.

This being premised, as a Foundation for what follows; be pleased further to
know, that after Four or Five Years very hot Contest between the Heretors and
Elders (Five Men only, every way insignificant) about placing a Minister at
Kelso, a frequent Synod meeting there; ( March 94.) at which Synod as Ruling
Elders were some very worthy Gentlemen, particularly My Lord Polwart, now Earl
of Marchmount and Lord High Chancellor of Scotland. His Lordship, with some
other Members of the Synod crossed the River to Bridg-end, Sir W. Ker of
Greenhead's House, and communed with him about the business. After they had
talked some time in Sir William's Hall, and were not like to come to a
Conclusion: Let us go out, Sir W. and take a turn in your Garden, said My Lord:
When they were there, his Lordship and Sir W. drawing a little off from the
rest of the Company, spoke to this purpose.

I could heartily wish Sir W. said My Lord, that some Method were fallen on,
whereby the Differences, that are amongst you might be taken away: It Is a sad
thing, that such a Congregation, as Kelso, should be so long without a settled
Minister. It Is not the Heretors fault, My Lord, answered Sir. W. that this
place is so long vacant; we have offered several very knowing and Judicious
Men, against whom there can be no objection, they being every way qualified;
some whereof are Members of the same Synod: and to go no further; lo, My Lord,
there is one, (pointing toward Mr. Jo. Vetch) whom I humbly Judge very fit to
be Minister at Kelso. Truly Sir W. replied My Lord, I think the rest of the
Parish should leave the Heretors to nominate, whom they judge fit, provided he
be a Person qualified according to Law: And as to Mr. Vetch, I know him to be a
very Judicious Person, and a Man of a peaceable and calm Spirit; and therefore
most fit to be Minister at Kelso, to Compose the Differences of that place: He
is the fittest man I know, My Lord, said Sir W. but because some Heretors are
for him; therefore the Elders are against him. What method think you then, Sir
W. shall be taken to get you all brought to agree in one man, says my Lord? I
know none, answered Sir W. except this; That all who pretend to have any Right
in the Call of a Minister to Kelso, pass entirely from it, and put a Blank-Call
into the hands of the Synod, leaving it solely in their power to fill up what
Ministers name they shall Judge fit. And for my part, my Lord, that the World
may be convinced, that the stop lies not at my door, I shall go along with the
first; and, for ought I know, other Heretors will not be averse to do the like:
This cannot be done at this Synod; but against the next I shall use my
endeavor to have the Call ready. That is more, replied my Lord, than in reason
can be desired; and I think, the Synod will be so just, that they will insert
no man's name in the Call, till they know the Heretors are pleased with him. And
thus they parted in very good terms.

A Report of this Communing being made to the Synod by my Lord, they were all
exceeding well pleased, and thanked his Lordship for his diligence in that
Affair.

2
IN short, the Synod meeting October next at Kelso, the said Blank-Call,
subscribed the last of July, 94. by Fifty Nine Persons, whereof Four are
Elders, (and there are but Five) and Attested by Mr. Glen and Mr. Thomson,
Ministers of Kelso Presbytery, now most active to render Void and Null, what
they then Attested, and were mighty forward to promote, is put into the hands
of the Synod.

They, taking the matter to their serious consideration, did first name Four or
Five Persons, whom they judged fit to be Ministers at Kelso, and sent some of
their number to Sir W. Ker with the List of the said names, leaving to his
Honor to pitch on any one of them he pleased: That will I not do, answered Sir
W. for that Person may please me, who perhaps will displease another. You have
a Blank-Call put into your hands, do with it as you will be answerable to God
and Man. This is the Sum of what past.

These Brethren having made report of what past between Sir William and them,
immediately the above mentioned Mr. Guttry and two or three others are put into
a List, that it might be determined by a Vote, which of their names should be
incerted in the said Call: And so without any debate, the said Mr. Guttry
carried it, having more Votes than any of the rest, as Records bear.

Hitherto, you see, things are done most deliberately and Legally; but now
follows something like an Afterbirth: a Monstrous and Shapeless Creature. In
plain terms, you shall find as strange and wild Passages in their kind, as have
fallen out in our Age. Such things, we say, as you could hardly believe Men of
common sense can be guilty of: most extravagant acts; quite contrary to all Law
and Form: Acts raising to the very Foundation the things, which the same
persons did build the other day. Strange! None more observant of due Form and
right Order at other times; but, when it comes to be their own Case, Hackertons
Cow, as we say, then they stand not to break over all Form; yea, and Substance
too, having no regard to material Justice it self; but carry like a flood all
before them.

3.
FOr the better understanding this so strange a Passage, be pleased to know,
that about Ten days after the said Synod had risen, a Committee of the General
Assembly met within the Kirk of Kelso to consider a Libel raised against Mr.
Peacock Minister at Morbattle, and to examine Witnesses in matters relating to
the said Process. Mr. Peacock, whose Wife being Dead was to be Buried that day,
wrote a Letter, promising to wait on the Committee, after he had performed his
last duty to his Wife. Notwithstanding this too lawful excuse, they went on,
and Examined Witnesses in absence: what was done by this Committee in the said
Affair, it is not our business to enquire. It is sufficient for our present
purpose to show here, that Mr. Jaque was a Member, if not Moderator of the said
Committee, and stayed behind after the rest were gone home.

What discourse, or communing was between the Presbytery of Kelso and him, as
to what past in the Synod about settling a Minister there, we can give you no
particular account: This you must Collect from what follows.

In the first place therefore know, that Mr. Jaque Preached the next Lord's Day
in the Kirk of Kelso, in order, as afterward appeared, that the people might
know his skill in that Art: Know also that the next Lord's Day (at least the
second following.) Mr. Glen Minister at Stitchel, being sent to Preach at
Kelso, told the people from the Pulpit, that he was ordered by the Presbytery
to make Intimation to them, that the Heretors, Elders, and others of that
Parish should meet within the Kirk at Kelso the next Morning, precisely at Nine
a Clock, in order to subscribe a Call to Mr. W. Jaque, Minister at Biggar. A
wonderful surprise, you may be sure to most part. Pray Mr. Glen, might the
people justly have replied; Tell us, by what Right, or Law can Mr. Jaque be our
Minister? Were we not told the other day, that Mr. Guttry in Oxnam was by Act
of Synod appointed to be Minister of Kelso? Yea, did not some of us hear the
very Act pass, and see it recorded in your Register? Tell us, pray, what way
you have got over the Act? Have you razed it out of the Records of the Synod?
This will be found a Heinous Crime. And, if it yet continue there; why is it
become Null and of no Effect? Shall the Presbytery of Kelso, a very small part
of the Provincial Synod of Merss and Tiviotdale undo what they have so
deliberately established by a Law? We cannot think, they will attempt any such
thing. And therefore, we must beg your pardon, Mr. Glen, if we doubt of the
Truth of what you say. Show us your Commission, otherwise we are not obliged to
believe your bare word; especially since you cannot back what you say by
Scripture; and we can instruct our Assertion from your own Records: Think not
thus to take from us the true Child, and to put in its room a spurious Brat.
This and much more to this purpose might have been objected. And further; It
had been most proper to have added as follows. Suppose, might they have said,
we had no right in Mr. Guttry, nor he in us by any Act of the Synod: and grant
also, that the Presbytery had power (as they have not) to nominate a Minister
for this place, yet they ought to give to all persons concerned due Intimation.
Pray Mr. Glen, speak ingeniously in the matter. Is this Intimation, which you
have made from the Pulpit, Legal, or not? Is it conform to the Laws, Customs
and Practice of this Kingdom? Think you it possible that Heretors and others,
that live at a distance, can be advertised in so short a time, especially now
in the very de^d of Winter, and in time of a very great storm of Show: And you
are not Ignorant, that most of the Heretors, and these that are by far the more
considerable, live out of the Parish, and that at a good distance. No, No, Mr.
Glen, it is so far from being a due and legal Intimation; that it is a perfect
Sham: A mere juggling with persons of Honor. A very Swallow could not give
Advertisement, though she had taken flight, as soon as the words dropped from your
mouth. You know the common Proverb; Festinans canis caecos panit Catulos: Fools
haste is no speed. You Will perhaps see the truth of this hereafter, and repent
out of time. It Is not in the wit of Man to justify your proceedings.

Pray come, Mr. Glen, let us reason the matter in earnest: Either you desire
the Heretors to meet, or not. If you desire they meet; how can you require that
of them, which you know is not in their power to perform? If you do not desire
they should meet; why make you an Intimation? Is it not in order, that they may
meet: So that in effect, you desire, and not desire. You desire in word, and
seemingly to the World; but in Truth, and in the sight of God you do not
desire. Mass John, Mass John, (might they say in their own dialect, shaking the
Head, and pointing with the Finger, as their custom is) This is not fair
dealing. It Is Hypocrisy in its hight. a juggling with persons of Honor: A thing
most unbecoming one of your Coat, especially, when you speak from the chair of
Verity.

4
WE proceed to show you more of this kind of stuff, though of a different Stamp,
yet a true native Brat of the former discourse. It Is as follows.

According to the Appointment, the Five Elders with a few, who run their way,
failed not to convene precisely at the hour: Never were men more eager to get
hands to a Paper, than both Elders and Ministers, especially the said Mr. Glen,
pressing every body to subscribe. Amongst others came the Bailyff, and
unhappily put to his hand; for which the honest Gentleman was turned out of his
Office by the Earl and his Curators. The Ministers had persuaded the Bailyff
that Mr. Jaque was an excellent person; but within a few days thereafter geting
a true Description of his humor and temper of Spirit, he sore repented of what
he had done.

The Elders no doubt by the advice of the Brethren, not thinking themselves
sufficiently secure with the Subscriptions got within the Kirk, went through the
town for more: Nor did they rest within Burgh, but traveled to the Country to
see what purchase they could make there. And that we may put an end to this
point, we shall only give you the following Passage.

It fell to the lot of Jo. Thomson, a Cooper, and one of the Elders, to go to a
little Country Village, called Fair-Cross; never did a Beggar go more carefully
from door to door, or was more unwilling to go without his a^ms, than he. At
last he stumbled into Dandy Huy's Barn, where his Servant Lad Robert Bruice was
Threshing. After some little course Complement, such as; What now, Robin; you
are always busy, is it not time to rest your self, quoth John? What now good
Man; is that you? What Is brought you to this Town; answered Robin? I have been
getttng Subscriptions to our new Ministers Call, Robin, quoth John again. O man
(with a gape and a Glower) We are now to get a dainty Minister. O O O, but he is
a brave man! Every body is Subscribing his Call. See man, what Names are there
(holding out the Call and Subscriptions) The Bailyff subscribes with the first
in the name of all the Heretors. Come, Robin, we must have your hand with the
rest. I cannnot write, answered Robin. No matter, quoth John, I shall lead your
hand. And so on the top of a Sack, or something of that kind, they two did the
business.

It Is worth the while here to show you, that John asked not for Good Man Dandy,
Robins Master; for he had refused already to subscribe, when desired by Michael
Fisher another Elder. Come, Dandy, said Michael; lend us a touch of your
fore-foot to a Paper here. Fie^d a scrape, and that I wot well, quoth Dandy. In
short, Dandy was more like to lend Michael his hinder foot, than his fore-foot.

It Is easy hence to judge, what sort of Cattle (except a few, who did on the
Bailyff's account) subscribed this Call; Journey-men, Apprentices, Servants,
Boys, if not Children; yea, Beggars, or such as live on Charity, or not worth
the Kings Unlaw, as we say.

To confirm this; know, that a debate falling out between Mr. Jaque and Mr. K.
or rather between the E. of Roxburgh and Mr. Jaque about a Brew House or
Cellar; for which Mr. K. being summoned at Mr. Jaque's Instance to compiere
before the Sheriff of Tiviotdale, his Proctour craved to see Mr. Jaque's Call
in order to know his Right to pursue for the said Cellar: Whereupon Mr.
Archibald Dowglass, Sheriff Depute, past an Interloquitor, that it should be
produced next Court day; which being come, the Defenders Proctour, craved the
Call might be produced. There is no need, says the opposite Proctour, to
produce any such paper, it being manifest to all, that Mr. Jaque is Minister at
Kelso: The Defender oppon'd the other days Interloquitor.

After some jangling between the two Proctours, Mr. Tho. Steel sitting that day
in the Deputy's absence, as the Sheriffs Substitute, took the Call out of his
Letter-Case, and gave it to the Defender's Proctour, who scarcely having cast
his eyes upon it; My Lord Sheriff, said Mr. Jaque's Proctour, It Is not fit
every body see this Paper; and immediately he snatched it out of his fellow
Proctour's hand, and threw it back to the Sheriff. To which it was replied by
the Defenders Proctour; That as all Writs, whereupon Processes are founded, are
given up to see, and object against; so much more ought this Call, seeing from
their Shyness in suffering it to be seen, 'twas presumable that it is forged;
adding, that he offered to Instruct, besides several other gross Informalities,
which might be made appear, if the Call were given up, that many persons had
Subscribed the same, who had no Right to do it; yea said he further, I offer to
prove, that there are hands at that Call, of persons that could never write in
their Life. These, and many other things to this purpose, were openly spoken in
the Face of the Sheriff-Court at Jedburgh. As to the business of the said
Cellar, or Vault, which gave occasion to this Debate, you will have a
particular account thereof, Sect. 7. Part 3. Ans. to the 15. Art. Remark B.

5.
THe Call being signed, as you have heard, was carried to Biggar; where, you
may be sure, it was made very welcome by Mr. Jaque, who was weary of that
People; or rather they weary of him, and that not only these of the meaner
sort; but persons of the highest dignity in this Nation: And which is yet more
Remarkable, such as very much favor his Party; particularly the Noble Earl of
Crawford, of which thing you may likely have a touch in the last or fifth part
of this Process.

We cannot well pass here an expression, they say, he had to some persons at
Biggar, when they were advising of him not to go to Kelso. You are now become
Old, said they to Mr. Jaque, the people there are very High and Proud; so that
you will find them somewhat untractable; especially considering that they are
divided amongst themselves, and those generally of the best Note are of a
different persuasion in matters relating to the Government of the Church, and
consequently will suit very ill with your judgment in that matter. That Is
nothing, answered Mr. Jaque, I love to be in Action. He had spoke more
properly, if he had said, I love to be in Contention. A Commentary on this may
be a saying of his own Brothers son, Alexander Jaque, a Dyer in East Lothian;
while discoursing one day with a near Relation of Mr. K's he told he had an
Uncle, who is Minister at Kelso; but, added he, Sure I am, he will keep them all
in hot water, and make them eat their meat in order. Shame befall him, and you
both, replied Mr. K's Friend; for well know I whom he keeps in hot water, my
very near Relation Mr. K. Schoolmaster there; but I am much mistaken, if ever
your Uncle was so well matched in his Life. I hope, he who vanquished the
Twenty Seven Gods of Lithgo, will not be easily run down by one single Man. At
this Mr. Jaques Nephew stood, as if his Nose had been bleeding. Many hundreds
of Instances could be adduc'd to confirm what is here alleged, were it not a
little off the purpose; we shall therefore conclude with this small one, when
Kelso Carriers were bringing away his Household Furniture from Biggar, some of
the people there said to them; Take him to you, take him to you with God's
blessing, for much Sap and Sorrow we have had since he came amongst us. In a
word, he has lived all his Life in Contention with his Neighbors; hence they
compare him to the Salamander, a Creature that can live in Fire without being
burnt: He loved Debates, when he was a Proctour in Ireland, and cannot now
forbear, though an Ambassador of everlasting Peace. We return to our purpose.

6.
THe Call carried to Biggar, as above related; after a very short Entertainment
in that Country (the particulars whereof we cannot well give you, nor is it
very needful, that you know them) returned back by Edinburgh, where it was
confirmed and ratified by the Gommission of the general Assembly in all its
steps. Mr. K's very far from thinking that the Commission is guilty of
Iniquity, or Injustice in this matter; yet he must be pardoned, if he say, they
are not altogether free of a fault. He sees they are but men, and so apt to
fall into mistakes. It Is indeed but a small one; hardly worth the naming. If
there be, as some say, Venial Sins, this is one. It Is Incident to the best of
Men, and the better they be, they are the more ready to fall into it. In a
word, it is Credulity. This is their fault. They believed all they saw, and
heard. It has been with them, as it was with that excellent Man, Joshua, and
the rest of the Princes of Israel. The sight of old clouted Shoes, torn and
rent Garments, and pieces of moldy Bread, and the lying Rhetoric of the
crafty Gibeonites made the Princes of the Congregation believe all they spoke,
as certain Truths. Josh. 9. It Is just so in the present Case. The Commission
seeing an Infinite number of Subscriptions, what hundreds of Persons Attesting
the truth of things, two complete sheets, and less than the half of the one
containing the Call; the rest packed with Names of Men, or rather Vermin for
most part, could not but give Credit; especially considering, how matters were
held forth with all the Art of Rhetoric imaginable; the Members of the
Presbytery and Kirk-Session, that went along with the Call, representing, or
rather mis-representing things to the Commission with all the force of
Eloquence, or rather Gibeonitish Deceit and Cunning they were Masters of. This
in general we dare with confidence aver; though their very words in particular we
cannot condescend upon; which certainly were to this purpose. Never; yea, never
had any man a more universal and unanimous Call from a Parish, than Mr. Jaque
has from Heretors, Elders and others in Kelso: Every one Pressed to Subscribe.
They are even going mad, as it were, to have him, since they heard him Preach;
so mighty well pleased they were with him, etc. Think not that these are fancys
and dreams; no, they are certain Truths. The whole tract of things above
related cries aloud the reallity thereof. Examine matters, take them not on
trust; make enquiry into the Call with all its Circumstances. Consider well
that abovementioned Expression Mr. Jaque's Proctour had in the Face of the
Sheriff-Court. It Is not fit, My Lord Sheriff, said he, that every body see this
Call. This very Expression is a demonstration of its Naughtiness, we shall yet
farther add one other Argument, which may convince all the world of the truth
of what is here related; and it is this. A Member of the Presbytery Preaching
that day Mr. Jaque was Installed, while he was exhorting the people (Men and
Women) to hold up their right Hands as a sign of their hearty consent to accept
Mr. Jaque for their Minister, the more to push them forward to that duty, used
this Argument: Mr. Jaque, said he, has a most unanimous Call from all Persons,
Heretors, Elders and others, etc. Whereas not so much as one Heretor has
Subscribed the Call, or given consent thereto.

Now, A Fortiore, If that Member of the Presbytery had the Confidence in the
Pulpit of Kelso, before some hundreds of persons, who knew the contrary, to
assert such Doctrine, judge you with what freedom he would speak that, and the
like elsewhere, to people that were ignorant of matters. There were some that
run out of the Church when they heard it, saying to themselves, Good God! Whom
shall we believe, when the Ambassadors of Jesus speak such gross Falsehoods in
the face of the Sun? And in truth Mr. K. when he heard it, did cast his Cloak
over his Face, being ashamed to behold the Light; so far was he from holding up
his hand. Now, do you really believe, that if the Commission had known the true
state of all things relating to this Call; how Illegally matters were carried
on in all its steps, as is above made manifest; and particularly how the
Heretors and others were abused and cheated by the Sham and Mock-Intimation
made to them by Mr. Glen; Is it possible, we say, you can really think, that
the Commission would have confirmed and ratified such an Irregular, and Illegal
Call? No, no, certainly. No more than good Joshuah would have made Peace with
the Gibeonites, if he had known where they lived. Credulity, Credulity, the
least of Sins, but too too often the Mother of much Mischief.

7.
AS it was very proper to give some account of the way of Mr. J's Entry to the
Kirk at Kelso; so now, we hope, none will think it impertinent to give here a
touch of his Carriage after he was settled there. Every body would have thought
(especially considering the odd way of his Entry to the place, and the quality
and Circumstances of these he had to do with) that he would have taken some
prudent and discreet method to ingratiate himself, and to gain the hearts of
those he was to have the oversight of; not only, that he might live the more
contentedly among them; but chiefly, that he might be in a better capacity to
do good to their Souls: But on the contrary, his way is to Hector and Domineer
over People, and to abuse and calumniate them in a most unchristian manner.

As to what he has done to Mr. K. it is needless here to mention: That you will
see again and again almost in every line of the following sheets. If his
carriage were only rude and unchristian to him, people, that are not acquainted
with matters might justly believe that all the Disorder, Confusion and
Contention in Kelso, has its rise rather from Mr. K. Schoolmaster, than Mr.
Jaque Minister of the Gospel. But it is good (good, we say, in some sense) that
there are Hundreds besides Mr. K. with whom he has odd stickling: Of which,
there are not a few of his own gang. It were endless to go through particulars:
If any doubt, a very little enquiry will find out the truth. At his Entry many
of the best Note in the Parish, who now absent, did keep the Church; but when
they found him run wild, both as to Doctrine and Practice, they deserted:
particularly Sir W. Ker, Bailyff Pringle, etc. Pray, is it any wonder people be
offended, when openly in the Pulpit he calls these, that do not run with him to
the same excess of opinion, Devils a communion of Devils, a company of Profane
Men and Women, etc. And while he sits in Judgment with his Elders, he calls
people Liars, notorious Liars, Knaves, Companions of that Hellish Crew, that go
to the Meeting House.

Nor is he a whit better in Civil matters. Has he not usurped the right and
property of the E. of Roxburgh and other Heretors, by giving a Call to a
Schoolmaster and settling him in the place: to say nothing of the other
Offices? Has he not with his five Elders without any Visitation, or calling for
persons concerned removed several seats in the Church? A complaint thereof
being made to the Bailyff, they were ordered to carry them back to their own
place. Yea he has done stranger things than this. He borrowed from a
Gentlewoman a Desk or Seat for the use of his Wife, which, without the owners
knowledge, he turned into another form; a thing as ridiculous and unjust, as if
you should borrow your Neighbors Cloak, and turn it into a Coat for your own
Convenience. The reason of this alteration of the Seat was; because Mrs. Jaque
is so mighty gross, that, as the Seat was formerly, she could not have
sufficient room in it. The Gentlewoman hearing what was done to her Seat, sent
for one of the Elders; and challenged him for what was done to her. He
answered, that the Elders could not help things: Mr. Jaque did what he pleased
in Session. Many hundreds of very strange passages might be adduc'd, if we were
not hastening to conclude this point. Take therefore only this one other; by
which you shall know, that Mr. Jaque not only does great Injuries to Strangers
or Laics, but also to his own Brethren, whom he stands not to abuse at a
strange rate, and that in the face of the most public Judicatures of the
Church. No man is more against Lords in the Church, than Mr. Jaque, and yet he
can Lord over his Brethren, and Banter them at pleasure. In the face of the
Synod ( Oct. 96.) when a very Worthy, and Reverend Brother Mr. Orock, Minister
at Hawick was exonering his Conscience in defense of the Truth in a point
relating to Mr. K's Process, he most uncharitably called him Mr. K's Agent. And
know that in a Paper (of which in its place Sect. 26. Part. 4.) given into the
said Synod, and which at that minute was the Subject of their debate, being
publicly read before them, he calls Mr. K. The Devils Agent, and Factor for
Hell. So that by an infallible consequence, honest Mr. Orock is but the Devil's
Agent's Deputy, and an Inferior Factor for Hell: If that be true, which Mr.
Jaque says and writes.

From such a Man good Lord deliver us. To whom in the world can we compare him?
He is infinitely worse, than the Usurper Cromwell, who, though he raised himself
by wicked means, yet during the Administration of Affairs, acted his part not
ill: But here is one, who not only crept in by indirect measures; but after he
has got in, behaves himself like a Cruel Tyrant, Domineering over great and
small.

8.
SO much for matters of Fact. As to those things, which are to be determined,
either by the Canons, Custom, and Practice of the Church; or the Public Laws
of the Kingdom, we shall leave them to the Enquiry and judgment of those, that
are better versed and more experienced in such Studies: Yet we humbly judge it
not altogether improper for us to propose here some few Queries.

Q. 1. If a Provincial Synod has after great deliberation past an Act
appointing such a Man to be Minister in such a place; whether or not, may a
Presbytery of that Synod, eight or ten days thereafter go about to setle
another in his room? And what Censure deserve they, if they do so? Now know,
that neither the Presbytery, nor they with others had any Power, or Commission
given them by the Synod to do such a thing.

Q. 2. If the said Presbytery going on to setle another Minister, than was
appointed by the Synod, make a Sham and Mock intimation (such as is above
described) what Censure, etc.

Q. 3. If the Ministers, or Elders, or both, use sinistrous methods (such as
are above related) to get Subscriptions; especially from Persons that have not
right to subscribe a Call, What, etc.

Q. 4. If these Ministers, or Elders, mis-represent things to a Church
Judicature, or to a Congregation, in order to carry on and effectuate their
business; What, etc.

Q. 5. If Mr. Jaque not only knew, that another had right by Act of Synod to be
Minister at Kelso; but did actually commune and discourse with the Presbytery
about his own setlement there: yea, went up to the Pulpit on design to give the
People a Specimen of his Abilities. Now, whether, or not, may it be said, he
was in some respect Active, and not altogether Passive in the matter? For
certainly to commune and discourse with others upon the Subject; and to step up
to the Pulpit, and Preach for such an end, does clearly import more than to be
purely, on altogether passive in the affair; all these words in their native
and proper signification implying action. Hence you may infallibly infer, that
it Mr. Jaque wrote to a Gentleman, that he was Altogether passive in this
present affair, he wrote that which he knew was false; What Censure therefore,
etc.

Q. 6. If Mr. Jaque did publish abroad in his Letters, and otherwise (as can
infallibly be instructed by the production of some of them) that the said
Bailyff Pringle and others, did subscribe his Call by the Consent and Direction
of the Principal Heretors; and if this be not true, What, etc.

Now, certainly the principal Heretors are the E. of Roxburgh, Sir W. Ker of
Greenhead, and Cavers Ker; to name no more. That the Bailyff and others did not
subscribe Mr. Jaque's Call by their direction, does most evidently appear from
this; viz. That these Persons of Honor did expressly declare in a Petition
subscribed with their hands, and given into the General-Assembly ( Jan. 96.)
that they did not own Mr. Jaque's Call, and that it was Null, ab Initio, etc.

Q. 7. If it be standing in the Records of the Presbytery Book, (as one of Mr.
Jaque's Letters bears) that the Bailyff and others subscribed the Call by the
Direction of the Principal Heretors; and this be false, as is above related;
What Censure does the Presbytery deserve?

Q. 8. If Mr. Jaque's Call to be Minister at Kelso, shall be found to be
Illegal; and his carriage since his Entry justly offensive and displeasing to
the far most considerable part of the Parish; and little or no hopes that
things shall grow better: Whether, or not ought he to be removed from the
place? Many other most pertinent Questions might be here moved; such as,

1. How came this business in before the Commission, since there was no
Reference made to them, neither by the General-Assembly, nor Synod in the said
matter? 2. Why has not the Synod censured the Presbytery for so palpable and
gross an Enormity? 3. When the E. of Roxburgh and others gave in a Petition to
the General-Assembly, complaining of the great Injury done them in the said
matter; pray, why was their Petition rejected? Ah, did you not hear this, and
the other Brother cry out, Moderator, Moderator; That Petition is not to be
regarded; because it comes to us, per Saltum. They ought first to make
Addresses to the Presbytery; next to the Synod: and if justice be not done them
by these Judicatures; then are they to complain to us. The Presbytery! A
competent Judge indeed! Is it fit, think you, that he who gave the wound,
should determine the Injured Persons satisfaction, or his own punishment? As to
the Synod; if we may say it, that Judicature is not much fitter than the other
to judge in this affair; For many, if not most of the Ministers, especially the
leading Men, cannot free themselves of being Art and Part (as we say) in the
matter under debate; otherwise it can hardly be well believed, that they would
bear so patiently the Affront and Injury, that is done to themselves in this
business. And if you should doubt of the truth of what we here assert, we can
point several of the leading Minist^rs, that were very active to effectuate the
matter under present consideration. As to the worthy Gentlemen, the Ruling
Elders, we can say little or nothing against them; except that they too seldom
keep Diet, which is no small loss to those that have business before these
Judicatures. And for the Inferior sort, it is too too well known that they
follow the crowd, seldom but running in the same line with their leader: What
Mass John says, they will not stand much to swear. Now we leave to the
Consideration of an indifferent person, whether or not the E. of Roxburgh and
others concerned in the Parish of Kelso, had just ground to decline the said
two Judicatures in this present Affair; and to make their Addresses to the
General-Assembly. No reply can be made here; except you say, The business ought
first to be tabled at least, if not debated before these Courts; and when you
found your self lessn'd there; then you might carry it to the General-Assembly.

We Answer, 1. To carry it into the Presbytery, is an act of great folly and
madness; for they are all Parties, the very persons that have done the Injury.
And, as is above made manifest, the Synod is little better, a great many of
them especially these of greatest power and influence, being also parties, and
so most incompetent Judges. 2. Make of this thing what you please: it is but a
little failing in form; there is no real injustice; no injury, or evil done to
any person,

It may seem very strange to see Church Judicatures break over all form; yea,
and substance too, not regarding material justice it self (as is evident in the
present business) in matters of their own concern; but if other people fail in
the least Punctilio; were it but in Form, or some Circumstance; then they cry
out, That Is intolerable, we cannot win over it, etc. May it not be said of too
too many of them, as our Savior said of the Pharisees (S. Mat. 23.4.) They
bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, and lay them on men's shoulders;
but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers. So much for
Mr. Jaque's Call.

Now begins hot work; yea fierce and bloody War, as you shall see before we
come to an End,

9.
WE shall in the first place suppose Mr. Jaque had a legal Call; for in Truth,
Mr. K. did not then know that it was, what it is: The very next day after Mr.
Jaque was Installed, Mr. K. went to him, and gave him. a particular account of
his Circumstances, viz. How it had been the constant practice and custom of the
place, past memory of Man, that whosoever was Schoolmaster, was also
Session-Clerk, Precentor and Reader, and had 50 Marks out of the Session-Box,
besides the Casualities arising from the said Offices: To all which, he by his
Call and Contract had right. In short, after some reasoning about the matter,
Mr. Jaque said, he would take the advice of his Brethren in the Affair: And
thus they parted.

About 2 or 3 weeks thereafter, Mr. K. went again to Mr. Jaque to know his mind
in the said business. The Presbytries Advice, said Mr. Jaque is, that you make
your application to the Kirk-Session. And thus they parted without speaking one
other word. Accordingly (not without the advice of persons concerned, Heretors
and others) the following Petition was delivered out of Mr. Ks hand to Mr.
Jaque in presence of Two or Three Elders and some other persons in Mr. Jaque's
own House, 11th. March, 95.

A PETITION, Given into the Kirk-Session of Kelso, by Mr. K. unto the Reverend
the Minister and Elders of the Kirk-Session of Kelso; the Petition of Mr. James
Kirkwood, Schoolmaster there.
Humbly Shows,
THAT, whereas past Memory of Man it has been the constant, and uninterrupted
Custom and Constitution of this place, in all the alterations of Government,
either in Church or State, the Offices of Schoolmaster, Session Clerk, etc.
have been lodged in one Person, without division or separation: And seeing your
Petitioner has good and undoubted right to the said Offices, and to the
Emoluments and Casualities thereto belonging, which any of his Predecessors
were in use to have, conform to a subscribed Call and Contract by a Noble Earl,
Robert E. of Roxburgh, and his Lordship's Honorable Curators; with other
Heretors of the said Parish, Bailyff, Fewers, and others of the said Town. And
it being most certain, that the dividing and separating the said Offices, and
squandring the Emoluments thereof, contrary to the said ancient Practice,
established by the wisdom of those concerned in the Parish, will tend
considerably to the disadvantage of the place, and very much impair the Honor
of the Contractors.

Therefore it is expected, that the said Reverend Minister and Elders, will
admit the Petitioner, and establish him in the said Offices of Session-Clerk,
etc. and to the possession of the Emoluments thereto belonging: Seeing no
exception can be used against his Christian carriage, and behavior; which has
hitherto been blameless and orderly, as can be instructed by several
Testificates, not only from many Eminent persons of the late Government; but
also from the most Famous Men of the Church now established.

Sic subscribitur, James Kirkwood.

Mr. Jaque and his Elders, you may be sure, had that day a very deep
Consultation, stretching their wits to the utmost. And truly it cannot be
denied, but that Mr. Jaque is a man of a pretty good reach that way. And yet if
he and his Elders had no more wit, than their own, it had not been in their
power to have stav'd off Mr. K. so long as they did. But, pray, from whence had
they this borrowed wit? Be not offended if we tell you the truth.

From whom, but the Father of Lies; without whose aid such Hellish Calumnies,
as you shall hear, could never have been hatched.

10.
THe result of their Consultation was, as follows. The next morning about Eight
a Clock they got to the Church, and there kept Session. They had not sit long,
when they order their Officer to call Mr. K. without any previous citation or
warning. When he came before them; We have considered, says Mr. Jaque your
Petition; we desire to see your Testimonials and Contract. M. K. laid down on
the Session-Table Testimonials, boaring his Christian behavior from his very
Infancy to the day he came to Kelso Two very ample Testimonials from the
Presbytery of Hadinton, where he past his Trials in order to Preaching; one
from Mr. Seton Minister at Lithgo, two from Edinburgh; the one from Doctor
Rule, Principal of the College there, and Minister in the Grey-Fryars-Church;
the other from Monsieur Depon, Minister of the French Congregation. But because
this business about Testimonials comes in hereafter again and again, we shall
leave it to its more proper place: Only suffer us here to make a short, but no
very impertinent digression.

Know then, that Mrs. Kirkwood (whose name is Gelecina Van-Beest) is a
stranger, descended of honest Parents; her Mother a French-woman; her Father a
Hollander, who, blessed be God, is yet alive (School) and has been keeper of the
Magazine of Maestricht about 56. years: Her Brother Captain Joshuah Van-Beest
is well known to thousands in Scotland, and has suffered not a little for the
present Government; was sore Wounded and taken Prisoner at Gillycrancky, and
lay long in the Blair of Athole, to say nothing of his Wounds since in Flanders.

Now, Mr. K. having come to live in Edinburgh as is abovementioned, and in the
Parish of the Grey-Fryars, whereof the said Doctor Rule is Minister, went to
him and told, that his Wife was a stranger, and understood French much better
than Scots, especially in matters relating to the Principles of Religion: and
therefore he desired, that without giving offense, she might have liberty to go
to the French Congregation; and since he himself did sufficiently understand
that Language, and had no proper seat in the Grey-Fryars Church, he craved also
Liberty, that he might go along with his Wife; to which the Doctor willingly
condescended, saying, that it was most proper: And therefore it is, that both
the said Doctor, and the French Minister have given Testimonials, showing M. Ks
Christian and orderly carriage. We here return from our Digression and go on to
tell you.

That Mr. K. was removed, till Mr. Jaque and his Elders considered his
Testimonials and Contract; and being called in again, Mr. Jaque spoke to this
purpose. We have considered your Testimonials and Contract; we find you have a
Testimonial from the Incumbent, but none from the Minister of Lithgo. M. K. not
well understanding the ground and reason of Mr. Jaque's distinction between
Incumbent and Minister, waited a little till he further explained himself. Then
said Mr. K. Pray, Sir, let us not debate or jangle about words. It Is nothing to
our present purpose, whether Mr. Seton be called Minister, or Incumbent. I look
on him, and own him as a Minister of the Gospel; call you him what you please;
that is not our debate. The thing, you challenge me for, is, that I have not a
Testimonial from Mr. Wear; whom you call the Minister of Lithgo. I answer; He
was not the Minister, while I lived there. A Minister, I shall grant you he
was, and preached in the Meeting House there, but I never heard him; not did I
so much as once absent my self from the public place of Worship. And yet after
all this, and much more to this purpose, Mr. Jaque (so mighty narrow is his
Charity) with the height of Confidence again said, it cannot be, but you were
then living in Lithgo, when Mr. Wear had the Church; for I past once that Road,
after that he was settled Minister in the Church, and you were then living
there. Mr. K. no more doubting of the truth of his own Assertion, than that he
was living, replied, Sir, What need we thus debate about a business which may
be made appear like the Sun in the noontide? If I do not Infallibly instruct,
that I was living in Edinburgh with my Family many months before Mr. Seton was
put from his Church, or before Mr. Wear entered to it, I shall be Infamous
forever. Or, if you will take upon you (which is the more proper way) to prove
that I lived in Lithgo after Mr. Seton was deposed, or (which is all one thing)
after Mr. Wear got the Church; I shall undergo what Disgrace and Infamy you o^
any man shall think I deserve. Would not any rational man think that this was
enough to have put a stop to any further procedure in this affair? And yet you
shall see it again and again brought above board. Mr. Jaque is a man by
himself, (Homo perpaucorum hominum) very few in the world, if any, like him. A
man of a wonderful temper of Spirit, one that condemns all, that differ from
him; thinks, that every man ought to be of his judgment: And so the proudest
man under the Sun. He has no Faith, no Charity to give to any that is not of his
opinion. The Testimonial given by the Presbytery of Hadinton, he regards no
more than the Turks Alcoran. Mr. Setons in Lithgo is abominable in his eyes.
Now, Now, begins Bloody War.

11.
MR. K's Dilemma (viz. that either Ma. Jaque should prove Mr. K. lived in
Lithgo after that Mr. Wear had got the Church; or Mr. K. was to prove, he was
living in Edinburgh with his Family before that time) did not a little Confound
Mr. Jaque, and put him to a stand; yet he quickly recovered himself, and fell
on Mr. K. far more briskly, than ever.

What has been your carriage, said he, in former times, we shall not now
canvass: but I Am informed of very strange things, you should have done, since
you came to this Country: They tell me that a woman came to your house in this
Town, and fathered a Child on you. Mr. K. was not in the least moved with this
Story; of which you shall have an account within a little. We go on to tell you
of a second blow, far more terrible, than the former; a blow indeed, that
almost struck Mr. K. dead to the ground.

I am also informed, continued Mr. Jaque, that you being in the House of Sir
John Home of Blakader, did struggle so rudely with a young Woman, one of his
Servants, that she screek'd and cried so terribly, that Sir John came running
into the room, and rescued her out of your arms.

With this Mr. K. was so surpised, that he could not well open his mouth, till
Mr. Jaque again said, and that with an Emphasis; what say you, to this? I
flatly deny it, replied Mr. K. whereupon, Mr. Jaque, immediately desired him to
remove. Being called in again; The Session, said Mr. Jaque, is so difficulted
in this matter, that they have referred it to the Presbytery. Mr. K. answered
to this purpose: Sir, said he to Mr. Jaque, As to the first of these crimes you
have charged me with, I am not in the least moved; I know certainly the
business is a Cheat, and will be found so, if enquired into. But as to this
other about the woman in Blakader, I am truly surpised with it. It Is to me as
if it had fallen from the Clouds: And though I am as certain, as that I live,
that I am Innocent in the matter; yet I do not know what Malice may do. And
therefore I earnestly beg, before you carry the business any further, that you
suffer me to go, or write to Sir John Home about the thing; and I doubt not but
you shall get satisfaction. This most lawful Request was flatly denied; not
that they hindered him to go, or write to Sir John (for Mr. Jaque bid Mr. K. do
in that as he thought fit) but they positively refused to delay the Reference.

12.
NOw know, that before Mr. K. was come out of the Church; yea, while he was yet
speaking to Mr. Jaque and his Elders, the last Bell for Sermon was begun to
ring, it being a day, wherein the Presbytery was to meet. Sermon ended, the
Presbytery meets Immediately, and sits about an hour and an half before dinner.
Meeting again after dinner, they sit two or three hours. Mr. K. being neither
summoned, apud Acta (in face of Session) nor any other way; yea, not so much as
desired to attend the Presbytery; yet he resolved to wait on, walking all the
while in view of the Kirk-Officer. Every minute he expect^d to be called in; a
Gentleman all that time walking with him was exceeding weary, and often desired
to be gone, Mr. K. still pressing him to stay, till either the Brethren came
out, or called him in. At last out they come; and Mr. K. stepping aside toward
them, Mr. Gaudy came up to him. After some little discourse about Mr. Gaudy's
Sons, who were at Mr. K's School, Was there any thing before you to day, said
Mr. K. relating to me? Yes, answered Mr. Gaudy, and we have referred it to the
Synod, which is to sit Tuesday next. What! replied Mr. K. with a frowning
countenance. Have you considered a business of so high a Nature, as Adultery,
and Rape, or Force (for so it may be termed as to my part) and past a Sentence,
or Interloquitor thereon by referring it to a higher Judicature without
Summoning, or calling the Criminal before you? Let me tell you, Sir, it is a
very great Act of Injustice. The like has not been done by a Church Judicature
to any person whomsoever. Give me but one Instance in the world. One Crime of
this kind uses to depend a Year; yea, may be two, three or four, before you.
Wonderful! Lo, here two, that have past both Session and Presbytery, and got
into the Synod in one day; yea, perhaps within a few minutes: and all this
without Citing, Summoning or Calling the alleged guilty person before you* Was
ever the like done by any Judicature on Earth, till now? No certainly The very
Heathens would abhor such a Procedure. The civilized Roman Festus, positively
refused to hear Paul 's Accusers, till he was present to answer for himself.
Really, Mr. K. said Mr. Gaudy, we had not time to consider all things. You know
we have much to do on the Presbytery day before the meeting of the Synod.
Suppose it true, you say, replied Mr. K. judge you it fit, that a business of
so high a Nature should be managed in this fashion? Though you had sit till
night; yea, good part of the night, or appointed another Diet, you had but done
your duty. Pray, Mr. Gaudy, Let me reason the matter with you, either you duly
consider the thing, or not. If you did not; how could you refer to another
Judicature a business which you had not duly considered? And if you did duly
consider it, why made you a Reference, till you heard what I had to say for my
self? You did not know, whether I would confess, or deny the Crimes.

Yea, it is not possible, the business could be Duly considered without the
Accused's presence. Well, well, Mr. Gaudy, continued Mr. K. I shall say no
more, Exitus acta probat: We'll see what the event will be. And so they parted.

It Is needless here to make Observes, or to draw Conclusions from the Premises.
He must be very dull, that sees not through things so obvious to all that will
but open their eyes. And if any thing does not yet appear sufficiently evident,
the following parts of this Process will more fully discover it to you. Give us
only liberty here to tell you, that, if it had pleased the wisdom of the
Presbytery to have called Mr. K. before them; it is hardly to be doubted (unless
all was resolved and fixed before hand) but they would have given him time to
go to Sir John Home; And consequently all the Trouble, the Clamor, the
Mischief and Evil that has followed, and may yet follow, would certainly have
been prevented, that being the grand Point of the whole Process. But what shall
we say? The Secrets of the Almighty are unsearchable, and his ways past finding
out. Who knows, but all these things have come to pass to lay open to the view
of the World the Craft and Cunning; the Hatred and Malice; the Hypocricy and
double Dealing; the Pride and Uncharitableness; the Greed and Avirice; The
Ignorance and Folly of Wicked men.

13.
WE go on to tell that Mr. K's next work was to meet with Sir J. Home, which
behooved to be some time before the sitting of the Synod; otherwise he was sure
to be ruined and disgraced forever. His only comfort (under God) was, that such
a Worthy person, as Sir John, had a share in the business, by being an Ear and
Eye witness of the Action.

After some enquiry, Mr. K. is informed, that Sir. John was in Edinburgh, and
to return home that week. To go to Edinburgh, Mr. K. thought he might miss Sir
John, and therefore he delays till Saturday, thinking the three days
intervening three Ages. On Saturday he sends an Express to Blakader, about
Twelve Miles distant, with a Letter, showing the whole matter of Fact, word by
word, as Mr. Jaque spoke at the Session Table, and how it went into the
Presbytery, and out of that to the Synod. Sir. John was not come home, nor
expected that night, being to come the Wester Road; of which Mr. K. being
informed about twelve a Clock at night, got out of Bed immediately, and wrote a
second Letter, sending it away with another Express toward Edinburgh, though it
was the Lord-day. This Letter was in general terms, showing that there had
fallen out a business of such moment, that unless he met with his Honor,
between and Tuesday, he would be ruined forever; and that Sir John's self was
also concerned in the matter. This so alarming Letter coming to Sir John's hand
at Stitchel, he was not slow to send an Express to Mr. K. and he as ready at
command. Being come to Stitchel (the very day before the Synod met; a wonderful
Providence) he found Sir John Home and Sir John Pringle his Brother in Law
alone in a Chamber, both very anxious to know what the business was. After a
few Complements about one another health; I sent, Sir, says Mr. K. to Sir J.
Home, my Son in Law with this Letter, on Saturday to Balkader; and your Honor
not being at home, he brought it back. You may be pleased to read it; for it
will give you an Account of the business as succinctly, as I can do by word of
mouth.

Sir John had not traveled far into it, when he lifts up his eyes, and hands
to the Heavens. Sir J. Pringle standing by was astonished, at he knew not what;
a mere shadow: but after he got the Leter to read, he found it to be a real
Substance. What shall I do for you, says Sir J. Home, to Mr. K.? Shall I write
to Mr. Jaque. You may do in that as you think fit, replied Mr. K. I humbly
desire that you give me something in my custody. And so immediately he wrote
the following Declaration, and delivered it to Mr. K.

The DECLARATION of Sir John Home of Blakader.
I Sir John Home of Blakader, being informed of a Scandalous Report of Mr. J.
Kirkwood, Schoolmaster in Kelso, his having behaved himself immodestly in my
House; and it being incumbent on me, not only as a Christian; but as a Member
of a Civil Society to endeavor the preservation of my Neighbors good Name, Do
hereby testify and declare, that in my life I never heard, or saw any thing
that might give the least ground for any such Calumny; and particularly, as to
what he is accused to have been guilty of in my house: I do again renew my
Declaration, that never any such thing passed; but that the whole story from
the beginning to the end in all its Circumstances, is a most ridiculous,
impertinent, and malicious Lie; which I will declare on all occasions, and do
here give under my Hand and Subscription, at Stitchel, the 18th. day of March,
1695.

Sic subscribitur, John Home.

It Is necessary here that you know, that these two Worthy Gentlemen above
mentioned, came down with Mr. K. from Stitchel-Place to Stitchel Town (aquarter
of a Mile distant) to see Mr. Glen, Minister there, Mr. Jaque's very intimate
Friend. Mr. K went on his way home; they turned in, and gave Mr. Glen an
account of all that had past. Immediately, Mr. Glen dispatches Mr. Tailor, his
Wifes Brother, with all speed imaginable to Kelso, to acquaint Mr. Jaque with
the thing: Mr. Tailor was at Kelso, very near as soon as Mr. K. By good
providence Mr. K. no sooner alighted off his Horse, than he met with Sir W.
Ker. to whom he showed Sir John Home's Declaration; which, when he had read;
You are ^ow, says he, as sure as the Bass, and may defy them all, and vex them
to boot. But, tell me, continued he, whether or not your business be to come in
before Synod to morrow? That I know not, replied Mr. K. I am not Summoned to
compeat before them: Perhaps they may do before the Synod what they did at the
Presbytery; they likely will not call me at all; but transmit the matter to the
General-Assembly. My advice therefore, says Sir William, is, that you go just
now to Mr. Jaque and ask him, whether, or not, the business be to come in
before the Synod; and come back and tell me. There were about thirty paces to
Mr. Jaque's House, Mr. K. goes strait to his Chamber, and finds him and the
said Mr. Tailor very busy; the one hearing, the other narrating what had past
at Stitchel: But, as we say, Lvpus intervenit fabulae, Both were struck dumb.
Mr. K. without any long preamblet asked Mr. Jaque, if his busine^s was to come
in before the Synod; or if he was to be summoned to compear. To which, getting
no answer, he again repeats his words, saying; Sir, I earnestly beg of you to
tell me, whether or not I am to be called in before the Synod: I hope, Sir, you
will excuse me for being so pressing, where I am so much concerned: my
reputation lies at stake. In short, Mr. K. returned to Sir. William, and told
him, that Mr. Jaque positively refused to answer any such Question. Since, said
Sir William, they will not bring in your business before the Synod, you must do
it; and the fittest way is by a Petition: which accordingly was done. The
Petition being somewhat large, we shall only give you the Sum thereof; which is
as follows.

T^ Sum of a Petition, given into the Synod by Mr. K. 19th March, 1695.
WHEREIN he shows, that he being presented by all concerned, to the Offices
enjoyed by his Predecessors, and to the Fees and other Profits arising from
them, conform to his contract; and being admitted Schoolmaster, has possessed the
said Office since; and having first craved from the Elders, next from the
Presbytery, to be settled in the other Offices mentioned in his Contract, was
debarred therefrom, as was pretended, by reason of a non settled Minister and
Session. And now a Minister being settled, Mr. K. again apply's to Minister and
Elders, craving their Concourse in so far, as is competent to them. They
instead of giving him a formal and legal answer to his Petition, did pretend
they were informed, he was guilty of several most Horrid Crimes and
Immoralities; and without the least attempt to verify the same, immediately
referred the business to the Presbytery; the Presbytery, without so much as
once speaking to him, or calling for him, put it into the hands of the Synod;
the Elders and others in the mean time spreading abroad through the Kingdom
most dreadful and hellish Calumnies, and defamations against him. He concludes,
begging the Synod would be pleased to cause exhibit before them the Precedure
of Session and Presbytery, and to allow him an Extract thereof, and a competent
time to answer the same, that his Innocence might appear, and his unjust
Defamators may be proceeded against according to Law.

14
Now know, that Mr. K. was not cited to compear before the Synod; which is an
Infallible sign, that either the business was not to be brought in at all; or,
if it was to come in before them, it would have been considered by that
Judicature, without hearing what Mr. K. had to say for himself; which is the
height of injustice. By the one he still lay under the Blunder and Infamy of
two horrid Crimes; by the other he would have been sentenced without being
heard. Pray, do not mistake us: We say not, that the Synod would have past a
final Sentence in the matter. All we aver, amounts to this, either the business
was to be moved in Synod, or not; if not, he still lay under the lash of
disgrace, and infamy. If moved, he was to be called, or not; if called, he
ought to have been cited, otherwise he is not obliged to compear. If not
called; the Synod would have done something, or nothing in the Affair: if
nothing, Mr. K. still lay under the lash of the Tongue; yea, and would have
been in a far worse condition than ever; because the report, or news of his
Crimes, became so much wider, as the bounds of a Synod surpasses that of a
Presbytery, or Parish: And if they did something in the matter; what a name,
pray, shall you give that Something? A Sentence, Interloquitor, Dilature, etc.
So that, take things by what handle you please, you shall find great injustice
done to Mr. K. if not by the Synod; at least by Kirk-Session, and Presbytery.
But let us go on to tell, how the said Petition went into the Synod, and what
Reception it met with there.

The Synod meeting at the ordinary time, Sermon ended; Mr. Orock, Minister at
Haick chosen Moderator; they all go to Dinner. There Mr. K. is almost in every
bodies mouth the main Subject of discourse, things being industriously
dispersed through Town and Country to disgrace him, even by the Kirk-Elders, as
you shall afterward hear; and Wives in Kelso representing matters beyond what
Modesty can express. If Sir John Home, say they, had not speedily come into the
Chamber by God's good Providence, and rescued her out of his arms, he had
certainly got his will of her, etc. Most of the Ministers, Ruling Elders, their
Servants, Probationers, Chaplains, Country-Dominees (as they call them) and
others were all informed, both about the Business in Blakader, and the other
about the Woman with Child: but as yet very few knew any thing about Sir J.
Home's Declaration. It Is not amiss here, you know that Mr. K. was altogether a
stranger in Tiviotdale, not one of 10000 having ever seen him, till he came to
be Schoolmaster at Kelso; so that people were exceeding curious even to see
the Man of whom they had heard much both Good and Evil.

After dinner all did flock to the Churchyard, and stand here and there in
Companies, till a Committee, which was then sitting, should rise. Mr. K.
hearing, that people were very desirous to see him, went out with two or three
Comrades to the Churchyard, his House standing therein. His foot was hardly
well over the threshold, when he cry's, and he cry's; There he is; There he is.
Whilks he? Whilks he says another? That in the midst, answers the other. Some
went found as if they found a Covey of Partridges, looking a squint to see his
Face; and returning to their Companions, said; You's an old body, no question
he is past Fifty; they say, he is a Grandfather, and has a Daughter Married in
this Town. It Is time he were forgetting such Pranks. Certainly, says another,
he has been keen that way, when he was young, who is so forward now, when he is
old. Mr. K. overhearing this, said with a smile to those that were by him, The
contrary is rather true; He has been saving in his youth, and therefore has the
more to spare in his old age. With this all rush into the Church: Mr. K.
follows, and not without some difficulty gets through the throng near to the
end of the Table, where the Moderator sat. He stood there above an hour,
waiting a fit occasion to present his Petition. At last, when they were passing
from one business to another, he steps forward to the Table, and without any
more complement, says, Moderator, I have a Petition to present to this Reverend
Synod, which I humbly crave may be read, and an answer given thereto. Mr.
Semple answers, saying; Moderator, There are many, who live at a great
distance, that have business before this Synod; and I think, they ought first
to be dispatched. As for Mr. K. who lives at the very Church door, he may come
in with the last. Moderator, replied Mr. K. Far be it from me to seek to be
amongst the first. All I crave, is that my Petition may be received, and
Recorded as given in. As to the time when it is to be read, and answered; this I
leave to the Convenience of this Reverend Synod. And Moderator, continued Mr.
K. because it is a business of very great Consequence, I hope your Wisdoms will
pardon me; if I protest, and take Instruments, that I have delivered this
Petition into your hand in order to be read and answered. And with that he
threw the Instrument-Money up the Table to the Clerk of the Synod. You need not
take Instruments, said the Moderator, your Petition shall be read, and an
Answer given to it. Moderator, replied Mr. K. the matter under debate is of
such moment, that I can hardly be too much concerned therein: not only my own
Reputation, but that of my Posterity is at stake. And what is dearer to a Man,
than his good Name? And you know, Moderator, that abundance of Law, breaks not
Law. May it please you therefore to suffer me to take this Protestation. We
cannot hinder you, answered the Moderator, but it is needless; you shall get
what you seek Mr. K. overcome with the discretion and condescendency he saw in
the Moderator, took back the Money. After this he removed into the Churchyard,
till he should be called.

. 15.
WIthin a very little time, he is called in again to hear his Petition read;
the Sum whereof you have Sect. 13.

Next was read the Reference of the Session to the Presbytery, which we shall
here set down at large, lest our Adversaries should say, that we wrong them.

The Reference of the Session, Kelso-Kirk-Session, called by the Minister, Pro
renata, 12 March, 1695.
THis day Mr. James Kirkwood Schoolmaster, gave in a Petition, laying claim to
be Precentor and Session-Clerk to the Parish of Kelso, founded upon a Contract,
or Grant, made by the E. of Roxburgh, and his Lordship's Curators; dated in
Oct. 1694. which Contract he produced, and being read, the Session took the
said Petition and Contract into their serious Consideration; and Mr. Kirkwood
being called in, the Minister and Elders declared their readiness to pay all
deference to the Noble E. of Roxburgh, and to the Noble Countess of Roxburgh,
and his Lordship's Honorable Curators, in so far as is Consistent with the
established Order and Government of this Church. And therefore desired to be
satisfied in a few things. 1. Whether he had presented the foresaid Contract to
the Presbytery or not; and had the approbation of the Presbytery to be
Schoolmaster of Kelso, conform to the Act of the General-Assembly, dated 7th
Feb. 1645. To which he made Answer, that it was not Formally presented; but
Virtually by a Petition given in by the Bailyss of Kelso, signfying the
Substance of the said Contract, and confesses, that he had no Formal
approbation conform to the said Act, which was read to him. 2. Whether he was
fit, or qualified to be a Precentor: and if he was content to subject himself
to Trial for that Effect. He said, that he had more of Art, than a good voice;
yet content to be tried. 3. He was enquired, what Testimonials he had from the
places of his last residence, Lithgo and Edinburgh. In answer whereto he
produced one from Mr. Rule, Principal of Edinburgh College. Another from Mr.
Alexander Seton, formerly Incumbent at Lithgo; but none from the Kirk-Session
of Edinburgh; nor from the present Minister of Lithgo, Session, or Presbytery
thereof. Also he produced a Letter of thanks from Mr. William Tullidaf for his
Civility to his Wife and Family at Lithgo. Whereupon he was told by the
Minister, that the Reason of the Sessions so particular enquiry of his
behavior in the places from whence he came, was a Fame that came to their ears
of a Woman that came to Kelso with Child, and charged him, as the Father of it,
and went to him and spoke with him about it. He confesses such a thing was,
and that a person came to him in the dark; but whether Man or Woman he did not
know: and that she told him such a time before she went over the water with him
to Culross; and he said that this was about five Months before, so that it was
unreasonable to think a Woman could be so near her time so soon: And also that
she offered that Child to Adam Bog Merchant; which was a way to get Money from
either of them. And being questioned also; why he did not cause secure her for
his Vindication; he said that he went to Sir W. Ker and told him of it, who
promised to cause secure her, if he could tell where she was; but she was gone
before that time to the English side, where she brought forth the Child.
Another of Sir J. Home of Blakader, with whom he should have struggled, and
were parted by Sir John's stirring in his Closet near to the Room: which Fact
he denis Simpliciter. The next thing read in Synod, was the Referrence of the
Presbytery. Mr K. cannot give you the exact words thereof, having only once
heard it read; but never got an Extract. It was comprehended in a few lines to
this purpose. The Presbytery having considered the Contents of the said
Referrence, thought fit to transmit the whole Affair into the hands of the
Synod. Last of all was read Sir John Home's Declara^ion, as above, Sect. 13.

After all these Papers were read, Mr. K. said the Moderator, what have you to
say against the Referrence of the Session? Moderator, replied Mr. K. It Is a
most Absurd, False, and Calumnious Paper. There Is hardly one t^^e Sentence in
it. In a word, Moderator, it is quite another thing, than what past before the
Session. Moderator, says Mr. Semple, The Testimony of Mr. Jaque and and his
Elders is far rather to be believed, than Mr. K's. Moderator, answer^d Mr. K. I
must beg liberty to tell you, that Mr. Semple ^^^tice mistakes the state of the
question; which is not, whether Mr. Jaque and his Elders their Testimony, or
mine deserv's the greater Credit? I acknowledge that my Testimony deserves no
Credit at all. I ought, not to be regarded in this present debate, and theirs
as little; because we a^e Parties; formally (...) opposites one to another, so
that neither of us can be heard in our own Cause. When they sat my Judges, as
was pretended; pray, Moderator, who was my Accuser? I neither saw, no^ heard of
any, but themselves: and you know very well, that they cannot be both Judge and
Party. And no^ when the Reverend Judicature becomes my judge; Who are my
Accusers? I ^^ow ^o^e, but Mr. Jaque and his Elders, and certainly they cannot
be both Accus^rs and Witnesses; for if th^s were sustained, not one Panne^ of
ten Thousand could escape the lash of the Law. They do indeed adduce one
witness; but a very strange one; viz. their own Records. But, pray, Moderator,
what a^e these but themselves speaking on Paper. They are the work of their own
fingers; if ever there were any in the world: they speak every thing you bid
them, and nothing else. In short, Moderator, it is all one thing, whether you
take the Accuser's Word, or Writings to Attest the truth of a Matter. If Mr.
Jaque and his Elders, continued Mr. K. had read over to me, what they Recorded,
which ought to have been done, and I had Subscribed the same; that, and that
only, would have made against Me; and not what they record at pleasure. And
further, Moderator, I could refer it to the Oaths of Mr. Jaque and his Elders,
let them, if they dare, Swear upon their Eternal Salvation, that our communing
at the Session-Table was conform to the Contents of this Paper under debate: I
appeal to their Consciences, if they can say, there was the least motion of Sir
J. Home's being in his Closet, or his stirring there, but that he came into the
Chamber where they say the Woman and I were struggling, and parted u^. But,
Moderator, if this Method should be taken, that Mr. Jaque and his Elders swear
upon the heads of the said Reference; it is just that the Members of the
Presbytery declare upon their Oath also, what was the subject of their
Consideration in this Affair; especially since they were not pleased to call me
before them; which was an act of great injustice. And, Moderator, continued Mr.
K. that I may put an end to this point; I shall only adduce one other Argument,
which may well pass for a Demonstration of the truth of what I have said; and
convince all the world that this Reference is a most False, Lying, and
Calumnious paper. I offer, Moderator, to instruct, that Michael Fisher, one of
the Elders, and Clerk to the Session, who wrote both Mr. Jaque's words and mine
at the Session-Table in the very moment they did drop from our lips. I say,
Moderator, I offer to prove that Michael Fisher, two or three minutes after he
^ose from the Session Table went into a House hard by the Church to take a pipe
of Tobacco, and told two very honest persons that he had been writing strange
things about Mr. K. how he struggled with a young woman in Sir J. Home of
Blakader's Family; and that Sir John came into the Chamber, where they were
struggling, and Sundred them. Sundred them, is Michael's own word. Thus, and
much more to this purpose Mr. K. spoke in face of Synod. But, if he had then
known what he came to know within a few days thereafter, he had Nettl'd Mr.
Jaque and his Elders at another rate, for Sir J. Home was not at home; far less
in his Closet, when such a thing should have fallen out; as he himself declared
in face of the follow^^^ Synod; of which business you have particular account,
Sect. 23, etc.

Now know, that after M. K. had spoke, as is above-related, not so much as one
Member of the Synod offered to open his mouth: So that all sat for a while
mute, till the Moderator, at length said; Mr. K. you may remove a little, and
you shall have the Mind of the Synod. What thoughts the Members of the Synod
had of the whole Affair, and what reasoning was among them, after M. K. was
re^^^v'd, you may very easily collect from what fo^lows.

Mr. K. therefore being called in again; It Is the Judgment of the Synod, says
the Moderator to him, that you ca^^y hom^ with you this Reference of the
Session; and what you own in it, you set down by it self, and subscribe it.
There is a Committee appointed to meet to morrow morning at eight a Clock, in
Sir John Clark of Pennic^ok 's Chamber in Robert Ormston 's Horse, to recei^e
your Answer. This indeed was the heigh^ of Justice; more could no man expect.
And yet it was but Justice; and no Injury done to the opposite Party. No real
and true injury, we me^^; no In^ustice done them: but much Infamy and Disgrace
is thereby put on them; For in effect, it is a perfect Confirmation of all that
M. K. said in face of Synod; and a condemning what Mr. Jaque and his Elde^s had
done, to say nothing of the carriage of the Presbytery in the said Affair.
There remains one other thing, which does not a little confirm some Points of
the Premises. It Is this: The said Reference was so ill written, or interlin'd;
especially, where that business of Blakader was given an account of, that it
could not be read; and therefore, said one (who, no question favored Mr. Jaque
and his Party.) There Is no need to read any more of it. By no means, Moderator,
replied M. K. must that point be past. That Is the main Clause: if they gain
that, they gain all; and if they lose that, they lose all. So the Paper went
through four Ministers hands, and yet could not be distinctly understood. And
therefore Mr. K. said to the Moderator, How shall I read this Paper, which four
of your Brethren cannot do? Take him with you, replied the Moderator, who wrote
it* And thus M. K. took his leave of them, thanking them all very heartily for
the Justice he met with from them.

16.
HOme immediately he goes, thinking to shut himself up within his Closet; but
he was by Friends, one after another, who were more kind, than welcome, kept
from doing any thing till after midnight. Then falling seriously to work;
first, to write over the Reference (for he could not do any thing to purpose
till he put it into a better dress) and having scarce well begun, poring on it
to get it read (for he could not have Michael Fisher, writer thereof, to assist
him, as the Moderator had advised) and leaning with his Arms upon the Table,
the Pen did drop out of his Hand, and he fell sound asleep. It Is no wonder; for
he had slept little or none in eight days and nights before, being mightily
troubled about that Business in Blakader; the Candle all the while burning by
him. But at last he awakes with no little astonishment, seeing both Candle and
fair daylight. Nor knew he for a pretty while, either where he was, what he had
been doing, or what he had to do. And after he had gathered in his Thoughts,
and was, as 'twere come to himself, his Body was altogether incapable to move,
being as stiff as a Tree with cold, sitting in a Room without a Fire; his
Fingers not folding themselves to hold the Pen. But above all things, the
trouble of his Mind and Spirit with the Thoughts of not having sufficient time
to prepare Matters against the meeting of the Committee, galled him to the very
Heart. Having got with some difficulty to his Feet, he took some few turns
through the Room, as nimbly as he could, rubbing his hands one against the
other, till he got Life again into them. Then falling to work, he scribl'd over
the Reference, and made some few Remarks thereon, not so well digested, as
otherwise they would have been, if he would had more time. He kept not a double of
the Paper, which he gave to the Committee; yea, he scarcely had time to read it
over, after he had written it. The Heads or Scrole thereof, as a Memorandum of
what he gave in, he has by him; of which, take this short account at present,
and you shall have some more hereafter.

Some REMARKS on the more Material Points of the Reference.
1. HIs claim to be Session-Clerk, etc. is not only founded on his Contract but
also on the uninterrupted Custom of the place past memory. 2. He used no such
Distinction, as formally and virtually, not being proper Terms for that
purpose. ^he said, his Contract was not presented to the Presbytry in Ter;
minis; but, which was equivalent, the Sum or Substance thereof, viz. as much as
concerned the Presbytery to know, was represented to them in a Petition given
in by the Baily, in name of the Earl and others. So that in effect, the
Contract was intimated to the Presbytery in all parts necessary for them to
know; as the said Petition at more length bears, Sect. 5. Part 1. 3. As to that
Question, Whether, or not, he was qualified, or fit to precent in the Church:
he answered modestly, he was none of the best; he had Art, but his voice was
not very pleasant. And besides, he added; that, if people were not pleased with
him, he would substitute the School-Doctor. 4. As to that Question, whether, or
not, the Presbytery had approved of his being a person duly qualified to be
Schoolmaster, according to that Act of the Genesis Assembly, 7 Feb. 1645. He
answered, that the abovementioned Petition, given in to the Presbytery by the
Baily, expressly bears, that the Heretors were sufficiently satisfied as to what
concerned the said Act, besides other qualifications requisite for one of his
Office, leaving to the Presbytery to make what Enquiry and Trial they thought
fit in that Matter. He added, that it was a sufficient sign of their
Approbation, that 4 of 6 Members of the Presbytery (for there were no more) had
put, two their Sons; one his Brother, the fourth a Friend to his School. 5. The
account given in the Reference of his Testimonials is very defective; failing
both as to their Number and Quality: of some it speaks with disdain; others it
quite omits. As to his not having one from Mr. Wear in Lithgo, he told the
Session, that he was not Minister there in his time. So that things here in the
Reference are exceedingly misrepresented: For Mr. Seton was then present
Minister; and not as Mr. Jaque and his Elders, both disdainfully and falsely
call him Formerly Incumbent at Lithgo. And M. K. was not obliged to have a
Testimonial from Mr. Wear, then Preacher in the Meeting House; much less from
his Session or Presbytery. 6. As to Mr. Tullidaff's Letter mentioned in the
Reference, M. K. did show it to Mr. Jaque and his Elders, in face of Session,
to convince them of the falshhood of that Report, which they spread abroad of
him; viz. That he was always an Enemy to the Presbyterians; or, as they
expressly word it in one of the Articles of their Libels against him (as you
will see in its proper place) that at Lithgo, he was very offensive to all that
feared God: whereas he was very kind, and (if we may say it) liberal to them,
when they were very low, and some in great straits; as many that live in and
about that Burgh, if need were, will attest. And as to this Worthy and Learned
Person, one of the finest Men of that Party; know, that when he wrote this
Letter to M. K. he was Prisoner in Blackness Castle, on the account of his
strict adhering to the Presbyterian Principles; his Wife and Children in the
mean while living at Lithgo, about 2 miles distant. Now, Mr. Jaque and his
Elders must of necessity, either say that Mr. Tullidaff was a Man, that did not
fear God; or with shame retract what they libel against M. K. in the said
Point, and acknowledge his Conversation was not offensive to all that feared
God in that place. The truth of this. Assertion is most evident from Mr.
Tullidaff's own Letter, which we have thought fit to set down word by word.

Mr. William Tullidaff's Letter to M. Kirkwood.
Blackness, July 2. 1686. SIR,
I Expostulated with my Wife and Son, that they came off from Lithgo,
insalutato Hospite, not having saluted you. My Wifes Apology was (which is
indeed a truth) that the Carriers of our Household Furniture were impatient; and
it being the last day of the Week, and having things to put in order here, when
she came, she was necessitated to come off abruptly. Sir, I have hitherto
labored to shun the imputation of Ingratitude, having learned from a Heathen,
Si ingratum dixeris omnia. It Is true, I am not in a capacity to retaliate
Courtesies; but I purpose still thankfully to commemorate them: and persuade
your self, Sir, no tract of Time, nor distance of Place shall wear out the
Sense of yours. That the Lord may bless you with success in your Employment, is
the prayer of,

Sir, your obliged Servant Sic subscribitur, William Tullidaff.


This Gentleman at the Revolution, being made Principal in St. Andrew's
College, was very active, as is above related, to have M. K. Professor of
Humanity there; and that after his Plea with the Town Council of Lithgo, this
Worthy Person was desirous to have M. K. to be his near and intimate Neighbor;
yea, in some respect his very Companion; but Mr. Jaque and his Elders will not
be content, unless, as you will hear, he be banished the Kingdom, and all his
Goods made Escheat. Yea, they dare go a far greater length; some of them are
for hanging him, and that in a most disgraceful manner, which you will also
hear in its place. From such Men, good Lord deliver us. There rest now only two
Points; but the chiefest of all: the one about the Woman, that was said to be
with Child; the other is the business in Blakader; of both which, you shall
have an account within a little, apart by themselves, after we have ended with
what concerns the Synod, wherein we shall be very brief.

17.
THe Committee meeting time and place abovementioned, and M. K. being called
in, they desired him to read over the Remarks he had made on the Reference. He
gave an account by word of mouth of that Story about the Woman with Child,
telling the Committee, that, if they pleased, he would give it under his hand.
They were very well pleased with all he had done; and told him, that there was
no need to write down, or subscribe any such Story. M. K. being removed, the
Committee (as he was informed) rebuked Mr. Jaque very severely. 1. Because he
had brought a Business of so high a nature to public, upon so slender
Information. 2. Because he had not spoken to M. K. of it in private, before he
brought it to a Church Judicature. 3. For his Indiscretion to Sir J. Home, a
Person of Honor, in bringing his name into public, not having first
acquainted him with the Business: which if he had done, would have prevented
all the evil that has followed there on. M. K. also got his Reprimand for being
so brisk in face of Synod. But they were well pleased with his Apology, viz.
That he had been so accustomed for thirty years together to command and rule
over others, that, when he came thus to public, was apt to forget to whom he
was speaking, and had much ado to restrain himself from a hectoring like way of
delivering his Mind. He added also, that Mr. Jaque and his Elders had given him
so warm a drink, that truly he thought his Head a little light by it. To
conclude; The Result was to see, if differences could be taken away. And
therefore the Synod appointed some of their Number to speak with the Countess
of Ro^b. some with Sir William Ker, and some with M. K. All which was done. Mr.
Vetch and Mr. Semple were to go to the Countess. But Mr. Vetch being
indisposed, Mr. Meldrum Minister in the Town-Church of Edinburgh went for him.
The Countess was altotgether inexorable, and absolutely refused to admit Mr.
Jaque into her presence; tho some persons of great Honor did intercede for
him, and were very pressing he might get access; but all in vain, partly,
because he had entered into the Church of Kelso, without owning her Ladyship
directly or indirectly: partly, for falling so foully on M. K. at his very
entry. Little good, her Honor thought was to be expected from one of such a
temper.

There was a committee appointed to receive in the Reports of those that were
sent to commune with the Persons abovementioned; of which Business in the
following Part. We now come to give you an account of the two grand Points in
the Reference: and we are deceived, if you be not longing for it. We shall
begin with that Story about the Woman, who, they say, was with Child; and this
we think fit to divide into three Parts.

An Account of a Notorious Cheat. First Part.
18
KNow, that M. K. these 22 Years past never once failed in Harvest, being the
time his Scholars get the Vacance, to pay his due Respects by visit to that
Noble Family of Kincardin, wherein he had lived 6 years in a very honorable
Post, being Governor to that Famous Youth, my Lord Bruce, Brother to this
present Earl. In the year 1692, about the end of Sept. according to his wonted
Custom, having gone from Kelso to Edinburgh, from thence to Lithgo, from that
to Borroustonness; from whence are 4 miles by Sea to Culross, where the Earl of
Kincardin lives. About half an hour before Sunset, he enters Boat, wherein
were about 20 Persons, some whereof were his old Acquaintances, and very kind
Friends. After the ordinary Complements about one another Health; The Folk of
Lithgo, says one to M. K. do now sore repent of what they did to you and your
Family: and I know that many of them heartily wish you would come back again. O
but, said another, they treated you very barbarously. They first imprisoned
your self, and then cast all your Goods into the Street. I Am sure, said a
third, 'twas not their Duty; for kind was you to the Presbyterians, when they
were very low. I remember, continued he, when about 1200 Prisoners were brought
from Bothwel-bridge, through Lithgo, and were put all night into the Flesh and
Meal-Markets, most of them almost wholly naked, and about 3 or 400 wounded, you
alone stood from two or three in the Morning, till near eleven upon the Walls,
reaching down with Ropes Meat and Drink, and throwing among them many Clothes,
which the People about brought to them; and no other was suffered to stand
there, but your self, having, I remember, Brown of Thornidike, Captain of the
Guards his Staff, as a Warrant, that the Soldiers might not challenge you: For
you know, they were very strict on the account that some of the Prisoners had
made their Escape out of the Meal-Market. And kind was you to many, that lay
Prisoners in Lithgo-Tolbooth. particularly to Mr. Andrew Donaldson, a
Presbyterian Minister in Fife; and to Mr. William Tullidaff, who was long
Prisoner in Blackness-Castle (pointing to it with his hand, for it was in view)
and to his Family that then liv^d in Lithgo, etc. While some were talking to
this purpose, a young Woman in no very good Dress, unknown to any in the Boat,
after a very deep Sigh, says, O (a long pronounced O, indeed; For this Business
would be much better understood by acting it viva voce, than it is, being (thus
delivered by Pen and Ink) O, says she, What hard things have I suffered! Few
know my Sufferings. Her very looks and countenance in the mean time, pleading
for pity from all that were present. What have you suffered, said Mr. K. to
her? O Sir, answered she, Know you Sir Will. Ker. of Greenhead? I was five years
his Servant, and that I may repent this day. O (another long O, beating on her
Knees with her hands.) O that I had never seen his Face. And yet I must
confess, that he is a most worthy Gentleman: I cannot blame him. Come to the
purpose, Lass, said M. K. and tell us, what you have suffered, and how Sir W.
Ker comes to have a hand in it. Then with another deep Sigh, after that, says
she, I left Sir William 's Service, I came into Edinburgh, and he, and another
Gentleman employed me to carry in Letters to my Lord Ballantin, who, you know
was Prisoner in the Castle of Edinburgh. I got a Fourteen indeed for ^^^ry
L^^ter. At last, I was apprehended, and searched, and the Letters taken out of
my Breast. I would never tell who they were that employed me, but said that I
got the Letters from a Gentleman upon the Street, and two Fourteens to carry
them to my Lord, but we knew not whose Letters they were. And so I was taken to
the Canon-gate-Tolbooth, where I have layn these seven Months, and came out
Saturday last. It Is true, Sir William, and the other Gentleman were always
sending me something, the Lord reward them; and at last have get me set at
Liberty. But alas (with a deep sigh shaking her head, and wringing her hands)
Alas, Alas, said she, The Servants and Officers of the Tolbooth have taken all
from me: they have left me nothing but the Brats you see on me. I am going over
the Water to an Uncle, who lives about eight Miles from Culross he owes me ten
Pounds Scots; if I get it from him, I^ll put Clothes on me with it. I know not
what to do: I have not two Pennies in the World: I know not how to pay my
Freight. I expected Money in Lithgo; but they were not at home that should have
given me it: and now it is night, I know no body, I was never here before. This,
and much more to this purpose, she spoke with the greatest Confidence
imaginable; and never had a word to seek, as if she had been reading a Print
Book: so that Mr. K. with all that heard her, believed every word she spoke. In
short, he paid her Freight, and recommended her to the House of William
Couston, commonly called, Judge Couston, a Fewer in Culr^ss, telling his Wife,
he should satisfy for her Quarters that night. From thence he went to see his
old friend James Craich, a Merchant there; whose Son, Mr. William Craich, an
excellent youth, then Chaplain to the Duke of Queensbury, he fortunately sound
there, having come to see his elder Brother John, dying of a Consumption. The
said Mr. William did not long survive his Brother, dying of that same
Distemper. Mr. K. had taught him together with My Lord Bruce his Latin and
Greek. After some discourse and a Game at Chess, Mr. K. gave them an account of
the said Woman, telling where she lodged. The elder Brother, a very Sagacious
Man, Though weak in body, yet had spirit enough, asked Mr. K. if he knew that
Woman; what she was, or where she lived, etc. I never saw her before, nor heard
of her, answered Mr. K. till I was in the Boat: Beware, replied the dying Man,
she play you not such a Pavy, as two Jilts did about a Month ago in that same
house. Pray tell what that was; answered Mr. K. There came, said the sick Man,
two Women to Judge Couston's House, ^he one very big with Child, as appeared,
the other waited on her, as a friend or a kind of Servant. They told they were
come from such a place, and goin^ (...) another; gave this and the other
reason, why they were thus alone: she w^ Married, but durst not yet reveal it.
They came, said he, on Saturday, and staid all Sunday; but it was observed by
the Servant Maid, who did not go to Church, but staid at home to wait on the
said two Women, that they were exceeding curious tho in a cunning manner, to
know where the finest things lay, and to see them. This being told to the
Masters of the Family, they concluded they were Cheats; and therefore Judge
Couston, the good man himself resolved to watch all night, and to lie in a room
next to theirs. The night, said he, is not long: it is no hard business to watch
one night. About the break of day he falls asleep. The Jilts get up, and
knowing where things lay, carry all away with them they were able to bear; the
worth, they say, of about ten or twelve pounds English Money. After fair day
light the Judge awakes, misses his Guests, looks up and down the House, wants
this and the other thing; his wife upbraids him, not knowing whether to laugh,
or be angry at him: He is like to eat off his own fingers, being both Robbed
and affronted. Immediately he hounds out ten or twelve Horses into all
Quarters; two along the Coasts, East and West, the rest through the Country:
After no little Search they are got lying in a Sheepfold about five Miles off,
near Dunfermlin; The Jilt big with Child was eased of her burden and as Swamp,
said John, as I am. In short, all the Clothes and Linens were got again, and
that Child which they thought was in that Woman's belly, was nothing but some
Linens, which they had stolen some days before in a Gentleman's house, who by
this means got all his Goods restored. The two Women were carried to
Dunfermlin, and after some days Imprisonment, were scourged through the Town,
and so let go* I must further tell you, Mr. K. continued John, if that Woman,
whom you have recommended to Judge Couston's Wife, shall happen to go out at
door or Window, carrying with her what Goods her hands can fall on, you will ^e
obliged to refound ^he loss, and be affronted to boot; and let me el^ you also,
there will be very odd work about valuing things, they may call them worth
twice as much as their real value: It Is true, it will come to their Oath; and
yet even that way things may be highly over-valued. Mr. K. heard all this with
great attention; and after some deliberation he found no other Remedy to
prevent what evil might follow; but to go himself and watch her all night: for
to bid Judge Couston and his Wife to be wary of her, either they behooved to
shut her to the door; or watch her. By such means he was sure to be affronted,
and spoken of by every body; and therefore, said he, I Will rather go to Judge
Couston's house, and watch there all night, than run the hazard of being
affronted, and may sustain great loss besides. With this out he goes, and into
Judge Couston's, the two houses being contiguous, so that he had not above ten
paces between door and door. He tells the Judge and his Wife nothing of his
Jealousy he had of their Guest, but was very merry with them at a drink of Ale,
and a dram or two of Vsquebaugh, or Scots Waters, which truly were as pleasant
as hot water to him. In short, the stranger with another young woman ( Brown of
Thornidikes his Ladies Gentlewoman, as they say, who very providentially came
there that night) go to their Chamber each to a B^d, Mr. K. lay in a Chamber by
himself; a partition of deals being between his and theirs: so that scarcely a
Cat could move, but he would hear.

He tossed and tumbled all night, rising frequently to look to the Doors and
Windows. The Gentlewoman, whose Bed was within an Inch of his, told some
persons thereafter, that she never knew in her Life such a man: she got no rest
for him the whole night, he was always going out or into his bed. Next day Mr.
K. takes his morning drink with his Landlord, giving a share to the stranger,
after which he goes to the Palace to see the Earl, she made toward her Uncle;
and thus they parted till January thereafter, as you shall hear.

The Second Part of the Cheat.
19.
OF the First and Third Parts of this Cheat, Mr. K. gave an Account to the
abovementioned Committee, that sat in Sir J. Pennicook's Chamber; but as to
this Second Part, (which is by far the drollest of the three) he knew nothing,
till he went to Culross in the following vacance, and it making very much for
his vindication in the point under debate, he gave a particular account thereof
in face of Synod, Oct. 1695.

The occasion of this Cheat, was as follows. The said Judge Couston's Wife has
only one Child, a Daughter, her Husband's Step-daughter, he having Married her
a Widow, and has no Children by her; this Daughter was Married to Mr. John
Mercer Schoolmaster at Culross; who about the beginning of the Revolution
being turned out of his Office, went to London, and there got an occasion to be
Chaplain to a Man of War. Mr. K. (as is above related) taking his Morning drink
with the Judge and his Wife, the Stranger also sitting by, enquired, when they
heard from their Son-in-Law, Mass John, as they used to call him. We have got
no account from him, answered the Judge, these four years and more. He wrote a
Letter to his Wife, that he had got an occasion to be Chaplain to a Man of War,
and was just going aboard; since that time we have heard nothing of him, and
therefore we conclude that he is dead: This is all that past on that Subject.
Now know, that Mr. John Mercer's Father is a Farmer of very good account,
living in Pawmil of Adie in the Parish of Hosway, about six Miles from Culross.
The Stranger, or Cheat, not yet fully instructed in all Points and
Circumstances necessary for her design, turns a little aside into a House,
after she was gone out of Culross, where she gets a full Information of every
thing, that might be serviceable to her purpose.

After this she goes strait to Pawmil, and with great confidence enters the
house of the said John Mercer; and tells him, she was sent Express from his Son
Mass John, who, said she, blessed be God, is safe returned again to his own
Country; and is in Edinburgh: The honest old Man's heart warmed within him,
when he heard his Son was alive. She confirmed all she said with such Tokens,
that there was no ground left for any doubt, at last she added; Ay, but I must
tell you, Sir, that he is still the old Man: the world cannot make him hold his
tongue. Being in company one day, he spoke some things about King James, and
the Prince of Wales; for which he was carried to the Cannon-gate, Tolbooth:
But, Praise to the Almighty, he wants not good Friends to speak for him; he may
come out when he will, if the Good Man of the Tolbooth, and the Officers were
satisfied. He bid me tell you also, that he is not in that Condition you would
him, when he comes home to his Friends, neither as to his Clothes nor Linens;
and therefore he desired you either to send him money to buy in Edinburgh, or
Cloth and Linen to make things there. Immediately the honest simple Man sent to
Dunfermlin, and took off Cloth, and what other things were to be had there; and
what necessaries could not be got in that Burgh, he sent Money to buy them in
Edinburgh; as also to pay his Sons Dues in Prison according to her Information:
Nor did she let him forget to satisfy her self, giving her four Shillings
sterling for her pains. All these things were sent, not with a common Servant,
but with a Neighbor; one, whom Mr. Mercer thought he could trust: The Woman
also went along with this Man, riding forsooth on a Horse like a Gentlewoman.
When they were come near to the Tolbooth of the Cannon-gate; Come, says she,
Good Man, let us go into this house, and take a dri^^, till I go up to the
Tolbooth, and tell Mass John that you are come. Thus both w^^t into the
Alehouse together, and after she had taken a drink or two; Sit you still here
Good Man, quoth she, till I come again. Out she goes, and within less than half
a quarter of an hour returns with a sheet of Clean Paper in one hand, and an
Inkhorn in the other. Ha, ha, Good Man, says she, It will not do. All you and I
have both will not fully satisfy the Prison Dues; the Keepers of the Prison
are I confess, very descreet: they are content to take what we have to give
them at present, and Mass John's obligation for the rest. It Is no great Sum he
will be due. He sent me out, you see, to get him Paper, Pen and Ink; and
desired I should take into him all the Money we have, with the Cloth and
Linens; and he will come out immediately. He has no will that you go into him;
lest they seek you to be Cautioner: And when they see what fine things his
Father has sent him, it will make them the more willing to take his obligation
for what rests. The Country Man believed all she said, as his Creed, and thus
she went out with her arms full, but forgot to return. After that the poor man
had sit, till he was weary; poor indeed, for she had left him nothing; yea, not
to pay the Ale and Bread he and she had eat and drank in the place; at length
despairing of her return, he with another man went up to the Tolbooth, and
asked, if one Mass John Mercer was Prisoner there. Mass John Mercer, replied
the Keepers! We never saw, nor heard of such a Man. Now we leave you to
consider, what strange thoughts this poor deluded Soul had; how he looked, what
he said when he went home to the old Man; who with his Friends and Neighbors
were all expecting and longing to see him, whom they had given over as lost. O
what a consternation, think you, would it be to the Aged Father a Widower! What
to the Father and Mother-in-Law? But especially to their Daughter, his Wife,
who had mourned some years as a Widow; and on a sudden put in full hopes of her
Husband, and immediately again disapointed? Posterity will call this a Perfect
Comedy, or Romance. If you be curious to know matters more particularly, you
may ask the Persons above named.

The Third Part of the Cheat.
20.
JAn. 1693. Patrick Johnston, commonly called Paty Peers, a Fruit-Seller in
Kelso, meeting (as is supposed) with the said Woman in Lughtonlon near
Dalkeeth, agreed with her for so much to carry her to Kelso. She was (at least
seemed to be) big with Child; yea, so near her time, that he almost despaired
to get her out of Lawder, where they stayed all night, he Maintaining her all
along the Road, and she assuring him, that she was to receive enough at Kelso,
naming this and the other Person, that were owing her. They come to the
Gardner's house in the Floors (hard by Kelso) about Sunset on Saturday. Come
Patrick, says she, Let us step in here a while, and take a drink: I have no
will to go into Kelso till it be dark. And indeed, they say, she took a hearty
drink there, Paty paying all. After it was a little dark, he brings her to the
House of Nichol Somervale, where all the Whores and Thieves were wont to lodge.
In short, having stayed there till Monday, she comes about nine a Clock at
Night to Mr. K's door, it being so exceeding dark, that one could hardly see
another a Pace distant. Now here lies the stress of the whole business; the
very hinge, whereon the ground of Mr. K's Accusation (as to this point) does
depend. All the Preceding Passages in the two former Parts are adduc'd upon
this head. We shall therefore be a little particular, and as plain, as
possible; though we cannot represent matters in so lively a manner with Pen and
Ink, as they were acted by that subtle Woman. Know then that Mr. K. was
returning from Convoying Sir W. Ker to the Boat (the thing falling out that
day, wherein Mr. Gaudy informed Sir William of the abovementioned Act past in
the Joint Presbytery at Jedburgh in Mr. K's Favor; of which Sect 10. Part 1.)
Mr. K. we say, then living in that Lodging, which belongs to William Chatto,
Merchant in Wooller, this Woman comes up to him, as he was going to lift the
Sneck of his door, saying with a low and feigned like voice. Ken you me Sir?
What are you, answered he? Do you not ken me, replied she? No, said he. Oho are
you? I am sure you ken me; answered she; pronouncing the word Me, with great
Emphasis. Mr. K. began to take Pet, and therefore in a displeasing manner he
said; Tell me plainly, Woman, who you are. Do you not remember, answered she,
and with that stopped? Remember what, said he? That once you and I crossed the
Ferry from Borroustoness to Culross, quoth she; and how I told you that I had
lain long in Prison. Are you the young woman, that was once servant to Sir W.
Ker, and carried Letters to My Lord Ballantine, when he was in Edinburgh
Castle? replied Mr. K. Yes, yes, said she, with a mighty low voice, bidding
him, St, or speak low; Yes, I am her, Well, What Is your will with me, says he?
With this she stopped a pretty while; till he again said, Speak Woman. At last
(as he understood it) whispering to him; I Am with Bairn, quoth she. Base
unworthy woman, answered he, What am I concerned with that? and immediately
left her, and went into his house, and instantly told his wife all that had
past. Next morning he went over to Sir W. Ker, and informed him of the whole
business. She is certainly a Cheat, said he; for there is not one true word of
what she says relating to me. And so he ordered her to be apprehended, but she
prevented that by leaving the Town before daylight next morning, after she had
spoken to Mr. K. without taking her leave of her Landlord, or paying one
Farthing for her Quarters. Patrick Johnston also, who brought her to Kelso, was
cheated both of his hire and disbursments, besides his great travel and pains,
in making enquiry for her in the English-side among the Midwives, but all in
vain; for she returned that same day back to Smellom, and from thence to
Edinburgh as Swamp, they say, as an Eel, and worst of all, cheated Kobert
Dickson, Carrier in Smellom. We shall conclude this point by showing you, that
several Persons in Kelso, of good Note have of late informed Mr. K. that this
Woman was sent to him in a jest by Mr. Pat. Mc-dowgal, then Town Clerk; but
deceased before this Plea began. They tell, that he instructed her, how to
carry both to Mr. K. and the abovementioned Adam Bog: Such sports, they say, as
this, the said Mr. Mc dowgal was much in use to play to many Persons.

Some REMARKS on the Cheat, and Reference.
21.
It Is no hard task to collect from the Premises, what uncertainties, Falsehoods,
and Lies, are to be sound in the above written Referrence, relating to this
Cheat; of which, take these few. 1. It Is most false that Mr. K. confessed, that
the said Woman did charge him, as Father to her Child; and suppose she had said
such a thing, and he acknowledged she said it, what then? 2. He had no such
Expression; as, That it was unreasonable to think she could be so near her
time, etc. He said, it was not possible in nature such a thing could be, except
by way of Miracle; such as that God can raise up Stones to be Children; for
there were but three Months Exclusive, since he had seen that Woman at Culross:
All which things were spoken in Face of Session by way of supposition only. 3.
He said not, she was gone to the English-side, or that she brought forth a
Child there; but that some talked so: And it was afterward found, that she was
neither with Child, nor did go to England, as the abovenamed Paty Peers can
attest to his great loss. 4. He said not, that she offered the Child to Adam
Bog; for she did not speak one word of him, nor mentioned his name to Mr. K. He
said indeed, that he heard she had named Adam Bog to some Persons in the Town.
5. Here in the Reference, and all along in the Process, as you will hear, Mr.
K. is challenged for not causing secure this Woman.

It Is answered; He used the ordinary and legal means by informing, and that
with all convenience the Principal Magistrate of the place; one, who was
himself concerned in the thing. And certainly, no wise Man would have advised
him to fall a struggling with her in the dark under the Cloud of Night;
especially considering, that he could prove nothing against her: In such a
Surprise, he did all that was incumbent on him. This Challenge, or Accusation
for not causing secure the said Woman could not have come so ill from any man
on Earth, as from Mr. Jaque: He sees a Mote in his Neighbors Eye, but cannot
discern the Beam that is in his own.

We shall pass here that Famous business, which fell out in his house at
Biggar, being a thing generally known through the Kingdom; how, viz. He let go
one Madam Stones, and English Woman, Cousin, as they say, to his Son's Wife,
who brought forth a Child in his house, and that, as the common report went, to
his own Son. This Madam Stones, Mr. Jaque did let go out of his house without
bringing her before any Judicature Ecclesiastical or Civil; which Affair we
shall pass here, though it well deserves a severe Touch, being a business
accompanied with some very dreadful Circumstances; and give you a short account
of a Passage somewhat in Kin to it, but by far more wonderful; if upon no other
respect, at least for its Singularity, which fell out in his house at Kelso,
July, 1696.

A verry singular Passage.
A wonderful thing indeed; the like perhaps was never since the Creation; yea,
not in Sodom it self. A Hellish Invention! Good Lord deliver us. How came it
into the Woman's mind? Certainly she has had Teachers, otherwise it could never
have entered her thought. Had such a thing been done in some houses in Kelso,
the very stones of the Church-wall had heard it. Much about that time, when
this was done, Mr. Jaque speaking in Pulpit of the Uncleanness of the place,
said; If there was a Town in the World like Sodom, Kelso was it. But little did
he then know, that Sodom trip't from Chamber to Chamber in his own house, His
own Steward, his Butler, or Cup Bearer; the Good-Lass; the great Professor in
his Family had Sodomitism rooted in her very Heart, We shall be as particular
in this Point, as Modesty will permit.

Know then, that before Martimus, 1696. Mr. Jaque had two Servant Women, the
one Margaret Shiel, commonly called The Good-Lass, so strait laced, as to her
Principles, that she disdained to speak with any not of her Communion, carrying
toward Mr. K. and his Family, as if they had been Barbarians; yea, as Persons
infected with the Pest, or Plague: The other Isabel Maison, not a Good-Lass;
because she carried Discreetly and Neighbourly. Mr. Jaque had also a
Servant-man, David, or Davy Brown. The Good-Lass, had a singular Affection to
Davy; such Affection as Potiphars Wife had to Joseph; but far more operative,
and much stronger: for that caught Joseph by the loose Garment only, which
slipping, he escaped. But this gripped fast by Davies heart with a Philtrum, or
Love-Potion, the like was never heard of in the days of our Four-Fathers. Most
cunningly was it contrived in all its parts, being made up of three
Ingrerdients; viz. Sweet, and thick sour Milk, with some other strange
mystical-like kind of a thing, in Color somewhat resembling Scarlet: This
Potion was given Davy in his bed, within a dark Vault at a good distance from
any Person. What real effect it had upon him, we cannot well determine. But
it is certain, that she confessed to three Persons, that she got as much from
him, as he was able to give a Woman, (so she vvorded it) which made Mr. Jaque
send him (though he denied it) as well as her, away without a Testimonial. Yet
he entertained in Bed and Board this vile and abominable Strumpet from July,
till after the Term of Martimus. And it is certain that Mrs. Charity, Mr.
Jaque's Grandchild and the other Servant-Woman knevv it; yea, savv the
Philtrum that same night it was composed; but with Candlelight only: yet
took a better view of it, at least of its dregs next Morning by the help of
the Sunbeams, and told Davy of the hearty Affection of his Sweet Mistress;
vvhereat he was like to Vomit both Gut and Gall, as we say. Mrs. Charity
informed her Grandmother, and she her Husband sometime before term, and yet
that vile Woman was kept till the time she was to remove, which would have
been, though that had not fallen out. No answer can be made to this, unless you
say; That it is a business of so abominable and hateful a nature, that it ought
not to have been revealed, nor made public: And therefore Mr. Jaque acted most
Prudently, and Christianly in concealing it. It Is true, when the thing first
came to his ears, he was much offended, saying he had never heard of such a
vile Whore in his life: she deserved to have her Nose slit up, and scourged
through the Town. And yet he suffered her to go away without any kind of
Punishment. To this we answer; If Mr. Jaque acted Prudently and Christianly in
this matter; he and others carried most Maliciously and Unchristianly in a
business of that kind. Mr. K. (say they, as you will hear in its place) did
expone and explain to his Scholars the word Menstrua. This, though a most Hellish
Calumny, Mr. Jaque, and others have published far and wide, proclaiming it
aloud in all the Church-judicatures of Scotland; as you shall hear. It Is more
than probable, that some Person has expon'd and explained also, the said word
to that vile-woman; and told her its true Nature, Quality, and Virtue; and what
effect it can produce, otherwise it can hardly be supposed, that one of her
Circumstances could fall on such a device. When Mrs. Charity and the other
Servant-woman did challenge this Good-Lass for the Ill Deed. What mean you,
woman, say they to her; design you to poison the man? No, no, replied she; I
only did it to make him etc.

22.
MR. K. is not Ignorant, what some people talk of him; viz. that he makes it
his business to seek out all Mr. Jaque's failings: Truly he needs not travel
far to get them. Pray tell me, who they are, that speak much to his
commendation? Certainly very few that know him. And who knows him not in
Scotland or Ireland? As to the foregoing Passage, Mr. K sought it not, it was
told him by three or four Persons without being asked; yea, it was current
through the Town, and had got footing in the Country also, before that he knew:
And if things happen to come to his ears, who can blame him if he make use of
them, when they serve his turn? It Is not his Custom, nor humor to believe
Stories and Tales; and if he be concerned, he narrowly enquires into things
before he gives Credit. There Is hardly any thing in Nature more unreasonable,
that they who Calumniate their Neighbor, should be offended, that he takes a
legal means to vindicate his own Reputation. And without all Question every man
is more obliged to defend his own good name, than another can be to rob him of
it; the one thinking he is Innocent, the other not: He that wards off blows, is
far more excusable, than he that gives; if he can by lawful means avoid them.
Some are so void of all sense and reason, that like little Children, they are
angry forsooth, you stand not still, while they beat you. This truly is Mr. K's
Case in many Points. But Mr. Jaque fails not to sail all winds to get
Information against Mr. K. What vast numbers of Letters has he sent through the
Kingdom, where Mr. K. has been living? To Edinburgh, Lithgo, Culross, etc.

In Summer 1696, he wrote a Letter to Frazer of Braes, Minister at Culross
(about forty Miles distant) earnestly pressing him to make enquiry about
matters. Braes, either forgetting or slighting the thing; Mr. Jaque writes a
second, and sends it with a sure hand, Mr. Webster, one of the Ministers of
Edinburgh, who went to Culross to assist Braes at the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. We need not be solicitous about the return of this Letter; for
certainly, if it had been to Mr. K^s prejudice; we should have heard of it: and
in justice being otherwise, it ought not to be concealed.

He wrote also to Mr. Wear, Minister at Lithgo, and got a return, which is
clashed among the witnesses, and adduc'd against Mr. K. And yet, when he pressed
once and again, that Mr. Wear's Letter should be produced and read in Public,
Mr. Jaque positively refused it: Of which more in its place. How many he wrote
to Edinburgh, we know not; only we are certain of one, a most Wicked and
Hellish Letter, which providentially fell into Mr. K's own hands; and is now
lying in Process before the Lords: Of which hereafter. Now let all the World
judge what Principle moves a man to be thus solicitous to find out the Failings
he Alleges, or Thinks (for certain Knowledge he cannot have) his Neighbor may
be guilty of. Pray, can it be any other Principle, than Malice, Envy, or the
like? And yet Mr. Jaque and his Elders, to name no more, are mightily offended,
that Mr. K. (who knows certainly, whether he be guilty, or not) is diligent in
the use of Lawful means to vindicate himself from their Calumnies. They call
him, as you will afterward see, Litigious, Contentious, Malicious, etc. Pray,
consider, that they are still Pelting at him with Libel after Libel; as you
shall see in the three following Parts. Poor Man! Does not Nature oblige him to
ward off the strokes, as well, and as long, as he is able; for, if he should
stand still and receive blows, they would immediately end his days: Or yet, if
he should cast away his Weapons (as some of themselves advise him; of which in
its place) and betake himself to his heels, he would be also a dead man; for
you know the common saying, He that that flies, takes the guilt upon him. The
true and natural Order of things obliges them first to desist; and by an
Infallible Consequence they deserve to be called Contentious, Litigious,
Malicious, and not Mr. K.

An Account of the Business in Blakader.
23.
THis being the chief Point in the whole Process must be Discust to purpose. If
the Kirk-Session had carried this one Article, they had gained all; for Mr. K.
would never have appeard in Public, nor looked a Gentleman in Scotland in the
Face, if he had been found guilty of such an Abominable Villainy.

But, blessed be God, he has come off Scart-free, and eternal shame and infamy
has thereby fall^n on his Enemies; and that not without, if we may say it, the
wonderful Providence of the Almighty, who has so ordered every step of this
business, that they evidently demonstrate to the World what sort of Spirit
possesses Mr. Jaque and his Elders. And that which makes the thing much more
remarkable, is, that they themselves are the Discoverers of their own wicked
Invention; like the Rat or Mouse in the Comedy, which by gnawing on the wood
awakes the Enemy to its Destruction: Terent, Eun. Act. 5. Sc. 7. All this you
will clearly see from what follows.

1. You may remember, what a dreadful Crime Mr. Jaque, sitting in Judgment with
his five Elders did lay to Mr. K's Charge; viz. That he struggled so rudely
with a young Woman in Sir John Home of Blakader 's Family, that he made her cry
so terribly, that Sir John came running into the Room, and rescued her from
him. See Sect. 10 and 11.

2. Know that Mr. Jaque and his Elders now deny, that they said, that Sir John
came into the Room, and parted Mr. K. from the Woman; but that Sir John being
in his Closet near by the Room, wherein Mr. K. was struggling with her, his
stirring within his Closet parted them. See Sect. 14 and 15.

Now, that we may proceed orderly in so material a part of the Process; know
that the Point incumbent here on Mr. K. to prove, is; that Mr. Jaque sitting in
Judgment with his Elders, said, that Sir John Home came into the Room, and
parted him from the Woman, with whom he was struggling. Further know, that tho,
it should be supposed, that this is not sufficiently proved; which, we hope no
indifferent Person will think, but that it is: Yet, grant it is not; even in
that case Mr. Jaque and his Elders are so far from being innocent in the
matter, that instead of one, they become guilty of many most Horrid and
Malicious lies; to pass that, when one wicked Device fails, a second highly
aggravates the Crime. The Points therefore, which Mr. Jaque and his Elders
ought to make good, are these soar.

1. That Mr. K. struggled with a Woman in Sir John Home of Blakader's Family.
2. That Sir John was in his Closet near by at the time. 3. That he stirred in
it. 4. That his stirring parted Mr. K. and the Woman.

24.
WE return to the abovementioned Point, which Mr. K. is to prove, viz. That Mr.
Jaque said Sir John came into the Room, etc. You are to call to mind, when the
Reference of the Session was read in Synod, the Moderator asking Mr. K. what he
had to say against it, he replied, that it was a most Absurd, False and
Calumnious paper; that there was scarcely a true sentence in it. And
particularly speaking about this point under debate, he said, he could refer it
to Mr. Jaque and his Elders Oaths, whether or not they said that Sir John came
into the Room, etc. Or, whether or not there was any mention of his being in
his Closet. Mr. K. further added, that he would refer the matter to the Oaths
of the Members of the Presbytery, desiring they might declare, what was the
Subject of their consideration, as to the present Point. We shall not further
insist upon this Argument, but proceed to another; which we do not in the least
doubt, but you will confess to be a sufficient Evidence of the Truth under
debate^ Know therefore, that Michael Fisher, one of the Elders and
Session-Clerk for the time, writer of the said Reference, and of the words now
called into Question; an^ that at the very moment, wherein they were uttered by
Mr. Jaque, went immediately after he rose from the Session-Table into a house
hard by the Church to take a Pipe of Tobacco, being, as he said, cold by
sitting so long in Session writing very strange things about Mr. K. How he
struggled with a Woman (...) Sir J. Home of Blakader's Family; and Sir John
himself came into the Room where they were struggling and Sundred them. These
are Michael's very word* For the better Confirmation of this Point; viz. That
Michael said, that Sir J. came into the Room, etc. It Is most proper that you
know these following particulars. 1. The Persons, to whom these words were
spoken, viz. William Moody Book-Binder, and Marg. Halywel his Wife, known to be
two very honest folk* and of good esteem, both born in Kelso, and have lived
therein all their life without the least stain; each of them being seventy four
Years of Age, and Married together fifty three Years: He the Son of Mr. J.
Moody, Schoolmaster, Session-Clerk and Precentor in Kelso above forty Years,
viz. From 1612, to 1650, a Preacher also of the Gospel, and that frequently at
Kelso. 2. Know also, that a minute or two after Michael was gone, it happened
that Mr. K. went into the said house, about four or five paces distant from his
School; and finding the old Man and his Wife amazed at he knew not what, asked
them, why they looked to strangely one to another? We are astonished, said
they, at the news we have just now heard of you from Michael Fisher; and we
know not, whether to believe them or not. You are the Person, who can best put
us out of doubt. After they had repeated, once and again, the said Michael's
words, as above related: This is a matter of great Consequence, said Mr. K. and
very probably will come to public; and you two may be called to declare upon
Oath what you heard Michael say in the matter; and therefore, it is my advice,
that you instantly set down in writing the very words you heard him speak: Now,
I say, while they are fresh in your memory, that if you should be called to
depone some Months or Years after this, you may do it with as great freedom,
and clearness, as you can do at this minute. Immediately the said William took
Pen and Ink, and wrote down the individual words above related; which when he
had done, he read them to his wife, both of them protesting most solemnly, that
they were clear and ready to confirm by Oath before any Judge the Contents of
the said paper, whenever they should be called. 3. Know that some little time
after this, Mr. K. commenced a Process against the said Michael; causing him to
be Summoned before the Commisary of Peebles sitting at Kelso, as a Calumniator;
and was to have adduc'd the said William and his Wife, as witnesses of the
Calumny: But while the Process was depending, William's wife Died. Yet by the
good Providence of God, Mr. K. got about thirty six hours before her Death, her
most solemn Declaration, in presence of two public Notars and Witnesses,
expressly bearing, as she should answer to God, before whom she was within a
little time likely to appear, that Michael Fisher said to her Husband and her,
that Sir J. Home came into the Room, and Sundred Mr. K. from the Woman. 4. Know
that the said William, has given under his hand some Months after his wives
Death, a Declaration before famous Witnesses, attesting the Truth, as above
related: All which three Papers are in Mr. K's Custody. We could adduce many
other Arguments to confirm our Assertion; but we have said too too much in a
matter, whch we may suppose to be False; and yet gain this Point with greater
advantage, than if our Adversaries should grant us all we crave in this present
debate.

25.
WE are here to examine the four above mentioned Points, which Mr. Jaque and
his Elders are obliged to instruct. 1. Say they, Mr. K. struggled with a Woman
in Blekader. 2. Sir J. Home was in his Closet at the time. 3. He stirred in it.
4. His stirring parted Mr. K. from the Woman.

The last three of these Points, Sir John did ^ut off with one Breath: I was
^^at home, said he in face of Synod, Oct. 1695. If not at home, not in his
Closet; if not in his Closet, stirred not in it; if stirred not in it, Mr. K.
was not parted by his stirring. These are Demonstrations as strong, as any in
Euclide. Now, if any person affirm for certain Truths, four several Points
(especially Matters of Fact) and three of them be as false, as Falsehood it
self, that is without any mixture of Truth in them) is any man, think you,
obliged to believe the other Point upon their bate word? It Is needless to make
application in a matter so clear in it self. We only desire by way of
Supposition to ask Mr. Jaque and his Elders a few Questions.

Suppose therefore, that Sir J. Home, was then at home; and perhaps in his
Closet, tho neither of these be true, but granting so much: Pray, Mr. Jaque, or
any of your his Elders, tell us, how came this to your knowledge? Did any of
you see Sir John in his Closet, or heard you his voice? Certainly none of you
will of dare say it. And further, tell us how you came to know, that Sir John
stirred. What kind of motion made he? Rose he up to walk, or did he beat on the
floor with his foot, or staff, that a servant might come to him? Lastly, how
know you that his stirring parted Mr. K. and the Woman? Did he desist as soon
(...) Sir John stirred, or was it a little after? It Is pretty odd indeed, that
Mr. K. being upon a very hot pursuit heard Sir John stir, and yet Sir John
heard not him struggle and wrestle with a Woman in a Chamber-floor. But, since
neither you your self, nor any of your Elders, do so much as pretend to have
been Eye, or Ear witnesses to the abovementioned four Points; it follows by all
absolute necessity, that either ye came to know them by the Information of
others; or ye your selves are the Forgers and Contrivers thereof: for we think,
ye do not lay claim to Divine Inspiration; and for Magic, Sorcery, or the
like, we know you will disown. Now if by Information, pray show us who upon
Earth is the Person, Man or Woman, that dare affirm such things. Produce but
one single Witness and you shall gain the Cause. But since this you cannot do,
have we not just ground to think, and say, that ye are the Forgers of these
most Hellish Calumnies? Hellish indeed we may well call them; being invented on
design to ruin a Man and his Family: to rob them both of their good Name and
means of living. Such horrid lies are certainly no less odious in the sight of
God, than these we call The crying sins of the Land; such as Adultry, Murder,
etc. No question, that Lie which Potiphar's Wife made of Joseph, was as
displeasing to God, as her Inclination, and attempt that he should lie with
her. Mr. Jaque, This you will find close Arguing: Win through it if you can. We
defy the Wit of man to find out an Evasion. You, and your Elders think your
selves with those of your Gang the only Saints of the place; whereas in effect
ye are down right Hypocrites, exactly resembling the Pharisees; against whom
our Savior pronounces so many Woes. They paid Tithe of Mint and Cummin; but
omitted the weightier Matters of the Law, Judgment, and Mercy, etc. St. Mat.
23.23. And do ye not the like; if not much worse? Your Elders are sent out on
the Lord's Day after Sermon to take notice, what person is walking in the
fields, and to call them before you for so doing; yea, you cause them challenge
poor old rotten wives, for sitting at their Doors upon a Turff, or Stone, to
take the benefit of the wholesome air, who perhaps can hardly, without being
suffocate, stay within for Smoke, and other sort of Nastiness. And which is yet
more remarkable, ye rebuke Women, that sit at Doors with Infants on their
knees, though they tell you that the innocent Babies will by no means cease from
excessive weeping within the house. In plain terms, ye are a stain to your
profession, and a great reproach to Christianity. It may be justly said of you,
as of the Pharisees in old time; Ye strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel. Ye
observe small faults in your Neighbors, and sometimes call them faults, that
are not; but ye discern not the gross and heinous Crimes, that not only lodge
in your own hearts, but often break out to the view of the whole World except
your selves

A word to Michael Fisher, one of the Elders and Session-Clerk beside.
26.
MR. Fisher, it is a wonder you have a Countenance to look a honest man in the
face. You a Recorder of Divine Truths! Yea, much rather a Forger of damnable
Lies. We showed you in the former Section three very gross and palpable ones,
without the least shadow of Truth in them, knit up in one bundle; which with
many hundreds are now inserted in all the Church Registers of Scotland. But
that which we here mainly charge you with, is false and double dealing. You
write one thing in your Reference, and tell your Neighbor another. In a word,
your Pen contradicts your Tongue: your tongue your pen: and both are most
horrid and malicious lies. You told two very honest persons that Sir J. Home
came into the Room, and Sundred Mr. K. and a Woman struggling together. You may
know your Dialect, you sounded it according to our Scots way, He Sindered them.
These are the very words which you spoke, while they were fresh in your memory,
and as yet warm upon the paper, which you had written two or three Minutes
before. Ay but after that you were informed, that Sir J. Home by his
Declaration had called your words a malicious Lie, and consequently, you and
your Accomplices are Malicious Liars; immediately you turned your tongue, and
changed your pen, laying and writing, that Sir John came not into the Room
indeed; but was in his Closet hard by, etc. That you said, he came into the
Room, two very famous witnesses have declared; the one in a most solemn manner,
even as she was stepping into Eternity: the other is ready to swear upon his
Eternal Salvation that you said it. Now, Michael, be ingenuous; confess, or
deny, as you please, it comes all to one thing: It Is but out of the Dub into
the Mire, as we say. First you said, that Sir John came into the Room, etc.
That Is declared to be a Malicious Lie. Next you write, that he came not into
the Room, but was in his Closet near by, etc. Certainly this is a Lie also; for
he was not at home. Michael, Michael, this is a sore Dilemma, a very hard Lock
you are put to. Take it by what handle you please, it will bite severely.
Acknowledge your sin; and first crave God's pardon, and next those, whom you
have injured, and advise your Brethren to do the like; especially your eldest
Brother, Mr. Jaque, who leads you all by a Nose of Wax into crooked Paths.

26.
THat nothing may be wanting on our part for clearing this Point of this Plea,
which has made so much Noise through the Kingdom, we shall here give you an
account of that Passage, which they say gave occasion of this calumnious report
raised against Mr. K. which we do not out of any Principle of Duty, or any
other necessary Tie incumbent on us; but rather as a work of Supererogation,
and to satisfy some Peoples Curiosity.

Know then, that Mr. K. according to his Custom once a year in the
Vacance-time, having traversed the Lothians and some other places of the
Kingdom, at last came to Blakader, where he was made very welcome by these two
worthy persons Sir J. Home and his Lady. After Supper Mr. K. taking his leave
of them signified he would take horse next morning, he thought before they
rose; and therefore asked, if they had any service he could do them in these
places he was going to. I will not suffer you to go away, said Sir John, till
after dinner. In the fore noon, you and I shall step over to Allan-Bank, and
see Sir Robert Stuart. To which desire Mr. K. condescended, and thus they
parted that night. Next morning Sir John comes pretty early to Mr. K's Chamber,
before he was out of his Bed, saying, I must beg your pardon, Mr. K. I cannot
wait on you this day, for there are three or four of my Tenants down stairs
pressing me to go tithe their Corns; my Servant that used to do it has got a
fall, whereby he has disjoynted his arm. That Is a business of Consequence, Sir
John, answered Mr. K. it needs no Apology. In short, Mr. K. gets up, and within
a little is called down to breakfast, Sir John making have to go to tithe.
Immediately after breakfast he takes horse, his Lady and Mr. K. going to the
Gate with him. Mr. K. returned again to his Chamber to take off his Hair,
having got a loan of Sir John's Razors. This being done, he goes to put on a
clean Cravat, being to visit several Persons of Honor in the Mers. Of all the
Cravats he carried from Kelso, he finds one only clean; but so abused and
wrinkled, that he could not put it about his neck in the case it was in, and
therefore he gives it to one of the Servant-women, desiring, that she would be
pleased to smooth it, which accordingly she did, and brought it back to his
Chamber. All he can remember, that past between him and her, was, that she
asking how her Mistress (the Lord of Throgtons Sister, whom she had served in
Kelso) and Mrs. Kirkwood kept their health; he answered, very well, praised be
God, and thanking her for the service she had done him, they parted. Now know
that this Woman was of Mr. K's acquaintance at Kelso, having served the said
Mrs. Ker, who lived about ten or twelve paces only from Mr. K. and to whom he
frequently paid visits. Know also, that Mrs. Jennet Home, Sir John's Sister,
was all the while in a Closet within the Chamber where they were, unknown to
either of them, and heard every word they spoke. Lastly know, that both Mrs.
Jennet, and the said Servant flatly deny what Mr. Jaque and his Elders charged
Mr. K. with. And thus you have got a true account of this Malicious Calumny.

28.
NOw, since it is certain, even to a Demonstration, that there are most Horrid
Lies and Calumnies forged against Mr. K in the matter above related; the
Question is, who are the forgers thereof. That we may proceed the more orderly
in this Point, we shall first lay down these few Conclusions.

1. It Is incumbent on all men to endeavor the preservation of their own, and
neghbours good name, as far as they can.

2. To forge Lies to disgrace and ruin our neighbor is a grievous Iniquity,
and the more gross they be, and the more public they are made, the Sin thereby
becomes the more atrocious: The Cirrumstances also of the Persons Injured and
Injuring (which in this present case are very considerable) do exceedingly
aggravate the Crime.

3. That Calumniators be punished according to their demerit, is most just.

4. All lawful means ought to be used to find out the Calumnator.

5. He, who knows the Calumnator, is partaker of his Crime, if he conceal him
when required to detect him; but more especially, if he brought the Calumny to
public before a Judicature. Since therefore, it is beyond all debate that
Calumnies are forged against Mr. K. it necessarily follows, that he ought to
enquire who are the Forgers: And certainly they are either the Members of
Session, viz. Mr. Jaque and his Elders, or some other persons; or both. If they
be the Members of Session, you cannot but acknowledge, that they deserve severe
punishment. If they have things by Information, they are obliged to give their
Informers, that they may be punished conform to their Crime. And (which is by
far the most likely of the three) if the Members of Session have been told only
a part of the abovementioned Lies, and if they have added the rest themselves,
or have made things worse, than were told them; in that case both are to be
looked on, as forgers of Hellish Calumnies, though the Members of Session deserve
the pre-eminence. Now know, that when Mr. Jaque and his Elders are required to
give their Informers, they answer; They are not obliged: It Is not their Custom.
Hardly any thing can be more unreasonable, than this answer; and have more sad
effects accompanying it, as you shall clearly see from what follows.

1. It gives just ground to think, that they are the Contrivers of the said
Calumnies in whole, or part. 2. It implies great partiality; they favor the
guilty more than the innocent. Neither do they, as they would be done to. 3. If
it be sustained that a Kirk-Session is not obliged to give their Informer, in
that case no man can be secure of his Reputation, or Office, if it be in their
power to deprive him thereof. For any person, whether a Member of Session, or
not, who has Envy, Malice, Prejudice at his Neighbor; or, who would have
himself or his friend, or a relation settled in his Office, may inform the
Kirk-Session, or any of its Members against him without fear of being called
into Question upon the matter. The Session is not obliged to tell, how they
came by such a report. You may safely say; this or the other man is guilty of
Fornication, Adultry, Incest, etc. He struggled with such a Woman, and had
certainly got his will of her, if he had not most providentially been parted
from her so, and so. In a word, you may speak of this kind what you please
without being challenged for it: The Kirk-Session is not obliged to give you up
for their Author. Or, you may take a more hid and private way. Whisper into
some persons ear, who, you know, will devulge it; That such a man is too
familiar with this or that woman, you see them often alone together; you do not
like so great familiarity, etc. This is enough to some person. He tells it to
two or three more with some little addition. They do the same. Presently it
becomes Fama Clamosa. Then the Church takes hold on it; especially if he be a
person they may meddle with, or would fain have a hit of. Being Summoned before
them, he craves to know their Informer. We are not obliged, say they, to tell
you who informed us. They adduce for Witnesses, the Informers themselves,
contrary to all Law and Reason. And thus an Innocent Man may come to great
trouble, vast expense; yea, be turned out of his Office, ruined and disgraced,
he, and his forever: And the rise and occasion of all this may be, Envy,
Malice, Avarice, Revenge, etc. Now there is no way under Heaven left to avoid
this, but severely to punish Calumniators. And how, pray, shall we come to know
them? Unless you give your Informer, and he his, till we come to the Fountain
and Root of all; to him who set it first a work, and by this means you shall
come to know the thing from its very birth, or first conception, with all the
increase it received from this and the other hand. And if any person should
report a Calumny, and cannot give his Author; perhaps has forgot from whom he
heard it; or may be knows his Author, but he denies it; and the other cannot
instruct that he said it: This man is punishable by Law. There is no other
Remedy in Nature left us to preserve our good Name. 4. If the Kirk-Session be
not obliged to give their Informer, this bad Consequence will follow, viz. most
Atrocious and Heinous Crimes shall pass without punishment. One out of Malice,
or Revenge, raises a Calumny on his Neighbor; saying that he is guilty of
Adultery, Incest, Bestiality, etc. If you be not obliged to delate this man, as
your Author, he passes unpunished, and certainly his Sin is as odious in the
sight of God, as that which he charge on his neighbor. We told you already,
that we have ground to think, that that revengeful Lie, which Potiphars Wife
made of Joseph, is no less grievious a Sin, than her attempt she made on him to
lie with her. And to let the greatest of Sins pass without punishment is
certainly horrid iniquity. We might here add, that the not punishing his sin in
this life, may perhaps be the occasion of his eternal Damnation in the life to
come. 5. It opens a door for people to commit the most Atrocious Crimes without
any restraint, having a kind of assurance their sin will never come to public,
they venture on it with the greater freedom. 6. People are thereby deprived of
the just and lawful means, whereby they might purge themselves of the Crime,
they are charged with. Who knows, but perhaps it could be instructed, that
either the Informer, or the alleged guilty Person was Alibi, (that is some
other place) when such a thing was said to be done. An instance of this kind
you have again and again above-related; Mr. K. struggling with a Woman was
parted by Sir J. Home stirring in his Closet near by. A most abominable Lie,
said, Sir John in face of the Synod; for I was not then at home. And thus we
have showed you sufficient ground, why you ought to give your Informer. Pray,
give us your Reasons why you are not obliged to do it? We know none worth the
naming. Perhaps ye would say, if ye durst tell it; He is a friend that informed
us, one of our own Party; He told it as a Secret, and we promised not to bring
his Name into public, etc. The very Heathens will rise up against this wicked
Generation, and condemn it at the great day. Amicus Plato, amicus Aristoteles,
sed magis amica est Veritas. Though he be your Father, who informed you, he ought
to be delated in this Case. It Is far better he be punished, and perhaps to save
his Soul, than that Truth be suppressed, and the Innocent suffer.

29.
WE did purposely omit one very bad Consequence of suffering the first b^oacher
of Calumnies to pass unpunished, viz. That it gives occasion to many thousands
of other People, partly to make most horrid Lies; partly to speak and publish
abroad gross falsehoods. Lies, when they add any thing to what they heard; and
Falsehoods, though they repeat only what was told them: And this besides many
other effects, that follow hereupon, which we shall hear pass for Brevities
sake. Know then that this business of Blakader, with the other abovementioned
made a wonderful Buz through the whole Kingdom, to go no wider. It was in
every bodies mouth; almost the only Subject of discourse, flying from Town to
Town like an Arrow; and still acquired more and more vigor, confirming the
saying of the Poet.

Fama malum, quo non aliud velocius ullum.
-- Viresque acquirit eundo.
O cursed Fame, thou does as swiftly run,
As can a Ball let out of any Gun.
And like a tumbling Stone from highest Hill,
In falling, strength acquires for to do ill.
It was very early set a work. Mich. Fisher, as you heard, as soon as he rose
from the Session-Table, run into the next House, and putting a burning Wisp to
its Tail, set it off. Nor need you doubt but his Brethren did the like, sending
it to all the points of the Compass. Nor was M. Jaque wanting in his duty
(whether to God, or the Devil, judge you) writing Letters as you heard, through
the Kingdom. That same very day, in which it was before Session and Presbytery
(12 Mar. 95.) it flew to Edinburgh, acquiring some strength by the way; or,
more likely, received it, before it left Kelso. In Edenb. it run current, that
M. K. was convicted of Adultery, and had confessed it before the Kirk-Session.
But chiefly that business of Blakader was very strangely represented, far
beyond the bounds of modesty. It was said with great confidence, that he was
guilty of that horrid Crime of forcing a Woman in Sir. J. Home of Blakader's
Family: that he struggled with her in a most rude and undecent manner, till she
screek'd so terribly, that Sir J. himself came running into the room, and with
great difficulty got him dragged off the innocent Lass. 'Twas not many minutes
in Edenb. when down it runs to the Cannon-gate, and into the E. of Roxb's
Lodging, where it was so represented, that the Countess blushed, and the Lord
of Drummelier, her Ladyships Uncle standing by, became pale like the Earth, he
having recommended M. K. to the Town of Kelso. From Edenb. it flies to Lithgo,
and other places about, with this addition, that Mrs. K. was dead out of grief
and shame: so that not a sew in that Country, especially those, who had a
singular kindness for him and her, made enquiry about the matter, to know,
whether she was dead or not. Nor did this report stay within the Island of
Britain; but went over Seas, and paid a visit to both Armies in Flanders.
People who know not M. K. believed all they heard; and even most of those who
were acquainted with him, became a little jealous, things being represented
with such confidence, that it made the best of his Friends to stagger, and fear
the worst. Mr. K. though certainly as innocent as Job in that particular, yet was
much perplexed for 8 days, till he got the above written Declaration under Sir
J. H's hand. If it had hapn'd, which God in his goodness has prevented, that
Sir. J. had died in the interim, Mr. K. had been ruined and disgraced for ever.
Or yet, if he himself had by the excess and exceeding great weight of grief and
anxiety, which did oppress his Spirit, fa^^n in^o some distemper of mind, or
disease of body, which readily might have ended his days; what disgrace and
infamy. judge you, would he have left behind him on his own and his Pos^eritys
good Name? And how, think you, would his adversaries, the forgers and
contrivers of the above written Lies and Calumnies have triumphed and rejoiced,
as if they had done God and their Country good Service by cutting off the face
of the Earth such a vile and abominable Wretch, as they would have the World to
believe he is? What? did not one openly in the high street have this
unchristian expression, viz. That Kirkwoon deserves to be hanged over these
Shambles, pointing with his hand to the Flesh Marke^: And (...) other time that
same Person said, It were alms to hang him, speaking (...) Mr. K Now ^ow, that
about 20 day^ after this person had spoke thus of Mr. K. M^. J^^^ a^n^^d him
with the Di^^^ of an Elder, as a Reward of his good Service; and that
notwithsta^^ing M^. K. did formally in face of Session object against his ^^ing
received into that Office on the account of the said Expressions, and some
other Reasons, as Instruments then taken at more length-bear: Of which Business
you will have a touch in the last Part of this Work.

The Third PART. Commencing at the Sitting of the Committee. (ult. Apr. 160^.)
which consisted of the Presbytery of Kelso, and 12 Assistants, whereof 8 were
Ministers, viz. Mr. Hardy, Mr. Vetch, Mr. Semple, Mr. Orock, Mr. Mulli^hen, Mr.
Couden, Mr. Wilson, and Mr. Noble. This last may be reckned a Member of Kelso
Presbytery, though he be now transported to that of Jedburgh, because, as yet he
sits with both. The 4 Ruling Elders are, Sir John Pringle, of Stitchel; the
Lairds of Torwoodly, Watherly and Buckam.
1.
YOU have had in the two former Parts, several very extravagant and wild
Passages: But you may assure your self, that you shall have in this and the two
following, a great many things very far surpassing all you have yet heard. Yea,
we dare promise to show you some things infinitely beyond, what you are able to
conceive in your mind. Infinitely, we mean in its most extensive, and proper
significacion. Never, yea never certainly in this world was there heard of such
a monstrous, and wonderful kind of Judicature, Ecclesiastical or Civil, as you
shall find sat upon the 24th of Sept. 95. Nor were ever any Judges before
guilty of such horrid and wicked Crimes; such Illegal, Informal, Unjust,
Foolish, and Ridiculous acts, as they committed the said day; of all which you
shall have an account in their proper places. Only here we must not omit to
tell you, that we are very far from ascribing these wild and exorbitant actings
to every Member of the Committee. No, no, not the half of them. These worthy
Gentlemen above named, with not a few of the assisting Brethren, would
certainly have abhorred to fit amongst the actors of such gross Enormities.
Know that there was only one Assisting Brother present at that Meeting. Alas,
alas, it has been Mr. K's great misfortune, that Gentleman kept not Diets. Many
never came and some very seldom, of which you will now and then have a touch,
as occasion offers; We now proceed.

The Committee meeting the said ult. of April, pretty frequent, none being
absent, except Mr. Semple, Mr. Crock, Sir J. Pringle, Torwoodlie, and Buckam,
and yet nothing was done. The reason pretended, was Mr. Semple's absence, who,
as you heard, was sent to the Coun^ess of Roxb. to see if her Ladyship would be
reconciled to Mr. Jaque, by which means all differences might be taken away;
this being the chief thing recommended to the Committee by the Synod.

You all know very well, said Mr. K. to the Moderator, what kind of Reception
Mr. Semple got from the Countess. How her Ladyship positively refused to admit
Mr. Jaque into her presence, though several Persons of great Quality were very
pressing for it.

M. K. not prevailing by this, further added, that by their not proceeding he
still say under the lash of malicious Tongues, and was deprived of the Profits
due to him by Contract. This had no influence on them. By the way know, that if
her Ladyship had been pleased to countenance Mr. Jaque, immediately Mr. K. had
appeared, free of any vice; sound from the crown of his head to the sole of his
foot. Many time he had this offer made him, that if he could gain the C. all
his sores should be instantly closed up. This he told her Ladyship once and
again; adding that he was far from desiring her to do any thing inconsistant
with her Honor, and the trust her dear Lord had committed to her, whatever
might become of him. We return to our purpose.

2.
WHen nothing, that Mr. K. could say to the Committee, prevailed to make them
proceed in the Process; that his Appearance before them might not be altogether
in vain, he proposed to them some very necessary Questions, and took
Instruments thereupon, both in the hands of their Clerk, and of a Public
Notary, in each 4 or 5, the Sum whereof follows.

1. He asked, if they were a Quorum, and what number made one. And if they
were, he craved he might be formally process'd according to Law, viz. that an
Informer, and Accuser might be condescended on; and that other legal Methods be
taken to find him guilty, or not. If not guilty, that he be absolved, and have
the extract of his Absolviture given him.

2. He craved, that they might proceed only as to the Points contained in the
abovewritten Reference, and that no other Accusation should be received against
him, till these were discust; for he was hearing, that the Members of Session,
having failed so Grossly in the Main Points of their former Charge, especially
in the business of Blakader, which was their Plight-Anchor, were about
contriving a new Libel; which they did, as you will hear. He also here
protested, that if they should sucumb in their probation, they might be liable
to Lex Talionis

3. He craved that Patrick Johnson in Kelso, and Robert Dickson in Smelholm,
being the Carriers employed by the Woman, who was said to be with Child, and
with whom he was slandered; and also, that the other Woman in Blakader might be
all cited and examined in this Affair.

4. He craved to know, if there was an Act made or a Commission and Power given
by the Presbytery, appointing William Christy, or any other of the Elders to
Collect the Profits belonging to the Offices under debate; to which he had
Right by virtue of his Contract. And also he desired to know, if the said
William Christy or any other had made any account of their Intromissions, and
to whom; and protested that the said Ittrometters, or Collectors, and their
Constituents, whoever they were, might be liable to refound the same, both as
to time past, and to come, during their Intromission, and his Incumbency, etc.
as the said Instruments at more length bear.

3.
It Is most proper here to insert a very odd Passage, which gave occasion to the
E. of Roxb. to Commissionate some persons to appear before this Committee, or
any other Church-Judicature, that might happen to sit and cognosce on this
Process, within the bounds of Mers and Tiviotdale, to see that nothing should
pass there in prejudice to his Lordship's Right.

Know then, that on the 23d of April (8 days before the meeting of the
Committee) Mr. Thomson Minister at Ednim, came to Mr. K's School-door, and
calling him out, paid his Brothers School-wages. After some communing, Mr. K.
asked, when the committee was to meet, telling, he longed exceedingly to have
that Scandalous business put to an end. The day is not yet determined, replied.
Mr. T. You will get notice, when it will be. Mr. K. did not in the least doubt
but that it was Truth, which Mr. T. spoke, considering he was Clerk to the
Presbytery, and the Synod left to them to appoint the Diet, and give
Advertisement to the Assistants. This fell out on Tuesday, and on Friday
thereafter late at night Mr. K. is certainly informed that the Diet was
appointed at Ednim, within the said Mr. T's Church at a Visitation there, 8
days before the said Tuesday; and that Letters were sent to the Assistants,
showing, they were to meet the said ult. Apr. We need not make Inferences here
from Mr. T's carriage in this matter. It Is obvious to all the World, that his
design was to attack Mr. K. at a disadvantage, viz. to give him as little time,
as they could to prepare himself for Battle. Know also, that Mr. K. was told by
a Gentleman, who was at the said Visitation, that all the Ministers there
present had formally engaged and promised still to adhere one to another, till
they got him turned out. We dare not compare this little Combination to that
most horrid and dreadful one mentioned 23 Act. of those persons, who bound
themselves by a Curse, not to eat nor drink, till they had killed St. Paul.
Yet, though this in most respects comes far short of that, in some regard it does
very much exceed it. That was done by a Rabble of rude ignorant fellows; This
by these who call themselves Ambassadors of Jesus, met in the house of God in
order to advance the great ends of the Gospel. As there the Apostles took a
most prudent way to disappoint these wicked men of of their Hellish design; so
here Mr. K. that he might put himself in as good a posture of Defense, as he
could, by the good Providence of God fell upon the following Method; which with
the Assistance of the Almighty has been the chief means to carry him through
the many dangerous Passages of this Plea. As there the Apostle could not have
escaped the fury of that Multitude, without the Assistance of the chief
Captain; so here Mr. K. had certainly been swallowed up amongst the midst of
the waves, if he had not been strongly supported by not a few most Honorable
and Worthy Persons. This you will acknowledge, before you come to the end of
this work.

Now, the Method he took was this. That same night, wherein he was informed of
the two abovementioned passages about eleven a Clock he provides a horse, and
having taken journey next morning very early, was at Broxmouth (the E. of
Roxburgh his house) before nine in the Morning. He was not long in getting
Access both to the Earl and Countess to whom he spoke at large: The Sum whereof
relating to this present Affair, was, that the Presbytery of Kelso with the
Elders there had already encroached too far on the Earl and other Heretors
their right in matters relative to the Offices of Schoolmaster, Session-Clerk
and Precentor; and to the Profits thereto belonging, and to suffer them to run
on at this rate, would certainly at length not only raze and destroy their
Right in that matter; but tend to the great disadvantage, if not to the ruin of
the place: For to dis-unite and divide the said Offices, and squander the
Profits appointed for the encouragement of the Masters and Teachers of the
School, could not but at last produce that effect. And, My Lord, continued Mr.
K. This right to present one and the same individual person to all the said
Offices, your Lordship and the rest of the Heretors have peaceably possessed not
only past Prescription (which gives a sufficient right, at least till a civil
Judge determine otherwise) but beyond the memory of any man breathing. This
Right cannot be taken from your Lordship, without the Sentence of the highest
Judicature in the Kingdom, if you please to carry the Cause before them. And,
My Lord, I humbly beg your pardon, if I speak yet more freely to your Lordship.
Since, I say, you derive this Right from your Noble Predecessors, one after
another for many Generations; Pray, My Lord, what will People think, and say,
if you let it slip through your fingers? Especially considering what sort of
Cattle they are, who would wrest it from your Lordship: your own Tenants and
Servants, who will triumph over you, when they have gained their point. They
have too too much Honor already, in that they dare enter the Lists with your
Lordship, and debate for what is not theirs. But should they carry their
design, they would become insolent beyond all measure; so that it would become
hard for any to live in peace and quiet by them.

And that, My Lord, which makes the thing the more absurd, is, that they are
both Judge and Party, by assuming to themselves (B^evi manu, forsooth) that
right which past memory of man has been lodged in your Lordship and your Noble
Predecessors.

And turning toward the Countess, he spoke to this purpose. As to your part,
Madam, every body does acknowledge, that hitherto you have managed the Earl's
Affairs, not only to the satisfaction, but to the admiration of all, that hear
the same; so that many other Worthy and Honorable Ladies in this Kingdom have
taken your Ladyship for their Pattern in the managing their Childrens Fortunes.
But, Madam, I must take the freedom to tell your Ladyship, that if you sit
still, and suffer this Feather to be plucked out of the Earl's wing, you shall
lose very much, and that deservedly, of your former Reputation. Yea, Madam,
it is that, which you cannot do. You may not do it. And to use yet greater
freedom; Madam let me tell you, it is that which you dare not do. It Is
altogether inconsistent with your Trust; for not only the Earl's Honor and
Interest, but your own is at stake: Your Ladyship ought to be called to an
account for it, if you use not legal and just diligence in the matter.

In short, a Commission is immediately drawn up, and subscribed by the Earl and
his Lordship's Curators, giving power to Gilbert Ker, Brother German to Sir
William Ker of Greenhead, and to Allex. Potts, Writer in Kelso, or to either of
them to appear before the said Committee, or any other Judicature within Mers
or Tivio^dale, to see that nothing should be done in the said Process
prejudicial to the Earl's Right. Which Commission was pesented to the Committee
by the said Allex Potts, and Instruments taken thereupon ult. April,
abovementioned. He protested also that the said Dilature of the Committee, or
any other Dilature to be made by the said Judicature might no ways pre-judge,
or impede the Earl of Roxb. and his Curators, and other Heretors concerned in
the Parish of Kelso; or Mr. K. or others in their names to prosecute a Declator
of the Right of Presentation to the said Offices; and for the Emoluments,
Casualities, and Perquisites thereto belonging, not only as to By-gones, but in
time coming, as the said Instruments at more length bear.

Thus you have got a brief Account of what was done before the said Committee,
ult. April 95. Only rests a little Passage, that fell out that Evening, of
which you will have a touch or two hereafter, referring you back to this place.

The matter is this: Mr. K. being desirous to meet with the said Mr. Thomson,
waited till he went out of Town homeward; and then did cast himself into his
way, and Convoyed him more than half a M^le. They communed on several heads. At
last, We hear, said Mr. Thomson, You went to Broxmouth on Saturda to see the
Countess of Roxb. Yes Sir, replied Mr. K. you sent me thither. I sent you! What
mean you by that, said he? Your carriage toward me, caused me to pay that
visit, answered Mr. K I do not understand you, replied Mr. T. I shall then be
plain with you, said Mr. K. You know, Sir, that this day eight days at my
School-door, when I asked you, when the Committee was to meet, you said that
the day was not yet condescended on; though you knew it was done eight days
before; and that at a Visitation in your own Church. Well, Well, Mr. T. you
thought to have surpised me, but by the good Providence of God, I am thereby
in a better posture of defense than I was. What was designed for my hurt, tends
now to my advantage. Mr. T. you may be sure, being not a little damped with
these words, at last said, He knew not, but the Presbytery might alter the
Diet. Yes, Yes, replied Mr. K. and write Letters De Novo to the Gentlemen: For
all the Assistants were advertised by Letters several days before Mr. T. and
Mr. K's first communing. And supp^se, added Mr. K. you thought that perhaps the
Diet might be altered; this was no ground to say that it was not yet
Condescended on, when the Committee should meet. And thus they parted without
much Complement. Now know, that one Mr. Jo. Dawson in Harpertown, now a
Preacher, was present, and heard all that passed between Mr. T. and Mr. K.

4.
MAy 1695, the Commitee meeting again this day, after a very long consultation,
sent their Officer for Mr. K. and desired to bring him in privately at a back
door; which Mr. K refused to do, saying, he was not ashamed to go in at the
public Entry. You are to take none with you, said the Officer. I must go with
him, said Mr. Potts, by virtue of my Commission. I am forbid to suffer you to
enter, replied the Officer. If I be hindered to go in with Mr. K. answered Mr.
Potts, I will protest and take Instruments that the Earl's Commission is
rejected by this Committee, though received by the former. After some debate he
was permitted to go in.

We have sent for you, Mr. K. said the Moderator, to enquire, whether, or not
you have acquainted the Countess of Roxb. with your Affair by Letter or
otherwise. Moderator, answered Mr. K. Mean you before Mr. Semple spoke to her
Ladyship or since? Before I spoke, replied Mr. Semple.

Moderator, said Mr. K. before I give an Answer to your question, be pleased to
know, 1. That I was certainly informed that her Ladyship had got an account of
my business, and that very much to my disadvantage; viz. That I was convicted
of Adultery, and had confessed it in face of Session. As also, that Sir John
Home had come into the Room upon me, while I was struggling with one of his
Servant Women, and that I certainly would have forced her, if he had not by
Providence come quickly into the Chamber and parted us. This the Countess did
know the very day, in which the business was before Session and Presbytery; at
least soon the next Morning. 2. Know also that I was not only desired, but
ordered by a Person of Honnour, who was concerned in the business, to give her
Ladyship a true account of the whole Affair; which accordingly I did by an
Express a day or two after the sitting of the Synod. Immediately Mr. K. was
removed, and being called in again, was told there was no more to be done that
day; and that he should be advertised some days before the next meeting. He
told the Moderator plainly, that he thought he had just ground to be
dissatisfied with their Proceedure. They did nothing the former Meeting,
because Mr. Semple was absent: and now when he is present, it is all one thing.
There are several of our number absent, answered Mr. Semple. If you never
proceed, replied Mr. K. till you be all present, that may be Ad Graecas
Calendas, or Nevermas: and so I must live and die in disgrace, and infamy. And
therefore, Moderator, I propose again to you the same Queries, which I had in
the former Meeting; viz. Whether, or no, you are a Quorum, and what number
makes one, etc. These, are very pertinent and necessary Queries. I earnestly
desire to be satisfied in them. When nothing, he said, could prevail with them,
he again protested, and took Instruments, as he had done at their former
meeting. You shall hear in its place, what a strange and wonderful kind of a
Quorum pleased them, viz. one single Assistant; and only one, at most two
Members of the Presbytery. It seems they were waiting for such a Catch.

There rests here a very remarkable passage, which may be of great use, as to
Mr. K. all along this Process. It Is as follows. Moderator, said Mr. K. I humbly
crave to know, Whether, or not, that Query you put to me, when I was first
called in, and my Answer thereto, be recorded. Yes, answered the Moderator,
both are recorded. Then said Mr. K. you must excuse me, Moderator, if I desire
that, what you have recorded may be read to me. This was positively refused,
esepcially by Mr. Semple, who, as we told you, is Instar Omnium. Mr. K. pressed
hard to have it done, using many Arguments for it; particularly telling them,
how much he was wronged by recording things amiss before the Kirk-Session,
which made him always jealous thereafter. Nothing he could say, did prevail
with them. Now, we leave to the World to guess, what could make the Committee
refuse to grant so lawful and innocent a Request. Either they had faithfully
recorded the matter, or not. If faithfully; pray what evil was there to let Mr.
K. hear it read? If not, it was a great Act of Injustice done him.

It Is good he is not obliged neither in Law or Reason to stand to what they
record.

5.
AVG. 20 1695. On which day Mr. K. being called in before the said Committee,
was told, he was to have a Libel given him, to which he was to make an Answer
in writing against that day eight days; and to receive on the said day a list
of witnesses; and the Libellers to answer that day fourteen days being the
third of Sept.

He answered, that his Scholars being to get the Vacancy on the 23d. then
instant, he had appointed to meet with some persons at Edenb. on the 26. of the
said Month about business of concern; and that some of these were Persons of
Honor, whom he might not disappoint. And thus not without great difficulty he
got the business delayed till the 10th of Sept. Now pray tell us what you
judge, could move the Members of the Presbytery, and a few of the Assisting
Brethren, pushed on by Mr. Jaque and his Elders to be so pressing, that the
Committee should sit in the heat of Harvest, and that weekly, and yet were so
slack; yea, did nothing April, May, June, July, till the 20th of August.
Certainly thought they, Gentlemen, and some others, who are (we will not say
Indifferent in the matter) but Unwilling to be Judges in this Process, will not
meet in the Harvest, especially living at a good distance. And it was so
indeed, the Presbytery (a wonderful Presbytery, as you shall hear) and one
single Assistant did what they pleased on the 24th of Sept: then next. They
then laid the foundation of a most unjust; yea, rather of a black and hellish
Sentence; for in effect, as you will see in its place, they fetched a Coal from
the lowest pit of Hell to be its Groundwork.

Sept. 10th 1695. This day Mr. K. receives a Libel, and is appointed to give in
his Defenses, 17th of the said Month.

6.
SEpt. 17, 1695. Now at length the Work begins to go on very orderly; for Mr.
K. had hardly well given his Defenses out of his hand, when he receives them
back, that he might read them in order after every Article of the Libel, Mr.
Thomson, Minister in Ednim, and Clerk to the Committee, first reading on
Article, and then Mr. K's Defense, both you may be sure, with as great Majesty,
as they were Masters of, in presence of a vast number of People; most part
whereof, now and then, lost their Gravity by bursting out into a fit of
laughter, which did put the Actors frequently to a stop.

You have the Libel here word by word, as it was given into the Committee; and
also Mr. K's Defenses, or Answers, as he delivered them, except perhaps where
there is a necessity to make some alteration on the account that mention is
made of the said matter elsewhere. We have thought it also not amiss here (for
it was not then done) to subjoyn immediately after the Article and its Defense,
or Answer some Remarks, or Explications upon such words and Expressions, as
seem not so clear, as we judge necessary; or at least we shall refer you to
other places, where you have these things more fully discussed, giving you for
your direction Letters, A, B, C, etc. enclosed within a Parenthesis, or two
crooked lines, thus (A.)

7.
ARticles exhibited to the Presbytery of Kelso with Assistant Members of the
Synod upon the 20. day of August, 1695. by William Christy, J. Laidly, Mich.
Fisher, Jo. Thomson, and Ja. Thomson, Elders, against Mr. Ja. Kirkwood
Schoolmaster there.

A Preface, or Preleminary Discourse given into the Committee on the said 17 of
Sept. by Mr. K. being prefixed to his Defenses.

Mr. K. humbly craves of the Reverend Members of this Committee, that before
this Additional Libel be entered on, the two chief Articles stated before the
Session, Presbytery and Synod may be first discussed; and that the other Heads
contained in his Instruments taken before this Committee ult. April last by
past, be considered, and Answers given thereto. And further, he humbly craves,
that it be showed him, by what Warrant this Committee can take upon themselves
to Consider and cognosce any other Crime, than what was stated before the
Sy^od, especially, seeing many of the Heads of this Libel are civil Matters,
and therefore fall not under the Inspection of this Judicature. Yet, tho he
Judges himself no ways obliged to answer any other Article, till these two be
first discussed, lest he should be thought altogether refractive in this
matter, he humbly offers the following returns to what is further laid to his
charge; and begs liberty to premise, that where some of these Articles, at
least many Points and Branches thereof, are in general terms, it must not be
expected that particular Answers can be given, till particulars be condescended
on. Neither can every little Branch or Twig sprouting from the main Articles
receive proper and particular returns: By that means this work might increase
to a Volume.

Article, 1. That in his Petition to the Synod, he does most slanderously
reproach the Session of the Church of Kelso, as guilty of forging Hellish
Inventions to divide and break his Family, in pretending several most
uncharitable and calumnious Defamations, and Immoralities, that he was guilty
of; and that by the Proceedure of the said Session, his Family sustains great
Scandals: for which it is humbly conceived they have given no ground, either by
their Reference to the Presbytery of his Affair, or any other way.

Answer, This he denies and oppones the (A) Petition, craving it may be
produced and read. That Hellish Calumnies are forged against him; he said, and
still does say, laying at the Kirk-Sessions door to give their Informers;
otherwise he must be pardoned, if he look on them as Contrivers thereof.

Remark, (A) The Sum of this Petition you had Sect. 13 Part 2. And you are to
have a large Account of a very odd Passage relating thereto, Sect. 21 of this
Part, and a touch also of it, Sect. 16, Part 4.

Art. 2. That he did publicly in the face of the Synod charge all the Elders
of Kelso to be his Enemies: For which, it is humbly conceived, they never gave
him just occasion.

Ans. The Circumstances of this being considered, no man will blame him for
saying the Elders were his Enemies. Mr. Semple frequently abovementioned
telling the Moderator, that the word of the Elders was to be taken in a matter
relating to the Records of Session. No, replied Mr. K. for they are Enemies;
that is, Parties, Opposites, or Adversaries. A very common Expression at such
occasion.

Art. 3. That he denied openly before the Synod, what he had owned, and
confessed before the Session Judicially, and is Recorded in their Register;
wherehe appears to be unfit for humane Converse; much more for a place of such
Trust, as Clerk to a Church-Session, or Precentor.

Ans. This he flatly denies. All he spoke in face of Session, he adheared to
before the Synod. What they Recorded, he knows not; it never having been read
to him. And can instruct their (A) Recorder, one of his Accusers, wrote at the
Session-Table, and Subscribed one thing with his hand, and spoke with his
tongue the contrary within a few minutes thereafter in a matter of present
agitation. Neither Law, nor Reason oblige him to stand to what they Record;
unless it be (B) read to him, and he subscribe the same; especially in matters
of so high moment, and where he has just ground to suspect the Recorder and his
Accomplices.

Kem. (A) Michael Fisher, of whom and this Affair, Sect. 24, Part 2. (B) We
told Sect. 4. that this present Committee flatly refused to read a Passage
which they had Recorded. This can be instructed by many Famous Witnesses.

Art. 4. That he has no Testimonials from the Kirk-Session of Lithgo, where he
resided many Years, and for some time, after Mr. Wear was restored to the
Church for which reason he is not capable to be precentor, or Session-Clerk in
Kelso, it being required by the 13 Act of the Gen-Assembly against Profaneness,
that all persons, who remove from one Parish to another have sufficient
Testimonials; much more Persons, who lay claim to such an Office.

Ans. Here are several Points pretty considerable.

1. He brought no Testimonials, say the Libellers, from the Kirk-Session of
Lithgo, where he resided many Years. (A) It Is answered; He has one from Mr.
Alex. Seton, Minister there all the time of his abode in that place, being 15
years: which Testimonial was thought sufficient by the Ministers of Edenb.
where he resided two years and an half, and brought from that City two
sufficient Testimonials; one from Doctor Rule, in whose Parish he lived:
another (...) the (B) French Minister, whose Auditors he and his wife were
during the time he abode in Edenb.

2. He resided in Lithgo, says the Libel, for sometime after Mr. Wear got the
Church. This he positively denies; and confidently (C) affirms, that he was
removed with his Family to Edenb. (D) many Months before Mr. Seton was put from
his Church, or Mr. Wear entered it. What should move Mr. Jaque and his Elders
thus to press this point, Mr K. cannot imagine. In face of Session (12 March
95.) Mr. Jaque enquiring for a Testimonial from Mr. Wear; He was not Minister
in Lithgo, answered Mr. K. in my time. That cannot be, replied Mr. Jaque for
(E) etc. After some discourse on this head; Sir, said Mr. K. There Is no need of
any debate about this Affair. If it can be instructed, tha^ I did reside in
Lithgo for some time, after Mr. Wear, got the Church, I shall take with all you
lay to my Charge. And thus ended that debate before the Session. Yet it came in
again in their Reference; and now the third time in this Libel. Mr. K. has no
will here to descant on Mr. Jaque and his Elders their uncharitableness in in
this matter; only seeing, Affirmanti incumbi^ Probatio, (He who asserts a thing
to be so or so, ought to prove it) he desires that they prove, that he re^^ded
in Lithgo for some time after Mr. Wear got the Church; which if they do, he
hereby obliges himself not only to take with all the Crimes contained in this
^^bel; but also to give for the use of the Poor ten Thousand Marks Scots (F)
providing Mr. Jaque and his Elders, or any one of them will engage for the like
S^^, if they succumb in their Probation.

3. Here Is an Act of the Genesis Assembly, 1694, cited to oblige a man to perform
a Duty, 1689. A strange Hysteron protron, Jannus-like, with an eye in its Neck,
looking backwards 4 or 5 years. Mr. K. humbly begs, that he be not
misconstrued, as reflecting on the Act it self. He only craves liberty to
wonder at the Policy and Art of the Libellers, who have turned its face
backward to make it point at his failings or 5 years before it had a Being.
They resemble themselves in every thing. This is of the same nature with the
^est of their prepostrous Accusations; for should one thoroughly consider this
whole business, he will find all these pretended Crimes Double faced; the on
looking to time pa^^, the other that to come. Is It not a wonder to see a man
punish^d 3 or 4 years before the Crime be committed? This is truly Mr. K's
Case. He has been kept from the Offices under debate, and from the Profits
thereof these 3 or 4 years for ^aul^^ supposed to be committed of late. Is not
this first to hang a man, and then sit on his Assize? It Is as absurd, as if a
Master should whip his Scholar this day for a fault, which perhaps he may
commit ten days after this.

4. The Session of Kelso ought not to enquire for a Testimonial from Lithgo,
but from Edenb. for that is to act Per Saltum.

5. Suppose there had been need (as there was not) of more Testimonials, they
ought to have given him a competent time to procure them; and not in a minute
or two (G) hurl him out of the Session into the Presbytery; and as soon out of
that into the Synod.

Rem. (A) See Sect. 10, Part 2. (B) Said, Sect. (C) Mr. K. is as certain of
this, as that he lives; at least as he can be of any thing of that nature; 1.
By the date of Instruments taken the very hour he left Lithgo. 2. by the date
of the contract of his Lodging at Edenb. besides a hundred other infa^^ble
Evidences. (D) 7 at least, Mr. K. removing with his Family in March, 1690, Mr.
Seton was deposed Sept. thereafter, as Records can Attest. (E) See Sect. 10,
Part 2. (F) This and this only put the Libellers to Silence. (G) See Sect. 11
and 12 Part 2.

Art. 5. That Fame about the Woman with Child sprung from his own mouth, and
diverse other Circumstances, which he himself has confessed to diverse persons;
and has never used means for his purgation, suffering the Woman to go without
using means to secure and prosecute her.

Answ. He acknowledges that this slowed partly from himself, partly from
others. That he used no means to secure the Woman, is false, as the Magistrates
can attest. He refers what further he would say on this Head to the account he
gave to the Committee, which sat in the house of Robert Ormston abovementioned,
Sect. 15, Part 2. See Sect. 18, 19, and 20, Part 2.

Art. 6. That the Fame, about his Carriage toward the Woman in Blakader, (A)
sprung from the Woman's Declaration of it in this Town before several Witnesses,
who are ready to testify it.

Answ. This is the main and chief Article, being no less, as to Mr. K's part
(had he not been prevented, as they pretend) than one of the Crimes of the
Crown; and therefore he most earnestly begs, it may be well considered and
canvass'd to the full, and legally discussed, referring to what he said about
it in face of Synod; and to what he wrote by the Synods order concerning the
Reference; which he gave in with the Reference being written and Subscribed
with his hand, to the Committee appointed to meet next morning for that end. He
desires also that the Woman in Blakader (B) be judicially examined before him;
and that her Letters to Jo. Brown, (C) William Jordain Merchants, and Ja.
Grieve a Glover, might be produced, if extant; and if destroyed, that the
Persons be summoned to Depone about the Contents of the said Letters.

Rem. (A) It Is a most horrid Calumny put on that Woman in Blakader (and
consequently on Mr K. also) to charge her, as the Author and forger of that
dreadful business, of which you have a large account, Sect. 23, Part 2. Her
Letters to the Persons here named are a clear Demonstration of her denial. Nor
is this unknown to Mr. Jaque, for the said Jo. Brown showed him the Letter,
which she wrote to him; as he did to many others, particularly to Mr. K. And
certainly it was great injustice done that Woman, and a thing contrary to the
Laws, and Practice of this Kingdom to Summon witnesses to depone upon that
Point, and not to cite her to hear them depone: who knows what she had to
object against them? (B) Mr. K. did by way of Instrument crave that this Woman
might be cited to appear before Synod or Committee, in regard she knew the
matter under debate, better than any other whosoever: But this was never done,
nor her Letters produced; which is a certain evidence, that what was depon'd
relating to her, was false and calumnious. (C) This J^rdon (now dignified with
the Office of an Elder) is the Person, who depon'd against the said Woman, and
informed the Session about the matter: So that he was both Thief and Marshal,
as we say; Informer and Witness, which is contrary to all Law and Reason. He is
also one of the Persons, who ^urk'd within the Church, while his Servant Maid
and others depon'd, which thing Mr. K offered to instruct in face of Synod,
Oct. 95. He lurked, we say, but not ^o all the World; for Michael Fisher, one
of the Libellers, and the Kirk-Officer gave him and some other Witnesses this
sinful Toleration; but thrust to the door others, that ought to have been
there. This was done on the grand and solemn day, 24th of Sept. of which in its
place.

Art. 7. That his Principles published ^o the World in print are such, as (it
is humbly conceived) render him incapable of any Office within this National
Church: As that it is (A) Indifferent to hear Presbyterian, Episcopal, Papist,
Turk, or Heathen, which smells rankly of Nullifidianism: And that the
Government of the Church is Ambulatory and indifferent, left to the Wisdom and
Discretion of Superiors, to be disposed of as they judge convenient; and that
the (B) external Policy of the Church is indifferent, and to be disposed of by
the Powers of the Land, which savours greatly of Erastianism, if not Hobbism.

Answ. Before any particular Answer be given to this Article, it is not only
pertinent, but most necessary here to show to what hight of Presumption and
Insolency the Elders of Kelso are arrived, who being 5 Men of very mean
Capacity, and altogether illiterate, not one of them knowing to Decline his own
name, dare call into Question a Business; at least a Printed Paper, being an
Information of that business, which has passed the two most Supreme and
Sovereign Courts within this Kingdom: A Cause Hactenus judicata, and determined
in Mr. K's favors; his Adversaries not only baffled, and affronted, but
personally Fined; their Provost denounced Rebel and Fugative: that Printed
Paper answered to the full in Print by the greatest Lawyer in this Nation, Sir
James Stuart, His Majesty's Advocate; replied to again in Print, by Mr. K.
Copies of all three dispersed amongst the Lords of Privy Council; the Cause
warmly debated, Pro and Con, in a frequent Convention: And yet after all that,
the Lord Advocate and others could say, either as to the Cause it self, or any
harsh and unbecoming Expression (for his Lordship did not fail to seek out any
thing amiss of that kind, as is to be seen at the close of his Answers) Mr. K.
was assoil'd from every Punctilio in that Paper, as Records can attest: Ay, but
the Elders of Kelso can soar higher, or rather dive deeper, than all the great
Wits in Edenb. They discern in that Paper gross Faults; most heinous and horrid
Crimes; Crimes, that render Mr. K. incapable of any Office within the Church.
My good Lord Advocate, notwithstanding all the Evil he found in Mr. K. or his
Papers, yet feared not to commit to him the care of his only Son. But these
Elders will not suffer him to stand at their Kirk-door, and officiate as
Beadle. Poor Kirkwood, whose work it has been these two and thirty years and
upwards, to teach Noble and Gentlemen's Children, must now, it seems, in his old
days keep sheep on some Hill side. But pray, what be these horrid Crimes found
out in that Paper by the Elders? Lo, three all in a Knot; Erastianism, Hobbism,
and Nullifidianism; (C) Words their Elders no more understand, than the Seat
they sit on; which some, no very wise man, certainly with great pains, has
instilled, not into their Judgments, but Memories: as if they were Parrots; for
should this proceed from themselves, it could not be believed they spoke, but a
Spirit within them. To conclude this Passage, Mr. K. does not in the least
doubt, but the (D) Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, with
the Lord Advocate, who are concerned to defend their own Acts, will protect him
from the Malice of all his Enemies, and punish them according to their Merits.

A particular Answer.
His Principles, he hopes, are no ways repugnant, either to the Laws of God or
Man. The inferrences here drawn from his Printed Paper are most false and
absurd: Neither are the Words (E) faithfully cited. In short, he comes not the
length of Erastianism; he hates Hobbism; and does not well understand, what
they mean by (F) Nullifidianism, having never read of that Sect, unless they be
a new sort of Scepticks.

Rem. (A) Here is a manifest Falsehood, or rather a gross and abominable Lie;
for there is no such Expression in that Paper. Mr. K's words are; He is not so
scrupulous, but he can hear Presbyterian, Episcopal, Papist, yea, a Turk or
Heathen make a good discourse. Think you it not a very great Act of Injustice
(especially considering the matter under debate) done to your Neighbor, when
you cite his writings, not only to add words of your own; but to leave out such
of his, as are most material, and of the greatest importance. You know very
well, that it is an undeniable Maxim in Grammar, and a thing in it self that
cannot be otherwise, viz. Every Active Verb must of necessity have something
behind it; otherwise the Sentence is lame and imperfect. Mr. K. can hear. Pray,
What? Any Man whomsoever make a good and virtuous discourse. Can there be any
evil in these words? Is it sinful to hear a good discourse? Were Seneca,
Epictetus, or Plato this day living on Earth, might not Mr. K. and others hear
them discourse about Virtue? Certainly you are not hence to infer (as the
Libellers seem to imply) that Mr. K. can join in Worship with men of every
Sect, or Opinion in the World. God forbid he were of that Judgment. There is
one thing here very remarkable; which is altogether omitted by the Libellers,
to Mr. K's great disadvantage; viz. He did not use the abovementioned word
Simpliciter, or in general terms; but with Qualification, adding in that same
very line with the words cited; yet, says he, I could not do it at that
juncture; for I was sure it would give great offense to many on both sides.
This is an Infallible sign, that though he be in many things not very scrupulous,
yet he is cautious and loath to offend a weak Brother. In this point he is much
of the opinion of that Famous and Learned person Erasmus in his Conviv. Relig.
Page 144, ex Officina Hackiana, 1664. Cum notis Variorum; Imo profanum dici non
debet, quicquid pium est, etc. The whole Colloquie is well worth your reading,
espicially a page or two that follow these words; which make much to the
present purpose. Mr. K. is very far from being of the opinion with the Jews of
old, who were so nice and straight laced, that they would not have any
communication or dealing with people that were not of their Religion; yea,
refused to open their mouth to tell, or to point with their hand, to show them
the way to a Village, or Fountain of Water. This their Parents taught them,
says Juv. Sat. 14.

Non monstrare via^, eadem nisi sacra colenti:
Quae sitem ad fontem solos deducere verpos.
Our Blessed Savior by his example in discoursing with that Woman of Samaria
(St. John 4.) teaches us better things. There are too too many in our days,
who love rather to imitate the Jews in matters of this kind, than Jesus Christ.
(B) The Libellers, joining here close together these two Sentences signifying
one and the same thing, makes Mr. K's words very nauseating and unpleasant to
the intellegent Reader; whereas he has the one Page 2. the other the 18th on
different occasions. But the chief thing here, which startles him, is, that he
finds most part of the People, that have seen his Printed Paper, and especially
(which is very strange) the Ministers of the Gospel, do quite mistake the
meaning of the words, thinking by the Powers of the Nation, that he understands
only the Civil Powers; whereas he means both Ecclesiastical and Civil, as the
said Paper expressly bears; for there he mentions the then sitting Convention of
Estates, which was made up of both the Powers; and he further adds, Or the
ensuing Parliament, which also consisted (at least for sometime) of both. But
indeed the Case alters, when they sit separate, as now; for he still was, and
yet is of the Judgment, that the Church has an Intrinsic power; though perhaps
he will not grant it to be so ample and wide, as some would have it. But this
being a Ticklish Point, he will not meddle with it. And further, he finds that
many do much mistake him about what he means by the External Policy or
Governmeat of the Church. In short, he thereby understands only such Matters,
Circumstances, Rites, Ceremonies (call them as you please) without which the
true Worship of God cannot be rightly performed; and yet the word of God is
either altogether silent in these External Points, or delivers them only in
general terms, leaving particulars to be condescended on by the Wisdom and
Discretion of those in Church and State, whom God in his Providence has set
over us. (C) These Exotic and strange words, Hobbism, etc. made a wonderful
Noise through both Town and Country, almost every body enquiring at his
Neighbor, what sort of Crimes they were, Sorcery, Negromancy, or what else.
Good Lord deliver us, said they; he must be a strange kind of a Man. Hobbism!
What Is that? The common people found a great difficulty to retain these words
in their Memories, yet by some little help they minded their Tales; for Mr. K.
paying one day a visit to a Lady; Lord keep us, Mr. K. said she, What wonderful
kind of Crimes are these, which the Elders now charge you with? What Crimes
mean you, Madam? answered Mr. K. though he understood well enough what they were.
They have been told me, replied she, I believe, a hundred times; but I still
forget them. The Tail^s of the words are like that Be^som we sweep the Chamber
with, pointing toward it with her hand. Is It Hobbism, Mad^m? answered Mr. K.
Yes, yes, said she. In a word, after some little Laughter, and a Cup of good
Ale, he explained them to her. (D) It fell so out indeed, as you will hear near
the close of this work; for the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council did
protect Mr. K. from a terrible Blow, which Mr. Jaque intended to have given
him. Sect. 13, Part 5. Lord reward them for it. (E) He oppones the place, Page
3. But of this you have in the Letter A. If any be desirous to see the said
Printed Paper, he may have it from Mr. K. (F) Suppose it true, as the Libellers
Affirm, that Mr. K. is an Erastian, as he is not; it would certainly follow,
that he is not a Nullifidian; it being a perfect contradiction to be of a
certain Sect, and yet of none, as the word Nullifidianism imply's. In truth Mr.
K. loves not to be called by the name of any the most cried up Sect amongst us;
Episcopal, Presbyterian, etc. ^e wishes from his heart, that all these words,
as they are commonly taken, were ^azed out of the world; and that all went
under the name of Christians. Contentions of this kind began very early in the
Church of Corinth, (1 Cor. 1.11, 12.) and are now spread far and wide to the
ruin of many Souls.

Art. 8. That in explaining some Latin words to his Scholars; such, as
Mensirua, Praeputium, and the like; he has used very obscene Expressions, and
(A) Practices; and advised some of them, to ask the meaning thereof from their
Mothers, or Landladies, which was very unbecoming the Gravity of adiscreet
Schoolmaster amongst his Scholars.

Ans. This he denies, as far as the matter will permit. Menstrua is a word
standing in a Rule of Despauters first Part, which he cannot call to mind he
ever-expon'd, far less explained in his life in that or any other Book. And
though he had transiently told its signification; what Evil is in it? Every
Dictionary does it. Why is it in a Rule of Grammar? Why continued there so long?
If a Master pass it altogether; Boys become the more curious to enquire after
it. And do we not find it very plainly set down to us in Holy Scripture? And
besides, who has not heard it again and again repeated by the Ministers
themselves, not only in their Sermons to the People, but even in their public
Prayers to God; A Menstruous Cloth, etc.

As to Praeputium, he remembers something of it. Exponing one day to two Boys
the Greek New Testament, not in the School, but in a Room off it; the word
(...) occurred, which being turned into Praeputium, one of the Boys says, Quid
hoc Praeputium, Domine; Nostin, quid sit Circumsio, replied M. K. Circumcisio;
Quid hoc est, says the Boy again. Discingas, and oste^^^n, answered M. K. with
a ^rown or angry Countenance; which put a stop to any further Enquiry into the
matter; and truly was to be taken as a Cheek; for had M. K. been serious, he
might have taken a far shorter way. What need, pray, was there to lose down
Breeches for that end?

It Is here to be considered, that there is a vast difference between telling a
thing openly in a School before all the Boys, and to one or two in a corner, or
apart by themselves. The Age also, the Nature, and Disposition of a Boy with
other Circumstances, are in this case very considerable. M. K. might have been
plainer with that Boy, and yet modest enough.

To convince all the World of M. K.'s Innocence in this Point, he humbly offers
these following Considerations.

1. Menstrua is not to be found in his Grammar, which he has taught these 22
years by gone. He thought that word not worth its room, judging it fitter that
his Grammar be so far defective, than to give an occasion to Obscenity. 2. It Is
expunged out of Despauter, as now revised by him; and at this minute is at the
Press; yet that part, where the said word was to be, Printed 10 months since,
which is a kind of Providence to demonstrate, how innocent he is in the matter
under debate to all not prepossessed with prejudice. 3. He can adduce hundreds,
that have been his Scholars to attest that he passes obscene Words and
Sentences occurring in Authors, not so much as glancing at them; much less
exponing; and least of all explaining them; though often curious Boys press
hard to know them things: Nitimur in vetitum. He can instance some, that have
cried out to their Comrades, Ipse Preceptor nescit; ideo non vult nobis
interpretari: Particularly the last two Lines, 4 Od. 1 lib. H. As also that in
Ter. 3 Act. Scen. 2. Eun. Ego illum Enuchum, si sit opus, vel sobrius. And in
Buch. Med. Vtri eminentem vetuit solvere pedem, etc.

Rem. (A) What is mean'd here by this word Practices, Mr. K. knows not. When
the Libellers condescend on particulars, they shall get a particular answer.

Ar. 9. That he has asserted some things in the hearing of his Scholars and
others favoring of a (A) profane Spirit, and tending to sow principles of
Debauchery in young ones; such as their capacity in 13 years of their Age to
beget Children.

A. Mr. K. denies it. What is above related may confute the falsehood of this.
As to the particular here mentioned, he does not mind when, where, nor before
whom he spoke such a thing. But, though he had said something of that kind,
especially in private Company; What evil is in it? No man of any knowledge, or
reading, will question it. Physicians and (B) others go a greater length,
telling us of thousands, who are married, yea forced to marry below 12 years.

(A) Among other Interrogatories put to Mr. Rob. Colvil, adduc'd as a witness
against Mr. K. this was one; viz. Whether, or no, is Mr. K. a Man of a profane
Spirit? A wonderful question put to a Mortal. He answered very gravely: Indeed
Moderator, I know not. This was done in face of a Synod, to the great
astonishment of many hundreds of people. (B) See Tho. Gage, his new Survey of
the West Indies, Edit. 3 p. 344. and 345.

Art. 10. That he seems to be ill affected to the Civil Government, by his
conniving at, and countenancing some of his Scholars in their (A) drinking King
James's Health (B) frequently in his presence at his Table, without reproof or
correction, but smiling at it.

A. Remembers not his Scholars ever drank K. James's health at his Table: and
it might be done without his knowledge, and he smile at that time; but not at
it.

Rem. (A) Most of the Members of the Committee were for rejecting this Article,
as not relevant; but Mr. Semple rose up, and said; Moderator: To be
dissaffected (he should have said, To seem to be ill affected; for the
Libellers go no higher) to the Civil Government is a thing we ought to take
notice of. (B) It was not proved that it was so much as once done.

Art. 11. That he discovered himself to his Scholars in explaining the 4th
Commandment, to be much unperswaded of the Morality of the Sabbath, mentioning
several encouraging (A) Instances, to take liberty to sport, and play thereon.

A. To his knowledge, he never delivered any thing before his Scholars, that
was Heterodox. And as to the Sabbath, he is of the Judgment of many thousands
of Learned Divines; viz. That it is moral positive, not natural: That is, Man
by the Instinct and Light of Nature (especially as now corrupted) could not
have known that the seventh part of his Time was to be allotted for God's
Worship, more than the fifth or sixth; had it not been revealed to him. Or thus
in short: That God be worshipped, is (B) moral Natural primario, primarly, in
an iminent Sense: That a certain part of our time is appointed for that end, is
also Moral Natural; but secundario, secundarily; as a necessary consequence of
the former. As to the Duration or Frequency of the Action, it is Moral positive.

Rem. (A) How earnest and pressing Mr. K. has been with his Scholars
(discoursing to them commonly half an Hour on Saturday, and as long after
Sermons on Sunday, (besides other times) that above all things they would
seriously mind their eternal Concern, telling them, that within a short time
the things of this Life were to be of no use to them; and that the only mean to
be everlastingly happy, was to live conform to the Laws of God. What pains, we
say, Mr. K. has taken to instruct his Scholars in the true Principles of
Christianity, thousands of them, with all that have been Doctors in his School
can bear witness. Yea, the Libellers themselves do here acknowledge the thing;
nor do they say, that he did it amiss: they only seem to blame him, that he
mentions before his Scholars, the Liberty some people take to sport and play on
that Day. It Is good that two of the Doctors of his School, Mr. Colvil, and Mr.
Riddle, did depone in face of Synod ( October. 95.) that he dehorted his Scholars
from such Liberty. It Is a very wild Inference the Libellers make: Mr. K. say
they, in explaining the 4th Command gives instances of some People, who take
liberty to sport and play on the Lord's Day; therefore he himself seems much
unperswaded of its Morality. The Accusation it self is no less ridiculous; He
seems, say they, to be much unperswaded, etc. Here a man is Accused for seeming
not to have right Sentiments of a thing. A most wonderful Accusation indeed! It
seems, they had nothing to say against his practice, the only object of Human
Inspection, when they attempt to pry into his Thoughts, the peculiar object of
Divine Majesty. (B) Certainly the Libellers here accuse Mr. K. of they know not
what. Moral Natural, Moral Positive, they understand no better, than we told
you the Lady did Hobbism, Erastianism, Nullafidianism.

Art. 12. That he has prostituted his Authority over his Scholars to contempt
by playing at Football, and Games with them, and neglecting to correct them
for gross Immoralities, which may be constructed to be the cause of their
little profiting by his Teaching, and other great Disorders, to the offense of
their Parents and others.

A. That he prostitutes his Authority by conversing, or playing with his
Scholars, is denied. Blessed be God, he has always had as much Love and Respect
from, and Authority over his Scholars, as perhaps any of his Employ within the
Kingdom. That he corrects them not with that Severity, that is due according to
their Fault, and as he finds inprudence may tend to their good, is a most gross
Falsehood. His Accusers may be ashamed to charge him with this, as a Fault; for
in the Year 1690, these same very Men did stage his predecessor, Mr. Geo. Adam,
before the Committee of Schools and Colleges at Edinburgh (amongst other
pretended Crimes) for too much Severity, or Cruelty, as they alleged; and now
they accuse Mr. K. for Lenity. Whether we run fast, or walk slowly, comes all
to one purpose. Mr. K. according to the knowledge and discretion God has endued
him with, makes it his endeavor to keep a Medium between the two Extremes, the
humors and inclinations of Boys, with other Circumstances being considered.
Many Parents here and elsewhere, have much commended him for conversing
familiarly, and playing with their Children: yea, have earnestly desired him so
to do, Was it not by this Mean, that that Noble and Famous Youth, my Lord
Bruce, in so short a time attained the Knowledge, not only of the Latin and
Greek Tongues, but many other things? Mr. K. did perpetually converse with him,
played with him; lay in Bed with him: hence was still teaching him. Which
Method and Carriage, did wonderfully please the Earl his Father, a most knowing
and learned Person. If you doubt of this, Mr. K. can produce the Earl's Letters
as an infallible Sign. These Accusers or Libellers, five grossly ignorant and
illeterate Men, who know not what Advantage Boys reap by the presence of their
Master, dare charge Mr. K. for that, which knowing and learned Men do much
commend. They know not that Boys are learning a Language, even, when they are
playing. As to that instance they give about the Football; when you have
considered all Circumstances, you cannot but highly approve of what Mr. K. did
in this Matter. Know therefore that the people of Mers and Tiviotdale, are too
too much addicted to that violent Sport; and the Youth follow their Example.
Mr. K. having a very flourishing School of Boys out of both these Shires, those
of the one gave a Challenge to the other, to try, who should carry the Prize at
that Game. They were pretty equal in number. If they had been fighting for a
Crown, they could have done no more. These Scholars that were from other
places, were only suffered to be Spectators. After many days, they came off
equal. Mr. K. partly to inure his Scholars to speak proper Phrases at that
Sport; partly to prevent any hurt, they might do one to another at so violent a
Game, resolved to go see fair play. He does not deny, but, when the Ball came
to his Foot, he touched it. A most heinous Crime indeed; and well deserves
Deprivation.

Art. 13. That, as he is very easy to grant the Play to his Scholars upon the
least Importunity; so he allows them a Vacance at (A) Yuile, and (B) other
Superstitious days, contrary to an express Act of the G. A. of this Church,
bearing date 13 Feb. 1645.

A. Here is not only a manifest Falsehood, but certainly a most malicious Lie He
can instance some hundreds of the best Quality in Town and Country, who after
much serious Entreaty for the Play, were repulsed, and sent away without it in
no little anger. And who in Mers or Tiviotdale, that know any thing of this
Nature, can be ignorant, that for a complete year together, not one Person,
noble or ignoble, obtained the Play. Now is it possible that all the five
Elders can be ignorant of this? As to Yuile Vacance, as they call it; Mr. K.
grants it not: but Patrons of the School, and Magistrates of the Place, by an
Inherent right, as they pretend, give liberty to the Scholars at that Season of
the Year, conform to an old Custom, to exercise themselves a day or two on the
Ice: So that they (if there be any fault in it) and not he, are blameworthy.
And to demonstrate Mr. K's Aversness that way; know, that he having been here
only 3 years, was once at Edinburgh; the other two occasions the Scholars,
according to an old Custom through that whole Country, possessing themselves of
the School in the Nightime, Baracaded Doors and Windows, and kept it out with
Pistols, Swords, Staves, Cudgels, and other Arms. Yet after much work, Mr. K.
not without some hazard of his Life, broke in at a Window, and chastised all he
got in School.

Rem. (A) Mr. K. looks not so much to words, as to what they signify: Called
Christmas, or Yuile, as you please: only give him liberty to think the former
by far the more proper. (B) When the Libellers condescend upon these other
Superstitious days, they shall get a particular Answer,

Art. 14. That he is very neglective of the Worship of God in his Family; and of
obliging his Family to attend the Ordinances of God in the Church Assemblies.

A. The former part of this Challenge he denies: and were it not the Subject it
is, he would call it a manifest Falsehood, if not a most malicious (A) Lie. He
cannot indeed, but with regret acknowledge, that in the sight of God he is in
that, as in other Duties too too neglective; but not so in Man's account, as
can be instructed by many famous Witnesses, particularly by Mr. Will. Knox,
Governor to the Lord of Cavers's Children, who all the time he was in Mr. K's
Family, with his Pupils did perform that duty by Turns with Mr. K. What is here
mean'd by (B) obliging his Family to attend the Ordinances, he does not well
understand.

Rem. (A) There be various kinds of Lies, Some people in a drolling manner, can
coin you many hundreds, only to make sport. Others out of an ostentive and
bragging humor will not stand to tell with the greatest confidence imaginable;
a thousand stories of things, they saw, or heard in foreign Nations, or some
remote places, which yet they certainly know to be mere fictions of their own
brains. No doubt, but both these sorts of Lies are very displeasing in Gods
sight, And yet there is no Malice, nor evil design in the Contriver. Ay, but
there is a third sort, which is a most horrid and wicked kind of Lying; viz.
When men industriously hatch and contrive means and methods to calumniate and
disgrace their Neighbor. This Indeed we may justly call a most Malicious and
Hellish kind of Lying; Malice, as it were, sitting at its very root, causing it
to sprout and bud, and come to perfection. There is also variety of this
malicious kind of Lying. Some Calumnies are made up of pure Lies: a Series, or
Concatenation of mere Forgeries. Such was that you heard about the Woman in
Blakader, Sect. 23. Part 2. where you have four wrapped up in one Bundle,
without any mixture of Truth. This, we confess, is a rare kind of Lying; much
like pure Jambick Verses, seldom read in any Author. The more common way
therefore is to mix your Lies here and there with some Specious Truths, which
will be like a sweet Vehicle to carry down the bitter and poisonous Pill. Now
know, that both these kinds of lying are alike Wicked and Malicious in
themselves; yet this is by far more dangerous, than the other; because it is
liker to prevail with people, and therefore in some respect may be called a
more grievous sin, than the other. To it you may reduce a very cunning and
subtle way of Calumniating, viz. When words or Phrases are so artificially
contrived, that he, who hears them, cannot but have a very bad impression of
the Person understood by them; yet they are capable of another sense. So that
if you challenge the Author, he will tell you, he mean'd so and so. (B) who would
not hence infer that Mr. K's Family does not attend the Ordinances; at least
are very neglective of that duty; and that the fault lies in him.

This is a most abominable Calumny both on him and his Family; for he himself,
his Children and Servants give due attendance; notwithstanding all the
provocation he has met with from Mr. Jaque. By his Family, perhaps the
Libellers only mean his Wife, for she goes to the Meeting House. Pray who else
in the World, but themselves, would have so understood these words? Did we not
tell you in the former Remark, that they always have some little backdoor to
creep out at. They put the Whole for a Part; a very ordinary thing amongst the
Learned. They let you see, they can speak by Tropes and Figures, though they were
never taught such things. But know, that tho the Tropical or Figurative
discourse may often be good Oratory; yet very bad Law; and far worse Divinity;
especially in a Case of this Nature. Yea, it rather augments, than lessens the
Calumny; and does highly demonstrate, how disingenious the Libellers are. It Is
as absurd, as if you should point with your finger at 7 or 8 Persons, saying,
Lo, there is a Company of most wicked and lewd Fellows; Whoremongers and
Adulterers. And when you are Challenged for that Expression, to say, You only
mean one of them is such, which you can Instruct. It Is not very proper, we
confess, for Mr. K. to proclaim his Wives praises; and therefore all he shall
say here, is, that he leaves to any person, that ever had the occasion to
converse with her; yea, even to those, that have lived some years in her
Family, Servants or others, to declare, what unchristian behavior, or
unbecoming and unjust deed they at any time saw in her. Yet, since she is here
accused, tho indirectly, of a very heinous Crime; and he upon her account, it
seems necessary he say something both for his own, and her vindication. Her
Crime is, That she attends not the Ordinances of God in the Church Assemblies:
His is, That he obliges her not to perform that duty. Now know that there was
not a Woman in Kelso more observant of good order, than she, till Mr. Jaque and
his Elders had Calumniated her Husband, especially with the business in
Blakader. After that indeed she had no heart to hear him preach; and the better
he Preached, she thought him the worse Man. It was sore against her Husband's
will, that she deserted the public place of Worship; and therefore he not only
was a good example by keeping it himself (to the admiration of many hundreds of
People) but exhorted her so to do. Two Lords-days in compliance with his
earnest desire, she went to the Church sore against her inclination. On the
third, she did go also in the Fore-noon; but after she was returned, she told
her Husband with tears, that she could not hear that man any longer; nor any
other, that approved his doings: She told, she got no good from his Preaching;
she heard him with a wonderful Reluctance of Spirit, and therefore she
earnestly begged no more to force her to go to the Church. I Will go, said she,
to the Meeting House, where I hope to reap more good. Her Husband being fully
persuaded, that she spoke sincerely, ceased to press her further. Now think you
not but Mr. Jaque ought to have spoken privately to Mrs. Kirkwood, before he
brought this business into the Synod? Who knows, but he might have reclaimed
her from her Error? Whereas by this his carriage, she is the more hardened in
it; yea, he never once spoke to her in his life, nor was in her House, tho she
be his door Neighbor. We shall concude this Point by telling you that Mr. K.
is still in the Mist, and must leave you therein also; as to what is here
mentioned by Obliging his Family to attend the public Ordinances.

1. He attends them himself; that is one kind of obliging his wife to do the
same. 2. He did exhort her seriously to that duty: that is a second kind. Pray
what more would the Libellers have him to do? Shall he carry, or drag her to
the Church, if she will not go willingly? Or shall he refuse to let her sit at
Table; or lie in bed by him? Or shall he thrust her to the door? Poor Soul!
What would she do? She has no Friend, no Kins-man; no Relation, that we know in
the whole kingdom within a thousand Generations, except those, who are come of
her self. We hope the Libellers are not so Cruel, that they think he should
beat her, if she will not comply with him in this matter. Certainly they cannot
have such a thought, as that he should contrive some way to end her days.
Perhaps they mean, that he ought to suffer her to go barefooted, or the like.
That were to disgrace himself. We hope their Ignorance leads them not to think
he should pursue for a Divorce; for that he cannot obtain; unless he could
prove her undutiful otherwise; of which he has not the least suspicion
Imaginable. Now we leave you to guess which of these, or what other thing is
here mean'd by the Libellers.

Art. 15. (A) That he has greatly endeavored to discourage the Minister in
his Ministerial work ever since his Admission to his Charge, not only by (B)
Menaces to himself, but by false Suggestions and Informations to others, and by
his deportment on all occasions. As also the unjust detaining from him the
Possession of his (C) Brewhouse, which has been ever enjoyed by all Ministers
of Kelso ever since it had a Minister.

A. This Article has many monstrous-like Beads; but almost all in general
Terms; and therefore might be answered by a general denial of the whole. Yet it
having more Venom and Spite in 't, than any of the former, must not altogether
be passed in silence.

1. Its very front represents Mr. K. as an Enemy, not only to Man, but to God
himself, which is a most Hellish Calumny. 2. This is aggravated from
Circumstances: He began, says the Libel, very early, even from Mr. Jaque's
Admission. Were this true, as it is most false, Mr. K. justly ought to be looked
on amongst the greatest Hypocrites, and Cheats in the World; for his outward
carriage toward Mr. Jaque was most Discreet, Kind and Neighbourly. He paid
him six Visits: three in Civility, and three on Business: lent him a Grate
which he has to this day (17 Sept. 95.) and desired his Servants, who carried
it away, to signify to their Master, that any thing he had, was at Mr. Jaque's
service. And further, when Mr. Jaque and two or three of his Elders and some
others came one day in to see the said controverted Brew House, about 10 or 12
paces distant from each of their Houses, Mr. K: gave most heartily to him and
those in his Company a drink of the best Liquor he had. Now these things were
before the Plea began. Yea, after it was come to a good length, he carried very
Neighbourly and Christianly toward Mr. Jaque; for, when his Bees (if they were
his) unknown to any Person, had come off, and sat that day, and the following
night on a Branch of a Tree in Mr. K's yard, he casually next morning about 5 a
Clock going into it, and seeing them sit in a Cluster, and thinking they might
belong to Mr. Jaque (there being only a hedge between the two yards) went
himself to his servant, and told such a thing was. So they came and received
their Bees; though there be just ground to think, that they were not Mr. Jaque's,
he having but one Skep, which had cast twice, and the last time only two days
before this fell out. Mr. K. expects to be pardoned for publishing such pitiful
stuff as this is, in regard he is necessitated to do it upon his own defense.
But, pray, what return got he from Mr. Jaque for such acts of kindness and
discretion? never so much as one single visit on business or otherwise. He
never saw one Cup of his drink, nor a Crumb of his Bread in all the said six
Visits. In a word, Mr. Jaque never once opened his mouth to Mr. K. (except at
the said six Visits, and with difficulty then) from his first Entry, 24 Jan.
95, to the 12 of March thereafter, when sitting in Judgment with his 5 Elders
in a Surprise he struck him through the very heart with a (E) Thunderbolt from
Heaven, or rather Hell, viz. that horrid Calumny about the Woman in Blakader.
3. He menaces Mr. Jaque, says the Libel. O dreadful Calumny! What kind of
Menacing can this be? 4. He uses false Suggestions, and Informations to others
against him. This Mr. K. flatly denies. He gives a true account of his
business, for his own Vindication and Information. 5. He unjustly detains his
Brew House, etc. Denies it belongs to Mr. Jaque, but to the E. of Roxburgh of
which you have a large account in the Remark (C.)

Rem. (A) This 15th Article, as are many of the rest, is made up of several
different Points: So that in effect, these 15 Articles may be extended to 3 or
4 times as many. (B) This Point of Menacing Mr. Jaque did startle Mr. K. more
than any other in the whole Libel. He could not Dream, when, where, nor how he
had ever Menaced him. The word you know, in it self has a very bad aspect; but
the many strange Circumstances of the Persons and matter in hand make it look
infinitely more ugly. Any body would imagine that it imply's some very ill
natured and wicked thing; which truly made Mr. K. quake and tremble, when he
first read it. And therefore you may besure, he was very glad when he heard Mr.
Jaque give his Commentary on it; viz. that Mr. K. said to him, If you alter the
ancient Constitution and Custom of this place, by debaring me from the Offices
under debate, and from the Profits thereto belonging; and consequently make
null the Contract made by the Earl and others with me, it may occasion a
Rapture amongst us, and give ground to a Law-Plea. This Mr. Jaque calls
Menacing, or Threatening; but, pray, who of ten Thosand would have put so mild a
Gloss upon these words? We told you above, that there are some people, who can
speak so, that none knows their meaning, but themselves. Suppose Mr. K. spoke
these words to Mr. Jaque, or to that purpose; they look rather like a good and
wholesome advice given to Mr. Jaque, than a threatening; for Mr. K. saw further
into the matter, than Mr. Jaque could do; because he knew the minds of the
Principle Heretors, and others concerned; and more especially, what he himself
was to do in the affair, being the Person chiefly concerned of any whosoever.
(C) This business about the Brew House being a considerable part of the
Process, must not be passed in a word or two; and therefore we shall first give
you the following Remark, and thereafter an account of the Affair by it self.
(D) Mr. Jaque, as you will hear Sect. 32, raised a Libel against Mr. K. for
this unchristian-like Expression, as he would have it to appear. Know
therefore, that all Mr. K. thereby understands, is, that he was mightily
surprised, and almost struck dead with that horrid business in Blakader: and
therefore he compared it to a Thunderbolt from Heaven, on the account of its
suddenness and force, as a thing descending from on high upon him in a
Surprise; and immediately, as it were, he corrects himself; Or rather, says he,
from Hell, in regard of the Malicious Contrivance, or Hellish design they had,
who did first hatch it.

An Account of the Business about the Brew House, or Controverted Vault.
This being one of the grand Points of the Plea, and the occasion of no little
Clamor and Talk every where; it is very proper some account be given of it in
this place; for it comes not so well in any where else. Be pleased therefore to
know these following particulars, which we shall but name.

1. The Earls of Roxburgh are Proprietors of the Abbacy of Kelso; and hence it
is, that a great many Persons of the most eminent dignity in this Kingdom hold
Lands of them; particularly the Dukes of Hamilton, Earls of Home, Duchess of
Lawderdale, etc. 2. It Is now, and has been past memory, almost quite ruinous,
there only remaining 10 or 12 old Vaults, and a Church, memorable, rather for
what it seems to have been, than for what it is. 3. The Earls have disposed a
part of these Vaults, by granting Charters thereon, and giving Liberty to these
their Vassals, to Alter, Repair, and Build them De Novo for their greater
Convenience. 4. Some of these Vaults once were all that the Ministers of Kelso
had for their Manse, or Dwelling house; particularly Mr. Ja. Xnox, who died
1633; for people of old were not so nice in their Houses, Clothing, and Dier.
as in our days. The Vault now under debate, was his Hall, and Kitchen, and
another of it his Bedchamber and Closet, though both much below ground. His Son
Mr. Robert succeeding, got built him for his better accommodation, two little
To-falls, as they call them, or Galleries, the one to walk and study in; the
other was his Bedchamber. He died 1658. Doctor Weddal succeeding, things were
repaired much to the better. After him came Doctor Lorimer, in whose time also
a good Addition was made; and yet it was still imperfect. Next was settled Mr,
Ja. Gray; who being a single Person tabl'd himself in the Town, so that it
standing empty all his time, and 3 or 4 years thereafter during the vacancy,
became little better than ruinous. And therefore in the Year 1694 it was taken
down almost to the foundation, and a very fine Manse Rebuilt, though then none
knew, who was the man that should inhabit it. 5. Mr. Jaque possesses 5 Vaults
besides this new Building, all which could not be done in Kelso for the double
of what the Law requires. 6. The Schoolmasters of Kelso, till Mr. K. came,
lived in a very pitiful hole, rather than a house; and therefore for his
greater Encouragement, they have Built a very good House. When this was a
contriving, a Proposal was made by one concerned, that to Repair the Vault
under debate (which was then altogether ruinous) would save at least 5 or 600
Marks; and this Mr. K. was to do on his own expenses or give 200 Marks to the
Wright and Mason: to which he willingly condescended, they obliging themselves
to build a Closet on the top of his Turnpick. Yet this business with what he
has done otherwise in his House, has cost him above 300 Marks. He will not name
here what his Plea about the Vault has stood him: this he leaves to you to
guess what it may amount to. From these Premises any person, you would think,
of common sense will infer, that suppose the Earl had caused to build a Manse
every way sufficient in it self, and in a place abundantly convenient, Mr.
Jaque had no reason to complain, nor to claim right to these old Vaults on the
Account, that once they were possessed by his Predecessors, as you see expressly
contained in the Libel; but on the contrary ought rather to thank the Earl for
a better House to live in. And further, you see that this complaint in a matter
Civil made by the Elders, who are not the Persons Concerned, is given into a
Church Judicature; as if forsooth they could be Judges of men's Rights and
Properties; and which is yet more Remarkable, where Mr. Jaque who ought to be
complainer, and stand at Bar with Mr. K. sits his Judge. A fit Judge indeed!
Both Judge and Party. But if you had seen, what odd work the Earls
Commissioners and Mr. K. had one day before a Committee to get him removed from
being Judge in this and other points; and had heard what he said, when he came
off the Bench; you would think another thing. The next step Mr. K. made, after
Mr. Jaque was removed, was to distinguish the matters of his Process into
Ecclesiastical and Civil, as you will hear within a little in the Reasons of
Appeal from this Committee, Sect. 27. Hence it was, that Mr. Jaque caused to
Summons Mr. K. before the Sheriff of Tiviotdale at Jedburgh, where the business
about the Vault was debated Pro and Con pretty warmly by Proctours on both
sides. At last Mr. K. finding the Earls Right like to be encroached upon, used
means to carry the Cause before the Lords of Session, who alone are the Proper
Judges in matters of this kind. And therefore by a Bill given into their
Lordships, he first obtained a Sist; and thereafter an Advocation, which
business stood him two or three Expresses into Edenb. besides other Expenses
there. After some little debate at Edenb. Mr. Jaque gets it again remitted back
to the Sheriff; and also obtains a Sentence for 15 Pounds Scots of Remit-Money.

Now begins hot work. It would be very tedious to give you a particular account
of matters. We shall only touch one thing, which gave occasion of much Talk and
Clamor through the whole Country; and, they say, made good sport before the
Court at Jedburgh. Know therefore that Mr. Jaque failed not to cite abundance
of Witnesses; but many of them were not competent. The point admitted to be
proved, was, that the said Vault was in use, to be possessed by the Ministers
at Kelso. The first day appeared only three; of which one was rejected, because
a Party, being one of the Libellers: annother was cast as a Person once
convicted of Theft: the third depon'd in Mr. Jaque's favor; but being a single
Witness did not the Jobb. Another day he Summoned a vast number; a good part
went from Kelso to Jedburgh (6 or 7 Miles) in a mighty great Storm; poor people
wading some on foot, some on Horses through great wreaths of Snow. But the
sport was, that Mr. Jaque and his Lawyers either through Negligence or
Ignorance, had omitted to perform a necessary point of Law; so that all these
Witnesses returned home, as they went away, without deponing. Great difficulty
had the old poor people to wrestle home, two upon a Horse, except where they
had the Cadaver to drag out from amongst the Snow, some of them cursing Mr.
Jaq. and wishing he were buried in the said Vault. On the third day, Mr. Jaq.
gain^d his point by getting it proved, that the said Vault was in use to be
possessed by the Ministers of Kelso. Know also, that an Interloquitor passed in
Mr. K's favors, giving him power to adduce a conjunct Probation; whereby he
made good these following points. 1. That the present Manse is far better than
any that ever was in Kelso; and much beyond what the Law requires. 2. That the
Earls of Roxb. have actually disposed of these Vaults, even of some that have
been possessed by the Ministers of Kelso, by giving Charters thereupon, and
otherwise. 3. That the Vault under debate, was altogether ruinous and
unhabitable, and had been so for many years; and that it was repaired at Mr.
K's expenses, and that he possessed it by the Earl's Order. 4. That other
Schoolmasters before him, made use of it by brewing therein. And thus after
the business had been debated many days, there was a kind of a Cessation of
Arms for several Weeks, the Sheriff delaying for reasons known to himself to
give out Sentence, both Parties, you may be sure, gaping for it. At last, there
fell out a very singular Passage, the most strange by far of any in this Plea,
except the Descent that one of the Ministers made to Hell, above hinted at, but
to be given a more full account of within a little. The odd passage here
mentioned, is a short Dialogue between Mr. Jaque and Mr. K. in the Church in
time of Divine Service on the Lord^s Day; of which Sect. 2. Part. 5. For this
and some other things, as you will hear Mr. K. was cited at Mr. Jaque's
instance with the Concourse of His Majesty's Advocate before the Lords of
Privy Council; and also his Proctor with about 40 or 50 other Persons, as
witnesses to their great trouble and expense at Edenb. and loss at home, it
being in March, the busiest time of laboring; and some of them being very poor
People, their Wives and Children were near to starving at home, 12 or 14 days.

While Mr. K. is attending at Edenb. a Decree passes against him before the
Sheriff in Tiviotdale, ordaining him to remove from the Vault. There passed
also an Alternative Sentence, obliging him to satisfy Mr. Jaque's damage in
lying out of the Vault, unless he could prove he possessed it bona fide, viz.
by the Earl's Order; which was to be instructed by producing a Paper under one
of the Curator's hands, expressly bearing, that he did possess it by his
Lordship's Order: which accordingly was done under the hand of Sir W. Ker of
Greenhead. Mr. Jaq. was not slow, as soon as he got his Decree extracted, to
give Mr. K. a Charge, instantly to remove. He gave him also a Charge of Horning
for payment of the abovementioned Sum of 15 l. Scots, of Remit-Money. The Earl
and Countest, being then in Tiviotdale, Mr. K. acquaints their Honors with the
whole business. Immediately they take the Plea into their own hands, and
suspend both the Decree of removing, and the Sentence about the Remit-mony.
And thus matters stood, 25th of May, 1697; on which day, Intimation was made to
Mr. Jaque of the said Affair. Now to conclude, know, that, notwithstanding the
Minister's Manse in Kelso, be every way sufficient, and more than double (as to
Expense) what the Law of this Nation requires; yet it is offered by the Earl and
others, that, what may be found wanting therein after a Visitation, shall be
repaired. Hence you clearly see, how unjust they are, that would blame the Earl
in this Affair, who designs nothing, but to defend his own Right and Property:
and yet, you see, is ready to do Justice in the matter to those, who pretend
they are injured.

A Special Remark on this Point of the Libel.
People that do not understand the true State of things, are made believe that
this business about the Vault was the occasion of the whole Plea. This were to
make the Effect exceed the Cause; a thing as absurd, as if you should say, That
the Son was born many years before the Father had a Being: This Plea began 18
or 20 months, before there was any thing about the Vault. We now go on: To tell
you, that after the Libel and Defenses were read, as above-related, Mr. K.
received a List of one and thirty Witnesses, of which only two were designed;
and the Libellers were appointed to answer the Defenses on the 24th, then
instant; and he to object against the Witnesses the said Day. Lastly, know that
this day Geo. Pringle, Bailyff in Kelso, gave into the Committee a Commission,
subscribed by the Earl, granting him power to appear before the said Committee,
or any other Church Judicatures, as above specified in the former Commission to
Mr. Ker and Mr. Potts; which Commission of the Baily ordered him to require,
that the Libellers should give their Oaths of Calumny. This the Committee
positively refused to suffer them to do, as Instruments at more length bear, of
the date, 17 September, 1695.

8.
September. 24, 1695. This is the Grand Day of Action, mentioned once and again
in the preceding Part of this Work; and is frequently to recur in the
following. A day, that justly deserves to be kept in perpetual Remembrance on
the account of the many strange things done, and acted therein by the most
wonderful and monstrous kind of Judicature, that ever was on the face of the
Earth since the Creation of the World.

Mr. K. was never so straightned and perplexed with any thing in his Life, as
he is, how to give an Account of this days work. It Is a thing, which must be
done, otherwise he cannot but suffer extremely: And yet he trembles to venture
on it; such a vast number of things scare him from attempting it; so that after
he had taken Pen once and again, he threw it by him, being fully resolved to
touch it no more. 1. Such a vast number of strange and various Things occur;
and these with little or no dependency one upon another, that he knows not
where to begin, nor how to go on. 2. Many things, which properly belong to this
place, are spoke to elsewhere, and that in such Papers, as cannot be well
altered, particularly in the Reasons of Appeals; but especially in that famous
Paper given in to the Synod at Jedburgh, of which Sect. 13, Part. 4. So that
it is impossible to evite Tautologies. There Is a necessity to speak of them
here; and it is hard to get by them there. 3. It Is not possible he can give you
an exact account of Matters; because his Judges do flatly refuse him the
Extracts of Papers, which in Law and Reason he ought to have; particularly the
Depositions of Witnesses, which with some others would give great light to the
following Account. 4. He cannot here shun some unsavory Words and Expressions,
unless he should omit lawful Means for his own Vindication. 5. He will be
necessitated, not only to speak of, but to name some Persons sore against his
Will, both on their own and their Relations accunt. But he hopes all good Men
will pardon him to use lawful means to vindicate his good Name, from the
Calumnies of wicked Men. Now that this so necessary a part of the Process
(being the very Foundation, whereon all that follows is built) may be the
better understood, we shall use all means possible we can to set things so
lively before your Eyes, that, unless you wilfully hood-wink your self, it
shall not be in your power to pass them undiscerned. We shall therefore first,
give you a short Touch of the Judges; both as to their Number and Qualities: In
the next place, we shall speak of the Matter, or Subject of their
Consideration; and the way or manner of their Procedure.

About the Number of the Judges.
Of all the abovementioned Assistants, none were present, except Mr. Couden,
Minister at Duns.

Of the Members of the Presbytery, being only seven, four were Witnesses, viz.
Mr. Jaque, Mr. Gaudy, Mr. Tomson, and Mr. Simson; and consequently ought not to
sit Judges. Mr. Boid, their Moderator, went home, after Mr. K. had appealed
from them to the Synod; and so was neither present that Afternoon, nor the day
following, for they sat two days. Mr. Dalgliesh was at Edenb. as he himself
said to Mr. K. in Jedburgh Churchyard (22 Apr* 96,) being called from the
Synod on purpose to tell 3 or 4 Gentlemen standing there with Mr. K. whether he
was present or not. Hence you see, there only remains Mr. Glen in Stitchel, to
join with Mr. Couden, to make up this Judicature; the one to sit Moderator, the
other Clerk. Was there ever, think you, such another Court on Earth? Here is a
King, and his Secretary; but not a Subject to be governed. And though there were
a third Member, it is yet a very lame Judicature; for a Vote cannot go about, but
only even out and in. Now seems it not palpably evident, thot there was a
design in not constituting a Quorum; at least in refusing to tell Mr. K. what
number made one, when he craved to know it by way of Instrument. We know very
well that some will tell you, that things here are exceedingly misrepresented;
for they wanted not Members besides these, both to be Moderator and Clerk. We
confess indeed, they had, and placed them too: Mr. Gaudy was their Moderator,
and Mr. Thomson, Clerk: Yea, and Mr. Jaque also sat Judge, forsooth; and Mr.
Simson also, though all four Witnesses in Mr. K's List. Now know, that this
Remedy is far worse than the Disease. Pray, had they none to officiate, as
Moderator and Clerk, but some of the Witnesses? Fie, fie, the like was never
practiced in any Age before this. Saw you ever any Man sit Clerk, and both call
and answer to his own name with one breath? Here Is one that can do more:
officiate as Clerk, Witness, and Judge; yea, and be a Party to boot, and all at
one minute. Give me one single Parallel in the whole World, and you shall carry
the Prize. Mr. K. has inquired at some very knowing and learned Clerks, whether
or not they ever heard or knew the like? Never, never, said they, was such a
thing on earth.

About the Qualities of the Judges.
This is infinitely more difficult, and far more dangerous a Task, than the
former. It Is an easy thing to number the Persons of Men; but to tell; whether
they be good or bad, it is not so. As to Mr. Couden, Far be it from Mr. K. to
say or think, that he is an ill Man: Yet he must be pardoned, if he positively
aver that in this present business he has done many very unwarrantable and
unjust Acts. But these he attributes not to any ill nature in Mr. Couden, but
to his Simplicity, and (if he dare say it) ignorance in matters of common Law
and true Justice, and to a little Bias, which he has insensibly contracted
from the very business under debate; And lastly, and we may say chiefly, to the
bad Impression he has had of Mr. K. who was altogether a stranger to him. We
say, and do humbly conceive, that there is just ground to think, that the
illegal and unjust Acts, done by Mr. Couden, have mainly flowed from the bad
Character some Persons have given him of Mr. K. And who, pray, mere ready than
his Brother, Mr. Jaque? For 'twas in this very Month, that he wrote that
forementioned malicious Letter to a Gentleman in Edenb. a stranger, one he had
not seen since the fiftieth Year of God, and then but a Boy at his School in
Forress, about 8 Miles beyond Elgin of Murray. Now, since Mr. Jaque gave to a
stranger at such a distance, and that by a Letter, written and subscribed with
his own hand, so black a Character of Mr. K. saying, that he was a Person
destitute of Grace, destitute of Mother-wit; a Man of corrupt Principles,
corrupt Morals, etc. Since way say, he wrote so of him to one at a distance,
what would he not say to his Brother-Minister, sitting by him in his own House;
especially, when this Brother was going about to prepare ground for a Sentence
against so vile and abominable a Wretch, as Mr. J. represents Mr. K. to be:
For, as you will hear, he calls him in another paper, The Devil's Agent, Factor
for Hell. Mr. Couden's Bias. Know, that he was the Chief, or rather the only
Person that brought Mr. Jaque to Kelso, having strongly recommended him to the
Synod, October. 94, saying, that he was a great Preacher, etc. And concluded with
this; that he knew Mr. Jaque would accept of a Call: by which recommendation
Mr. Jaque's name was put into the List with Mr. Guttries and others, as is
above-related, Sect. 2. Part 2. But Mr. Guttry carried it by Vote of Synod. Mr.
Jaque and Mr. Couden's acquaintance was made in Ireland; For very few, if any,
in Mers or Tiviotdale had acquaintance with him, he having been out of tho
Kingdom from the Year 52, till after the late Revolution. Hence you clearly see
Mr. Couden's Bias, viz. His own Credit lies at stake: he having spoken so much
in face of Synod to Mr. Jaque's praise, cannot, but do all that lies in his
power for him, both to save his own Reputation: and on the account of his old
and intimate Acquaintance: and if he be thus obliged to do for Mr. Jaque, it
follows of necessity, that he must oppose Mr. K. Mr. Jaque's Adversary. To
conclude this point; if you shall add all these three into one: 1. The black
and dreadful Charactes, which Mr. J. puts on Mr. K. 2. That Mr. K. was
altogether a stranger to Mr. Couden. 3. The Bias abovementioned. If you unite,
we say all three into one; it can hardly be supposed, but they had such
influence upon Mr. Couden, as made him do things, which otherwise he would not
have done. But whether these things had influence upon him or not, we are not
here to debate, it not being the point in hand; our business is to show you,
that Mr. Couden did very many most unjust and illegal Acts. Yea, some things he
did of so dreadful and terrible an Aspect, that you cannot hear of them without
horror and amazement; of which business in its place. As to the Qualities of
the Members of the Presbytery, we need say little here; it being sufficiently
demonstrated in the abovementioned Paper given into the Synod at Jedburgh, 21
Apr. 96, that they can neither be Judges nor Witnesses, in this Process, in
regard they are Parties; Persons very much concerned, being exceedingly
biased, both as to Credit and Interest, as the said Paper at more length
bears, Sect. 13. Part. 4. And therefore it was, that the said Synod, and three
since, laid them wholly aside, as Parties. Yet we cannot here well pass without
giving you a touch of two or three of them, who seem more active and diligent
in the Affair than the rest.

Of Mr. Glen. This Brother has openly showed himself once and again in face of
a Judicature, an Adversary to Mr. K. acting as Proctour for the other Party;
and that when he was no member. And if he, and Mr Thomson, Judge, Clerk, and
Witness all at once, have in Mr. K's presence showed so much opposition, we
leave to their own Consciences, whether or not, they mispresented him in secret
to the Members of the Commission of the G. A. at Edenb. That he was
misrepresented, is certain; by whom God knows. These two, especially Mr. Glen,
waited punctually on at that time; and he thinks, he has just ground to be
jealous of them. The manner how he was misrepresented is given account of of
in that frequently mentioned Paper given into the Synod at Jedburgh near the
End. Yea, Mr. Glen's prejudice and malice against Mr. K. has run to such a
hight, that being in Company with some very worthy Gentlemen; and speaking of
Mr. K. he said, He deserved to be hanged. One of the Gentlemen replied, Mr.
Glen: You are too free of your Hanging. And yet this man; this man alone, shall
represent a whole Presbytery, by sitting Judge (we may say) on the Life and
Death, Fortune and Reputation; Falling and Standing of Mr. K. and his Posterity
for ever.

Mr. Jaque. It may justly amaze all the World, to think, that that man, who has
spewed out by Word and Writ so much spite and venom against Mr. K. should yet
be adduc'd as a Witness against him. And that, which makes it a Wonder of
wonders, is, that at the same very minute he is sitting his Judge also: Yea, a
Party, a Member of the Session; the Chief Member, a Former, Dictator, and
Contriver of the Libels, which was referred to his Oath, as Instruments then
taken at more length bear. We leave to any indifferent Person to judge, what
Equity and Justice could be expected from a Judicature made up of such
corrupted, and biased Judges; there not being so much as one single Person,
against whom he had not just Exceptions. So much for the Number and Qualities
of the Judges: follows the Subject of their Consideration, and the Manner of
their Procedure.

The Subject of their Consideration.
We shall endeavor here to be as brief as possible we can, referring you in
most things to other Papers, particularly to the Reasons of Appeal subjoined to
this days Action, Sect. 27. The things here spoken of are chiefly such, as have
come to Mr. K's knowledge, since he gave in these Reasons; or, of which there
is no account given elsewhere. Know then, that immediately after he was called
in before the Committee, there was read a very pretty Trialogue, which with the
frequent Remora's or Stops by Laughter, took up a large time. The Trialogue was
the above-written Libel and Defenses, or Answers, and Remarks on the said
Defenses; not these, which Mr. K. has now subjoined for clearing of things; but
Remarks, composed, as they say, by Mr. Jaque, and given in this day to the
Committee by the Libellers, as they style themselves. All things indeed were
done in very good Order. First, Mr. K. read his Preface, or Preliminary
Discourse above set down: Next Mr. Thomson, Witness, Clerk, and judge
above-named, the first Article of the Libel: Then Mr. K's Defense: After him,
Mich. Fisher, Session-Clerk, the Remarks on the said Defense. Lastly, followed
very prettily that, which Musicians call, The Burden of the Song, a thing not
unlike to Lil-li Burlero, Bullen-a-la. Lero, lero, lero; lero; Lil-li Bur-lero,
Bullen-a-la. Or, if you please, call it, A Tighee; or, a very hearty Gaff of
Laughter; especially, when the said Michael came to read and explain some
Latin, or Latin-like words, such as Nullifidianism; then indeed these, who sung
the Burden, prevented their time, and interrupted him in his Office: and there
being a vast number of them, did quite sink and overpower his Voice, In a
word; 'twas a perfect Comedy, or rather a Stage Play. Some were pleased to say,
that they never saw better Sport in their life. And in truth it would seem,
these Remarks thought shame of that days appearance; For they never ventured to
set out their Heads to the view of the World thereafter; though Mr. K. has
frequently by way of Instrument required a sight of them. He can instance some
of the Judges, and these the most intelligent amongst them, who called them
Silly ridiculous Things. You may be sure, if they had come to Mr. K's hands,
you should have got a sight of them with Minellius's Notes at their Tail. And
it is great injustice done him, that this and many other such Papers are denied
him. After the reading of this Trialogue, Mr. K. was ordered by the Committee
to give an answer in Writing to the said Remarks against eight a Clock next
Morning (it being then between three and four in the Afternoon) and also to
have his Objections against the Witnesses in readiness peremptorily at the said
hour. He complained of the shortness of the time, telling them, that these
Remarks were so exceeding long, that he could not in that space get them Copied
over; Far less Answers given thereto, especially, considering that he was
over-wak'd some nights before. And as to that other Task, viz. to have his
Objections ready against the Witnesses, he said it was impossible to do it; for
he knew not who they were, the List which they had given him consisting of bare
Names, without any Designation: So that he knew neither who, nor what they
were, nor where they lived, and therefore he could make no Objection against
them. In short; the Committee positively refusing to give any satisfaction to
these most reasonable and just desires, he with those commissionated by the
Earl, considering the Constitution, Nature and Circumstances of that
Judicature, thought they had too just ground to appeal from them to the next
ensuing Synod. And therefore did appeal from them in the ordinary terms, taking
Instruments thereupon, and within 10 days, conform to the act of the G. A. gave
in their Reasons, which you shall see in their place.

The manner of their Proceedure.
9.
YOu are not here to expect a full and exact account of this Business; For,
though we had a mind to give it you, it is not in our power to do it, because they
refuse to give an Extract of the Depositions, though (...) Act of Parliament
obliges them to it: and you must know, that neither Mr. K. nor any in his name
were present to hear the Witnesses depone, in regard he had appealed from that
Judicature, and so could not attend, lest it might be prejudicial to his
Appeal. Nor were Neuters, or indifferent Persons suffered to stay within the
Church to hear or see what was done amongst them (though Law requires that at
such times there be Patent-doors;) and yet many Witnesses were permitted to
hear their Fellows depone. In a word; all things were turned Topsie-Turvy; the
very Nature and Order of matters quite inverted; these thrust out, that should
stay in; and these kept in, that ought to be turned out. Though we cannot give you
a perfect account of things, yet we hope we shall be able to let you see a
sufficient Sample, whereby you may have more than a Conjecture of these things
you see not; for you may be sure all are of one Stamp.

1. Then know, that after Mr. Boid, their Moderator, a very knowing Man, and of
great Experience in matters of Discipline, had left them, all things went into
Confusion. They kept no Order, no Method, had no regard to the Articles and
Words of the Libel, but run on super Inquirendis; in general terms, any thing
that Witnesses had to say, or were pleased to tell concerning Mr. K. Which
method is reckoned one of the Grievances of the former Reign, and represented
to His Majesty as such, and given in by the Convention of States, 13 Apr. 89,
with the Claim of Right. 2. The Witnesses depon'd on Hearsay: Yea, double
Hearsay; as Paul said that John said, he heard Peter say: and this without
confronting one with another; which thing the Synod found to be a fault, as
shall be showed in its place in a Business about Bessy Thomson, Sect. 29, where
you will see a very remarkable Passage, and a warm debate between Mr. Semple
and Mr. K. By the way we must tell you, if Sir Jo. Pringle of Stitchel, had
been present at this Meeting, as he was at the other two, when the said Bessy
was called in, certainly things had not been carried on after that manner they
were done. And if he had been advertised, he would have come, as he himself
declared. And when he heard that Witnesses were examined with close doors (to
say nothing of many other much grosser Acts of Injustice) That one, said he, is
enough to anul all they have done. It seems, the Brethren had no will that so
knowing and just a Person, as Sir John is, should sit amongst them, otherwise
they would have given him advertisement. And, since they did it not to him, who
lives so near, even almost at Mr. Glen's door, how much less, suppose you,
would they do it to those who live at a distance? 3. The Judge himself prompted
and pushed on the posterior Deponent to confess what might confirm the
deposition of the Prior; and that by plainly telling him what the Prior Witness
had depon'd, on purpose certainly to make him depone the same. Lo the Equity
and Indifferency of a Judge! Yea, much rather the hight of Iniquity, and
downright Partiality. 4. Things depon'd, which made for Mr. K. were not
recorded, being either altogether omitted, or not subscribed by the Deponent.
5. Witnesses that had already depon'd, sat at the Table with the Judges, and
not only marred, but debated and disputed with other Witnesses, while deponing,
bidding them do this and the other thing: particularly, Mr. Jo. Tailor,
Brother-in-Law to Mr. Glen, did exceedingly mar Mr. Will. Knox, again and
again, offering to dispute the Matter with him; till at last, Mr. Knox told
him, he ought not to sit in that Place, far less speak at the rate he did. 6.
They not only took illegal methods to prove their false and calumnious
Assertions; but made use of crooked, backward, sinistrous, and ridiculous Means
for that Effect, preferring Topics to Demonstrations; weak and fallible
Arguments to certain and undeniable Truths; quite razing and destroying the
fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, placing in their room new Fancies of their
own Brain, as if thereby they could out-wit the very Wisdom of the Nation.
Lastly, and which well might serve for all the rest, being one of the most
prodigious things, that ever was heard to proceed from the mouth of a
Christian, much less from a Judge, and least of all from a Minister of the
Gospel, and that siting in Judgment.

The thing is this: No kind of Pique; no sort of Prejudice would have cast you
from being a Witness. Though you had said to the Judge, you wished the greatest
of Evil (as to his Life) might befall Mr. K. you would have been suffered to
depone. Suppose you had said, you could see him hanged, sunk in the deep,
ruined, disgraced, etc. yet you would have been sustained as a Witness. This is
not all we would say on this Head. The grand Point does yet remain* worse; yea,
infinitely worse than any thing you have yet heard: but we must beg your
patience a little, and you shall have it in its proper place, Sect. 24.

10.
THis, we confess, is a terrible Charge laid to the door of this Judicature;
and Mr. K. justly deserves to have it retorted on himself by way of
Retaliation, if he could not instruct the same. We come therefore to make good
these our Assertions; For we will not bid you take them on our bare word. The
Truth of which Assertions you shall find either expressly contained in, or
infallible deducibly from these few following Depositions.

Mr. Adam Scot, a Preacher, Probationer, or Expectant, as some call them,
depon'd thus: I being, said he, one day in the Chamber of Mr. Will Knox,
Governor to Cavers Ker younger, Mr. Riddle School-Doctor came into it, and said
he had been just now with Mr. K. debating about the number of the Senses; and
that Mr; K. said he would maintain (contra omnes Mortales) against all the
World, that there are six Senses; and that the sixth is, Actus Copulationis.

Mr. Will. Knox depones next. Amongst other things Mr. Couden, who was
Interrogator, puts this Question to him: Do you remember, that Mr. Adam Scot,
being in your Chamber, Walter Riddle came in, and said he had been with Mr. K.
etc. I remember no such thing, answered Mr. Knox. Strange! replied Mr. Coud.
Mr. Scot there (pointing to him with his hand) has just now depon'd it. He may
depone what he pleases, answered Mr. Knox, I Am not obliged to follow his
footsteps.

1. By the way, fail not to take notice, that the abovementioned Grievance,
viz. To depone super Inquirendis still remains in this Reign, as in the former.
2. You see they depone on Hearsay; and that without being confronted. 3. The
Judge pusheth on the Witness to depone contrary to Truth, at least against his
Conscience, which is worse. Pray, what moved Mr. Couden to tell Mr. Knox, that
Mr. Scot had depon'd so and so? Certainly, that he might have two concurring
Witnesses. Yet in Law 100 upon Hearsay is no Probation. We have not yet ended
this business: the best part by far remains untouched, which we must be
pardoned to fetch back from the following Synod. (15 October. 95.) that things of
so near a Kin may be ranked together.

A further Enquiry into Mr. Scot's Deposition.
11.
KNow that Mr. Scots and Mr. Knox's Depositions clashing the one against the
other, like two Contradictions, made a wonderful Noise through the whole
Country, every body speaking, as they favored; some saying that Mr. Scot,
others that Mr. Knox was perjured. And therefore to cast the balance, Mr.
Riddle was then in the Country, and knew nothing of this passage, was Summoned
to appear before the Synod, 15 Oct. then next: in face of which Judicature, and
in presence of some hundreds of People besides, he did most solemnly swear upon
his eternal Salvation, That Mr. K. and he never in their life debated; yea, nor
spoke about the number of the Senses, nor ever had any discourse relating
thereto any manner of way. Would you not have thought that this business was
now brought to a close, after so great a work, and so many solemn Oaths? But
you shall yet see more work, and more Oaths too; at least, one and a half, or
something, that comes very near an Oath. In a word; the best sport by far is
yet to come in the following Section.

12.
KNow therefore, That the Libellers did not rest satisfied (for Charity have
they none, though the chief of Christian Ve^tues; nor is an Oath with them the
end of Controversy) but immediately Ja. Thomson, who is Dominus Fac totum
amongst them, cried out most terribly, saying; Moderator, Moderat. I desire to
be heard. After a deep silence made by the Moderator and some others (for Mr.
Riddle's Deposition had raised a great deal of dust amongst 'em) the said J.
Thomson. proceeded thus: Moderator, Mr. Knox, since he depon'd, has wrote a
Letter to Mr. Riddle; which Letter, if it were produced, would be found to
clash with both their Oaths, and so not only prove them perjured, but also load
Mr. K.

This, they say, was suggested to J. Thomson, by Mr. John Craig, his
Brother-in-law, who was standing at his Elbow. It did exceedingly amaze the
whole Synod, and all that heard the same; and made them look one to another,
wondering what might be the event of this matter. That, which amused most part,
was Mr. Riddle's Shyness to produce the Letter, which created great hopes in
Mr. K's Enemies, and fear in his Friends; and the more shie and unwilling he
was, so much the more forward and pressing were the Libellers, and all that
favored them. Mr. K. suspecting the true Cause of Mr. Riddle's unwillingness
to produce the Letter, said to the Moderator, that it was very like, there
might be in that Letter a particular Business altogether extrinsick to the
matter in hand, which Mr. Riddle, perhaps had no will should be read in so
public a manner. There is indeed in the last two Lines, replied Mr. Riddle, a
Particular, no wise relating to this present Business, which I have no will
should be read so publicly. At which, J. Thomson again cry's out, Moderator, I
hope it is not Treason, and so may be read. There be many things besides
Treason, replied Baily Pringle, Commissioner for the Earl, that are not fit to
be proclaimed through the Country. Would you be content, that every body knew
your Count-Book? In short, after no little debate, the Synod ordered Mr. Riddle
to go home to his Chamber, and fetch the Letter. It being produced, they made
him swear de novo, That these two Lines at the close of the Letter contained
nothing relating to the Business in hand. And also Mr. Orock, who got the
Letter to read, promised on the Word of a Minister, that he should not read,
nor discover the said two Lines; (this is the half Oath abovementioned) but yet
a Brother, they say, standing at Mr. Orock's back, found out the Secret; a vrry
harmless Business contained in two single Letters, whereby was signify;d the
name of a certain Person, to whom Mr. Riddle was to give Mr. Knox's Service. As
to the Question under Debate, this Letter was so far from clashing either with
Mr. Knox, or Mr. Riddle's Deposition, that it strengthn'd and confirmed all
they had said; so that some Member of the Synod was pleased to say, We are all
ashamed. Whether the Synod had power to compel Mr. Riddle to produce the
Letter, let Statesmen and Lawyers determine. This we dare aver, that some very
knowing Persons say, that they transgressed their lines, and did what they
ought not to have done; especially considering, that the Controversy was
already determined by Oaths. And thus ended that Business, whereon the
Libellers plighted their main Anchor. Hence we may justly conclude this point
with that old saying of the Poet.

Parturiunt montes; nascetur ridiculus Mus.
The Mountains labor to bring forth
Some huge prodigious Monster:
And lo, a silly Mouse creeps out,
Which did create great Laughter.
13.
What could give rise to this so strange a Passage, Mr. K. cannot imagine. He
is ready to depone upon his great Salvation, that he is so far from having
spoken, or debated with Mr. Riddle, or any other person in the World about that
Subject, that never in his life any such thought entered his mind. He was
altogether an Ignoramus in that matter, having never either heard or read of
it. Now indeed, since this business fell out, some very learned Doctors of
Physic have showed him Books expressly maintaining that there are six Senses;
and that that under debate is the sixth; particularly, D. Jo. Archer, one of
His Majesty's Physicians in Ordinaay, p. 79.84, and 85. Edit. 2. printed at
London, An. 1673. And Bontieoe in his Aecon. Animal. says there are 8 Senses,
of which this is one, p. 47. What moved Mr. Scot to carry so strangely in this
whole Affair, it is hard to conjecture: Yet certainly, there is some Mystery
in it, which we cannot reach; the Circumstances are so very odd. About 7 or 8
days before he depon'd (having then got his Summons) he declared to a worthy
Gentleman and his Lady, with the greatest Ass verations one can use, except
before a Judge, that he had not nothing to say, which could any manner of way
make against Mr. K. He repeated the same words again the very same day he
depon'd, as he was dining with three Gentlemen. He has thereby hugely wronged
himself many ways; and smarted for it since. He has exceedingly disobliged his
Relations Persons of Honor and Respect: his own Father, whom Mr. K. had never
seen before, was pleased to make Apology for his Son's Fault. And that, which
chiefly adds to their Trouble, is, that he was not obliged, neither in Law, nor
Conscience to depone, doing it upon mere Hearsay; and that super Inquirendis;
it not being specified in the Libel, as the Law requires. He wanted not
Friends, Men of great Knowledge, to advise him; but he slighted them, and went,
(as Mr. K. is certainly informed) and consulted the Business with the Members
of the Presbytery; particularly with Mr. Noble in Ecford.

Mr. K. humbly begs pardon for being so large on this point, which with that in
Blakader, has been contrived by wicked and malicious Men, on design utterly to
ruin and disgrace him for ever. But, blessed be God, who has so ordered
things, that what you see mainly designed for his hurt, tends most to his
advantage; and to the eternal Infamy of his Enemies.

An Account of the Business about the Keegrels.
14.
MR. K. is very loath still to be harping upon one string, and always raking
dung out of a filthy Puddle. But since malice and envy have trampled and
pressed him down over head and ears in a most ugly mire; Must he not be
pardoned, if he can wrestle out again, and wash himself, that he may appear
somewhat honest-like amongst his Neighbors? But here is the Misery; After he
has got out of one Puddle, they fling him into another; and after that into a
third, and fourth. Ah; it is to be feared, if God send him not help, they will
never desist, till they end his days in some hole or other. Lo, here a most
uggly and durty one, as is represented, though not so in it self. He humbly begs
your patience to stand by, till you see him wash himself. We shall leave this
Allegory, and come to the true matter of Fact. Know then, that it was depon'd,
that this obscene word as they call it) was used in Mr. K's School. What
Witness depon'd it: Whether only once, or frequently used in his School;
Whether by Master, or Scholars, or both: Whether in his School at Lithgo,
Edinburgh, or Kelso, etc. Mr. K. cannot give you no certain account; for amongst
many other great Acts of Injustice done him, this is one; that his Judges would
never suffer him to see the Depositions; yea, not so much as to let him hear
them read over. That this word is amongst the Depositions is certain; for many
of the Judges have told him, that it was there, and, if his memory fail him
not, they said it was depon'd by Ja. Brown, by far the most famous of all the
Witnesses, as you will hear in its place, Sect. 24.

The ocoasion of the word Keegrels.
The true Story is as follows. One, now Mr. Dan. Cameron, Precentor in the
Gray-Fryars Church at Edenb. came about the year 1684, to Mr. K. then
Schoolmaster of Lithgo, earnestly begging he would be pleased to teach him
Latin. M. K. considering Daniel's years, which he took to be about eight or
nine and twenty, answered; if his Ingine was tolerably good; and if he would be
diligent, and continue so, he might soon acquire that Language. I shall study
day and night, replied Daniel, till I have it. In short, he falls indeed very
frankly to work; and among other helps, reads Vocables, the Latin in one
Column, the English in another: where reading the Parts of Man's Body; Caput,
the Head, Manus, the Hand, etc. he comes down to Coals, which he finds rendered
A man's Yard. Daniel quite mistakes the word Yard, thinking Coals signified A
stack-Yard, or a Garden; that same with Hortus: And therefore in presence of
the whole School he says to Mr. K. Sir, May not Coals signify as well a Woman's
Yard, as a Man's; Coals matris, as well as Patris? Mr. K. smiling, turned
himself about, as if he had been going to beat a Boy for some Fault. In the
mean time one Neal Cambel, a Boy of 7 or 8 years of age, standing hard by
Daniel, pusheth him pretty smartly with his Shoulder, saying; Houtman, Hout!
It Is a you hae, sounding it after the vulgar Scots-way, Daniel mistakes this
also, thinking Coals signified not only a Man's Garden, or Stack-yard; but his
whole Fortune or Estate, viz. All he had or possessed. And therefore another
Boy, a Gentleman's Son in Lithgo, perceiving him still to be in a mistake,
pointed with his hand toward Daniel's Breeches, saying; Stupidissime Asine,
Coals significat, your Keegrels; your Keegrels, Daniel. Then indeed Daniel came
to know, what Coals signified, more by the demonstration of the Boy's hand,
than otherwise.

This is all that passed in the School. Some persons in Town hearing of the
Business, failed not to object it to Daniel, pointing with their Finger, and
saying, Daniel, Coals, your Keegrels; your Keegrels, Daniel. Further know, that
Walter Sandilands, Son to the Lord of Hilderston in Lithgo, coming to Mr. K's
School, both at Edenb. and Kelso, (for he would not come to any other Master)
told the said passage to his Comrades; For it was his Brother (if Mr. K's
memory fail him not) that pointed with his hand toward Daniel's Breeches. So
much for the rise and occasion of this word; follow some remarkable effects it
produced amongst the Brethren and others.

The Effects or Dregs of the word Keegrels.
15.
When this Word was depon'd, Mr. Thomson, Judge, Clerk, and Witness
abovenamed, asked his Brethren, how he should spell it. They either could not,
or would not instruct him, being, as we are told, otherwise busied; For they
were all like to be-piss themselves with Laughter. Hence 'twas (whether by
their Fault, or the Deponent's, who perhaps, gave it not its proper sound, it is
not worth our while to enquire into) that it came to be spelled with a G, and
not a K, Gigrels, not Kigrels; or rather, as some great Artists in Spelling,
say, it should be Keegrels. This Error whether, we say, of the Clerk, or his
Brethren, or the Deponent, has been the occasion of no little work in the
following Judicatures, and of great Laughter in all Companies, where frequently
it became the main Subject of Discourse; some sounding it Gigrels, as we do G
in Lego; others, as it were, Jigrels, as we do G in Legis; a third person
crying out, that often he had heard Wagrels; but Keegrels, Gigrels, or Jigrels,
did he never hear before. Yea, even the Women made it the Subject of their
Talk, saying; Away with these rugged kind of words. Cannot you not use such
smooth and soft words as we do, when we bid our Children hide their Walies or
Pilda's? If this account offend any modest Ear, as certainly it will, let them
blame first the Kirk-Session of Kelso, next the Presbytery; and lastly the
Synod of Mers and Tiviotdale, who frequently tossed this Business, and many
other things of this Nature, like a Tenis-ball in their public Judicatures and
private Meetings, on purpose, we may say, to ruin and disgrace Mr. K. And if
this was done by wicked and malicious Men for the destruction and hurt of their
Neighbor; shall it not be lawful, judge you, for him to speak, or repeat over
again these same words for his own Vindication?

A necessary Caution.
Pray, don't mistake us, as if we were here charging all the Members of the
Synod, as guilty of the abovementioned Crime. No, no; we are very far from
that. All the worthy Gentlemen, Sir John Home, Sir Jo. Pringle and others, with
a good number of the Brethren, did what lay in their power to stop the Carrier
and Fury of the Multitude, but were not able; especialy, when it came to a
Vote, where a Dunoe can do as much as a Solomon.

If the Synod (15 Oct. 95.) had been pleased to listen to that Proposal made by
Mr. Clark (Minister at Innerwick, and Correspondent from the Lothians) and
others, viz. That all the Articles and Points or Heads in the Libel, that were
not Rhelevant, should be either quite expunged, or at least laid aside, as
hardly worthy to be taken notice of: and that they should take into their
serious Consideration the gross and heinous Crimes, as Adultery, Force or Rape,
etc. Certainly ^f this most prudent and wholesome Advice had been followed,
things would not have been at the pass they are. Before we put an end to this
Point, it seems very proper to bring in here what past relating to this word
Keegrels or Gigrels, before the Commission of the G. A. at Edenb. March 97. The
Sum whereof was this. While their Clerk Nicol Spence was reading over the
Reasons of Appeal, he stuck, when he came to the said word, or rather words;
for it is there written both with K, and G. Some of the Brethren crying, Read
on. At last Mr. Spence wrestled through with great difficulty; but so, as few
or none knew what he read: and therefore, 6 or 7 Brethren and ruling Elders,
cry all out at once, What Is that? What Is that? Honest Mr. Kirtin, Minister in
the Tolbooth Church of Edenb. being wiser than the rest in this point, turning
about his face to Mr. K. who was standing close to his back, said; What strange
words are these, Mr. Kirkwood? If it please, Sir this Reverend Judicature,
answered he, I shall explain them to you root and branch: or if you will, Lo,
there one, can do it as well as any, pointing with his hand to Mr. Dan.
Cameron, then present, who, as you heard, gave the occasion of making these
words so famous. There Is no necessity, they be explained, answered Mr. Meldrum,
Moderator. Now know, that Mr. K. had told him privately in his Chamber the
whole Story above related concerning this word.

The Conclusion. As to Mr. K's part of this word under debate, he does not
remember, that ever in his Life he made use of it so much as once, before this
Plea began, in any Company, far less in presence of his Scholars. There be
three kinds of words, which he chiefly labors to shun, either when he
interprets Authors to them, or when he hears them do it to him, viz. Obscene,
Pedantick, and Obsolete. And is it not this very thing, which he presses so
earnestly upon others in his Rhetoric, page 41, 42. Edit. 2. And chiefly in
his Grammar Desp. revised, p. 161. seriously recommending to all persons to
shun prof^ne and obscene words and expressions; giving there a special Caveat,
to beware of such beyond the rest there m^ntion'd, lin. 30. And this was done
long before this Plea began. The words are, Fugiendae sunt voces and Phrases
omnes Barbara, Impropriae, Obscurae, Priscae, Antiquatae, Sordidae seu Humiles,
Instatae seu Tumidae; praecipue veno Obscenae and Turpes.

A Deposition on a double Hearsay, and a Supposition to boot.
16.
MR. James Black now a Minister, then Governor to the Lord of Hilton and his
Brethren, depon'd thus; I suppose I heard one of my Pupils say, he heard Robert
Home say, that he drank King Jame^ 's Health at Mr. K's Table. To make amends
for this weak Argument, he depones next a mighty strong one; a Demonstration in
its kind; yea, a double Demonstratior for he had it by two of his Senses. I
being one day, said he, with a Gentleman in Mr. K's house, and his Daughter
playing on the Virginals, heard him bid her play, When the King comes home in
peace again. Pray, Mr. Black, How came you to depone thi^ It Is not in the
Libel. Did you bid them ask it you? If you did, you are (...) Vltronious
Witness; and so ought to be Cast. Perhaps it came in, as many other things did,
by the general Question; Have you any more to say against Mr. K? Know that even
in that Case, you are an Vltronious Witness.

Things Depon'd, not Recorded.
Mr. Knox abovementioned, having depon'd, and subscribed his Depo^^ions, stayed
in the Church, till the said Mr. Black depon'd also which being done, Mr.
Couden says to Mr. Knox, I forgot some Interrogatories, which I should have put
to you. And so examins him De Novo, And yet these Depositions are not Recorded;
at least not Subscribed by Mr. Knox, which comes all to one thing. Mr. Couden's
Tenet, or Principle in this matter, is, that what makes not against Mr. K.
needs not be Recorded, or Subscribed. This he openly declared in face of a
Committee, when he opposed Andrew Robson Gardner in the Floors his Subscribing
what he had depon'd, relating to the Woman that was said to be with Child. Mr.
K. pressed, he should Subscribe. There is no need, answered Mr. Couden; for
nothing he has said makes against you. What Is not against me, replied Mr. K. I
may say, is for me in matters of this kind. But in effect there is in his
Deposition that which truly tends to purge me of the Crime I Am Charged with.
Notwithstanding all Mr. K. could say, or the Deponent, who also pressed he
might be suffered to Subscribe, his just desire was denied, till Sir John
Pringle, and Bailyff Pringle said, Mr. K. craves nothing, but what is just and
legal: How can you refuse it? There is another very great Error here, which we
must not let pass untouched; it is this: Mr. Knox stayed all the while within,
and heard Mr. Black depone; and then he depon'd, which is contrary to Law. But
much more is this, to be objected against the Brethren, who sat all the while
their fellow Witnesses depon'd. Yea, which is very pretty indeed, they were
Auditors, or Examinators one to another: Come you, says the Judg-Witness, to
the Witness-Judge; and hear me depone, as I have heard you. A Circle far more
absurd, than that in Philosophy.

Topics preferred to Demonstrations. That is, Uncertain and Fallible Arguments
take place of most Certain and Infallible:
17.
THis is as wild a business, as in the whole Process, except the following
Passage; which ought indeed to have the Pre-eminence of all the rest. Know
then, that Mr. K. gave in a Petition to the Synod, 19 March 95. as
above-related, Sect. 13, Part 2: which Petitition, was once only Read that day,
and never since. A full half year thereafter (for they did not then challenge
it) the Elders charge him in the first Article of their Libel. ( Sect. 7.) for
Scandalizing, and Calumniating the Kirk-Session in the said Petition, as guilty
of Forging hellish Inventions to divide and break his Family. This you know, he
positively denies to be in the Petition, craving it might be produced, and read
over again. We have lost it, answered they, but we can easily supply that want
by causing some of the Brethren swear it was in it, Mr. Jaque is ready to
depone, and Mr. Thomson, who lost it, with some others. And certainly, two or
three Minister's Oaths are sufficient to instruct that these words were in that
Paper. Their memory cannot fail in so short a time. It Is little more than six
Months, since they heard it read: and we assure you, they were very attentive,
when it was a reading. When this Business came to be debated before a
Committee. Mr. K. was astonished out of measure, not having dreamed, that Mr.
Jaque, Mr. Thomson, and others had depon'd on that Head: and therefore he told
the Moderator, that the Oaths of all the Ministers in Scotland, were not so
strong and convincing at the Petition it self; and that a thing, which is
weaker cannot destroy, or in (...) that which is stronger: that it was a Maxim
in Law; Oaths cannot take away Writ. The Brethren thought more than they said;
For after that Mr. K. was removed (as a Member of that Committee told him) they
were much displeased, that he preferred the Petition to the Oaths of all the
Ministers in Scotland; till Sir John Pringle rose up, and told them, that it
was truth, which Mr. K. had spoken, viz. That ocular Inspection was in Law a
Demonstration, and that Oaths were fallible, and could not take away Writ. But,
pray, by the way, forget not to take Notice, who depon'd, Mr. Jaque, forsooth,
Mr. K's grand Enemy; yea a Party, the head and Chief of all the rest, the
principal Member of the Session; one who aliedges he is calumniated, and he
must swear that it is so. Good God! Was there ever in the world before this
24th of September. such a Judicature? One and the same person sits Judge, and
stands by as an Accuser, and swears to boot as a Witness.

To conclude this Point, know, that Mr. K. being with one of the Lords of
Session ( Sept. 96.) and amongst other things discoursing on this Head, had
much ado to persuade that Lord that the said Method was taken to instruct the
thing. His Lordship said, he never knew the like done before. They might, said
he, have asked, if you had the double of your Petition: And, if you had depon'd
that it was an exact Copy, or double of your Petition, they might have made use
of it to instruct their Charge. His Lordship asked what Mr. Jaque and others
depon'd upon the head. That, my Lord, replied Mr. K. is the Mystery which we
would fain know, but cannot. They refuse to give us the Extract of the
Depositions; or so much as to let us see them, or hear them read. His Lordship
lifted up his Shoulders, but said nothing. Without all question, some of these
Ministers are perjured, at least materially; For as sure as there is Light,
there is no such thing in that Petition. Mr. K. has its exact double. That
hellish Inventions are contrived and forged against him, the Petition bears
indeed, but does not condescend on the Contrivers; as is once and again
above-related.

No kind of Prejudice did cast a Witness.
18.
THis is the last and grand Point. It Is that, which we told you might well pass
Muster for all the rest. And now again we tell you, that the like was never
since the Creation of Adam. Search and make enquiry, as narrowly as you please
into all the Records under the Sun; and you shall not find one single Instance,
that can parallel this Business, of which we are now to give you an Account. I
shall not trouble you with a long Preamble, though too much cannot be said of
this Affair. But, because there are several Heads and Causes, that relate to
this Matter, we shall put them in different Sections, that things may be the
better and more easily understood.

We are now to give you some Account of the Depositions of the Father and the
Son, John and James Broun.
19.
^Ohn Broun, Merchant in Kelso, as he was going to depone, being asked by Mr.
Couden, if he had any prejudice or ill will at Mr. K. answered, that he had no
prejudice, no ill will at him; only he wished he were removed from Kelso. What
the said John depon'd, we can give you no account. All we shall say here is
this: Seeing he judicially confessed, that he wished or desired Mr. K. to be
removed from Kelso; it was enough to have cast him from being a Witness,
especially considering that this was all that Mr. K's Adversaries craved, viz.
to have him turned out of his Office, as shall hereafter evidently appear. We
cannot here pass a most pertinent and ^at Instance. In the year 1654, Mr. Rob.
Knox, Minister in Kelso, a very emi^^^ person upon many accounts, particularly
for his Loyalty to his King, being th^^ before the English Judges at Dalkeeth
for some Expressions he had used in favors of King Charles the I. or II. if
not both against the Usurper Cromwell, did except against one of the Witnesses,
as bearing no good will to him. The Judge asked the said Witness, if he had any
ill will or prejudice at Mr. Knox. The Witness protested most solemnly that he
had no ill will, no prejudice at him; but on the contrary wished him heartily
well: and with this he subjoined, that he only wished Mr. Knox were removed out
of Kelso. And for this last Clause, alone he was not suffered to depone. And
hence it was that Mr. Knox continued and died Minister in Kelso, 1658. Mr. K.
has this from very sure hands.

The Descent into Hell.
20.
NExt depones James Broun, only Son to the said John, a Boy or Youth, about 16
years of age. As he was going to depone, his Father says to Mr. Couden, Sir, my
Son cannot be a Witness against Mr. K. in regard he has a prejudice at him; Mr.
K. having beat him so, that he left his School and never returned to it again.
Then says Mr. Couden to the Boy, Have you a Pique or Prejudice at Mr. K? Yes,
Sir, answered the Boy, because he beat me; and made me leave his School. Have
you Malice at him, said Mr. Couden? What mean you, Sir, by Malice, answered the
Boy? Could you wish to see his Soul in Hell? Wish you ill to his Soul? Have you
a freedom to pray for his Soul, replied Mr. Coud. I will not say, Sir, that I
wish his Soul in Hell, answered the Boy. And so ended this Dialogue. It made no
stop in the Business: the Boy deponed with great freedom. Now, pray, consider,
what vast difference between the English Judges, though Laics, sitting at
Dalkeeth, in a common House, and our Scots Divines in the House of God. And
forget not to ponder well the Circumstances of this Affair. Those are
cognoscing the Cause of a Foreigner or Stranger, who was supposed to have
transgressed against the Supreme Powers of the Nation; These sit Judges on
their own Countryman; yea, one near in Kin (by Office) to themselves; and only
alleged to be guilty of private Faults: Those did cast a Witness, tho he
wished the Person heartily well, against whom he was to depone; These sustained
a Witness, who plainly told them judicially, that he had a Prejudice at him,
against whom he was to depone. For you are not here to look upon this as Mr.
Couden's Deed alone, but his Brethrens also. They are sharers with him of this
heinous Transgression. It is a wonder they run nor out of the Church, when they
heard Mr. Couden propose such dreadful Interrogatories. It was far more
becoming the duty of the Ministers of the Gospel to have sharply rebuked that
Boy, for harboring so long in his heart a Prejudice at one, that was once his
Master, than thus to indulge and encourage him in his Sin. But they must be
pardoned; for they were so mighty eager and not upon the pursuit of the Ruin
and destruction of another Man in this Life, that they quite forgot the Eternal
Salvation of that Boy's Soul in that to come.

21.
WE must not leave this Business so abruptly; especially considering that upon
the Deposition or Faith of this one Witness are mainly founded the principal
and most material Reasons of that Sentence passed against Mr. K. (22 Oct. 96.)
of which in its place. We shall here only name a few things, which it is very
fit you know a little more distinctly and fully. 1. You see the Father plainly
told the Judge, that his Son had a Prejudice at Mr. K. The Son confirms what
the Father had said: yet neither of them prevails. And who else in the World
can know this Prejudice so well, as Father and Son? 2. Both tell its rise and
occasion. Mr. K. beat him so, that he left his School, and never returned to it
again. Mr. K. does indeed confess, that he beat him, and that deservedly, but
too gently. Nor did he any more return, having learnt his Latin, and some
Greek, so went to College. The Cause of his being beaten, and the way it was
done is thus, as many attest. While Mr. K. examing Theams, his Scholars sitting
about him in a Semicircle, one Rob. Handiside, rising from his Seat, advances
little more than a pace to give his Master his Theme: In the mean while, James
Broun gets into it. Handiside complains: Mr. K. finding him wronged, commands
Broun to rise. He, in a manner refuses, muttering something within himself. Mr.
K. giving him about the Shoulders with his Scourge, makes him to rise. After
this he did not return. Upon the like occasion, he left Mr. George Adam's
School, who was Mr. K's immediate Predecessor, now in Mussilburgh. 3. This
Prejudice continues some years, and so becomes rooted and fixed in the Heart.
It was more than an ordinary Prejudice, that had lasted about 3 years. The Sun
should not once set in our wrath, say the holy Scriptures: here it arose and
set above two thousand times. Call it by what name you please, Envy, Hatred,
Revenge; for it well deserves any of these: Yea, Malice it self, though not in
Mr. Couden's Sense; For certainly in this point, he differs Infinitely from all
the Divines on Earth. His is a wonderful kind of Malice: Malice as deep as
Hell; as long and broad as Eternity; infinitely perfect in all its Dimensions:
and for its Nature or Quality, it is unexpressible, being in every respect, as
black as the Devil himself. It is a Question, if there be any Person on Earth
so exceeding wicked and malicious; so cursed and hellish, as to imitate Devils
in that degeee, in a sober fit to wish their Neighbor were in eternal Torture
amongst unquenchable Flames. But whatever may be Men's private Thoughts, or
secret Wishes, or rash and inconsiderate Words in a Rage or Fury; yet it is
madness it self to suppose, that any person in the World, far less a Christian,
is so demented, as to say in face of a Judge; yea, in presence of a Church
Judicature, That he wishes his Neighbor's Soul were in Hell. And hence it is,
one of the most foolish things in Nature to propose such a Question, which is
to be answered Affirmatively, or Negatively; and yet all the World will answer
but one way. Was it not a wonderful Skip in Mr. Couden, to jump at once from
the short Miseries of this Life to the everlasting torment of that to come? He
might have many thousands of Questions at hand, all fitter for his purpose,
than these abovementioned. Pray, what need was there to fetch them from Hell?
Might he not have said? Would you be glad to see Mr. K. so disgraced, as to be
put out of the Town by the hand of the Hangman? And it is very probable, he
might wish some such thing. Or, Mr. Couden might have gone higher; as, Could
you desire to see such a Mark set on Mr. K. as the Lord put on Cain? Or, Could
you see him cast into the Lions Den with Daniel? Or, into a burning fiery
Furnace, seven times hotter than ordinary with Shadrach, Meshach and Abednigo,
etc. 4. Know that this Witness deponed more than other twenty, as Mr. K. is
informed, if not in Bulk, at least in Quality. And hence it was, that by no
means they would cast him, because many great things were expected from him. We
have once and again, above told you, that what Mr. K's Adversaries had most
confidence in, did chifley fail them, and tended most to their hurt and
disgrace. This you clearly saw in the Business of Blakader, and in Mr. Scot's
Deposition; but this in hand has quite sunk them, and saved Mr. K. This, as you
will hear in its place, made the Committee of Bills in Edenb. sit as mute as
Fish. Sect. 6. Part. 5. 5. Know that this Business came to light but of late,
about a year after the said J. Broun deponed; otherwise, you may be sure, it
had been inserted amongst the Reasons of Appeal. But that which we judge most
worthy our notice here, is the admirable way this Business came to the
knowledge of Mr. K. and others, viz. by the means of an Ass: an Ass from
England. O happy, happy, thrice happy hour, in which this Ass crossed the
Border! By this Ass a great wonder is wrought in our Israel, and a dark and hid
Mystery is brought to light. We read in holy Writings. that an Ass spoke (22
Numb. 28.) and reproved her Master the Prophet for beating her, who had saved
his life. This Ass has done more than that. She has saved (under God) the Life
of the said J. B. and reconciled Mr. K. with the Father and Son. Yea, we hope,
she has done more than saved his Temporary Life. The poor miserable Youth was
most pitifully misled by blind Guides; but this Ass has most providentially
brought him back to the right Path: By that Ass (at least indirectly) the eyes
of her Master were opened to see the Angel standing with a drawn Sword ready to
slay him. Would to ^od by this Ass the Eyes of our Prophets were opened, not
only to see, but to be convinced of their sad Error in misleading a young
unexperienced Christian; that by this so wonderful a providence of God, making
use (whether Directly or Indirectly is not Man's concern to question) of the
dullest of all the Brutes to teach the Sons of Men true Wisdom.

An Explication of the Mystery of the Ass.
22.
WE are loath to leave you in the dark, and therefore we shall, as briefly as
we can, unfold this Riddle to you. Know then, that the said J. B. fell unwell
after he depon'd; which some were pleased to call a Remorse for what he had
done: others, the Judgment of God for his Sin. At length he fell into a Decay'^
for which his Physcians advised his Parents to give him Asses Milk. They got
one from England, a dead, decrepit, old and lame Beast, so foundred in its
Fore-feet, that with great difficulty they got her brought to Kelso, in several
days, though she was but a few miles distant. Know also, that Grass is not to be
had in Kelso near at hand, and this Ass was not able to go to a place at a
distance. To keep her continually within doors, they found agreed not with her
Nature. She had a young Colt sucking her, which added not a little to this
Inconveniency. Harvest was begun (it being then 28 of Aug.) so that within 2 or
3 days at most, she would get abundance of fresh Grass in the Stubbles to feed
on. And therefore to supply the present necessity, the Father, with Dr.
Trotter, Uncle to the Boy, went to Mr. J. on the said 28 of Aug. and having
represented to him all Circumstances, humbly begged he would be pleased to
suffer the Ass to feed in the Churchyard, an hour or two in the day, till they
got Grass in the Stubbles near to their House, which, say they, we will have
within 2 or 3 days at most. Mr. J. flatly refused this very reasonable and
modest Request; not upon any Superstitious account, as if he would not suffer
an Ass to go in that place; he is not scrupulous in that point: his own two
Horses, four Cows, with flocks of Geese, Turky-cocks, Ducks, Cocks and Hens
feed there: Yea, he is so far from being scrupulous or nice that way, that if
any Man's Horses (even after the time fields become freer to all) happen to
come into the Churchyard, he presently orders his Servants to drive them into
the old Church, where for some days they are forced to ease Nature on the Corpse
of very worthy Persons. Nor does he ordinarily let them go, till he and his
Servants be satisfied for the Damage, the one sustaining Loss, the other
Trouble and Pains. He has had these 2 years a poor Man's Chopin-Stoup and a
Plate, and it is like, may have 'em to Eternity. He was the death (as there is
reason to believe) of a Widows Horse, who fasted so long within that Church,
that they say his Chafts did lose the power of eating. We might tell you a
thousand Stories of this kind, were we not posting to an end of this Affair.
Know then, that both the Father and Uncle were very much petted with the Answer
they had got from Mr. J. He is most ungrate to me, and cruel to my Son, said
the Father; a very Turk would not have denied me such a Request. And in truth,
if you consider Circumstances, you will find Mr. J. guilty of great Inhumanity,
Ingratitude, Imprudence and Avarice in this Business, to name no more Vices.
The hurt or damage the Ass could do Mr. J. was very inconsiderable, not
amounting perhaps to 4 or 5 Shil. Scots in whole; and to put that in the
balance with the Health or Life of such a Boy, his Father's only Son, is a
strange thing. That, which may exceedingly aggravate Mr. J's Fault, or rather a
multiplied Crime, are the Circumstances of the Youths Parents: the Mother a
virtuous Gentlewoman, related to the best Families in the Shire of Mars: the
Father an old Man of good Esteem, the chief Person in his Circumstances in
Kelso, one that has been all his Life most constant to his Principles, a true,
but no Bigot Presbyterian. But that which is most considerable here, is, that
not only he was and is in a capacity to do M. J. Service many ways, but had
already done him several acts of great kindness, particularly did contribute
with others in giving Money for his necessary use, and many times made him very
welcome in his House with the best things he had. And lastly, gave him the use
of much of his Household Furniture, Chairs, Table, etc. from his very entry to
that day. The Table was sent home within a day or two after this refusal, brok^
into four pieces. Now, is there not here the hight of Ingratitude, after so
much kindness, so many favors done him, to deny so inconsiderable a Request?
Ingratitude! Certainly Ingratitude in a high degree; and if Ingratitude, what
is it not according to the common Proverb, Si ingratum dixeris, omnia? See you
not here a great act of Imprudence, a palpable sign of Avarice, Incivility,
Inhumanity, or rather Barbarity, etc. Now to conclude this tedious passage,
know that the Father did lay open (...) this Business to Mr. K. in presence of
the frequently abovementioned Baily Pringle, and several others. The Son also
has confirmed it again. You will have a touch or two of this Affair hereafter.

Reasons of Appeal by the E. of Roxb. and his Lordships Curators for their
Interest, and Mr. J. K. Schoolmaster, against the Presbytery and assistant
Members appointed by the Synod to Cognosce on Mr. Kirkwoods Affair.
23.
MR. K. having Right, as Schoolmaster to the Offices enjoyed by his
Predecessors, viz. Session-Clerk, Precentor or Reader to the Parish of Kelso,
conform to his Call and Contract, as the same at more length bears, and seeing
these 3 years bygone, he has been kept from these Offices, and the Emoluments
thereto belonging, tho all legal and fair Methods have been taken For putting
him in possession thereof. And also, he having meaned himself lately by a
Petition to the Minister and Elders there, they instead of granting the just
desire of that Petition, did lay to his Charge most illegally and
unchristianly, in face of Session, heinous Crimes, Immoralities and Calumnies,
and that without prior private Admonition, or Conference with him thereanent,
rejecting, and despising the Method prescribed by our blessed Savior, and the
Constitution of all well-governed Churches: which business of Mr. K. as it then
stood, being referred contrary to all Christian Charity, and brotherly Love by
the Session to the Presbytery, they not so much as giving him one minute to
procure a Testificate of his Innocence under the hand of those, who, were
eyewitnesses to what was laid to his Charge, though he earnestly desired the
same; which if they had granted, he would have exculpated and freed himself.
And the said Presbytery having that same very day, within a very short win
after the rising of the Session, sit down, and considered the said Matter
referred to (...), in a manner, Homologating the illegality of the Procedure of
the said S^^ion, did most unwarrantably, and to the Reproach and Scandal of the
Justice and Wisdom of such a Judicature, proceed in the said Affair (the
Punishment whereof, proved, is no less than Death, and perpetual Infamy to him
and his, one Crime being Adultery, the other Force or Rape) and give their
Sentence thereto by referring the same to the next Provinciat Synod, without so
much as citing, or calling Mr. K. the Person injured, to answer himself; nor so
much as enquiring, who were his Accusers, rather following the Method of the
hard-hearted Jew, and Pagan, than the Disciples of Christ; yea, or the
civilized Roman, Festus, who would not condemn a Man, until such a time as he
was heard, and his Accusers face to face with him. This Procedure of the
Session and Presbytery, may justly amaze and astonish all that hear the same.
Is it not wonderful, that Crimes of so high a nature, and so great moment,
which ordinarily depend before a Presbytery a full Year; yea, often two, three
or four, should in one day; yea, in an hours time, if not much less, pass like
Quicksilver, both Session and Presbytery, and get into the Synod without
either the Accuser, or Accused's presence; if Mr. J. and his Elders be not the
Accusers; for to this hour, there is no other condescended on. Certainly, though
all the Records of the Church through the whole World, since Christianity was
first settled therein, were searched and enqu^r'd into, a Parallel shall not be
found. It Is most evident to the World, that it was designed Mr. K. should still
lie under the Blunder and Calumnies laid against him: For though the Presbytery
had referred the Matter to the Synod, which was to sit within 8 days
thereafter, yet they did not cite him to the said Synod, nor so much as acquaint
the Synod with the Business, so that it is more than presumable he would not
have been called before the Synod, if he had not meaned himself to their
Wisdoms by a Petition, which he gave in many hours after they were sit down.
And after consideration had of the said Matter by the Synod, it was referred to
a Committee made up of the Presbytery and several Assistants. The E. of R. and
his Lordship's Curators, knowing what Spirit these Libellers are of, they
formerly upon several occasions having opposed his Lordship, and contemned his
Authority, he judging that this whole Procedure against Mr. K. is also a
striking against, and trampling upon his own Honor and Interest, he being the
main Instrument in bringing Mr. K. to this place; and being fully convinced of
his Innocence of what is laid to his Charge, he therefore stated himself and
his Curators, as Parties in defense of Mr. K. With very great respect and
veneration for these Gentlemen, Ministers and Elders, that are Assistants, it
is offered that they with the Presbytery are very incompetent Judges in this
Affair, for the above written Reasons, and what follows.

1. In regard most part of the Assistants were absent at the several Dyets,
when Mr. K. was called; so that, in effect, the Presbytery was always more
numerous, and at some Dyets, the Presbytery did sit by themselves without any
Assistant. And should a thinking Man consider the former Procedure of Session
and Presbytery, it cannot be expected, that they will proceed legally, as they
ought to do. 2. They have appeared very Partial against M. K. by suffering Mr.
J. and his Elders to sit with them, to hear their Consultations, when he and
others concerned must wait at the Church-door. 3. It is evident that Mr. K. and
the Persons, who contracted with him, are slighted, and the Parish of Kelso,
disgraced (as one of their own number did acknowledge) and that by suffering
Persons of no worth or esteem, to exerce the Offices belonging to Mr. K. 4.
When they put Queries to him, and got his Answer thereto, and Recorded the same
in their Register, they positively refused to read to him what was recorded;
though he pressed the same with many Arguments, which insinuates, that they had
recorded otherwise, than he had declared. 5. They, contrary to all Law,
Ecclesiastical or Civil, refused to give up the Names of their Informers of
that Business of Blakader, though seriously and often required, and Instruments
taken thereon. And also, that they refused to discuss the first two main Heads,
which were stated before the Presbytery and Synod, e're they entered on a new
Libel, tho they again and again pressed to it; but these they waved and
shifted, falling on new Points. 6. Their Procedure against him is very strange,
for they determined a Probation of that new Libel against him, and that before
the delivery thereof to him, and before the Relevancy of it was discussed, or
the Libel denied. And Mr. K. having given in a Defense, they ordain the
Probation to go on; and that before they declare what they repel, or what they
sustain: and an Answer being made to this Defense by the Libellers, which being
very large, they refused the ordinary Diet for Mr. K. to reply, not allowing
him to that effect a competent Time. 7. They refused to suffer the Libellers to
give their Oath of Calumny, required thereto by way of Instrument. And though it
is known they are most malicious, and dare not depone thereupon. Certainly
nothing is more just, than that such Accusers give their Oaths of Calumny; for
who can he free of such like pursuits, if Persons be not obliged to do it? 8.
It is true, that there are several Witnesses summoned, and a List given to Mr.
K. to the Effect (in case they had gone on legally) he might have his
Objections in readiness against them. But so it is, that their design is evil,
as appears by the List of Witnesses given him; for of 31 none are designed,
except 2; so that Mr. K. knew not what Objections to have in readiness, there
being 3, 4, or 5 Persons of the same Name with several of these in the List
given; and that even in the Town of Kelso, besides what may be in the Country.
And also, they have summoned Witnesses, who are not in Mr. K's List. 9. The
Presbytery and Assistants have showed themselves very partial in their
Procedure in this Affair; For though an Objection and Protestation was given in
against Mr. J. that he could not Cognosce, and sit Judge, in regard he was a
Party, and also had prejudice against Mr. K. And that he was main Contriver,
and Former of the Libel and reply, and Carrier on of this Affair: yet he was
suffered to sit in their Judicature, when Mr. K. and others concerned, were
ordered to remove; and that even at the same time, when they were considering,
and voting, whether he should remove or not. 10. Though in Law they were not
obliged to object in regard the List of Witnesses given in, did not bear their
Designations, as said is; and as to the Witnesses, who are not contained in the
said List, it cannot be expected objections should be given in against them;
neither can they be examined, unless Justice be overturned, and the form of
Process in such Cases altogether ranvers'd and altered contrary to the Laws and
Practicks of this Kingdom, Ecclesiastical or Civil. However, the E. and Mr. K.
would have objected, as they now object. 1. No Witness can be examined in this
Affair, until such a time, as Mr. J. and his Elders give their Informers of
that business about the Woman in Blakader; for, if Informers be not
condescended on, none knows, but some of the Persons, who are cited as
Witnesses, are the Informers. 2. Mr. J. is Listed, as a Witness, who cannot be
received for the Reasons contained in the proceeding Paragraph, and
Protestation taken. He also, as Minister of Kelso, and Member of Presbytery (as
he designs himself) is consequently a Judge in this Affair; and no Judge can be
Witness when his deposition makes a part of the probation. If this be
sustained, it were to Condemn a Man upon the Judges private knowledge; which is
contrary to the Laws both of God and Man. 3. The former Objection relative to a
Member of Presbytery and Judge, is holden as repeated against Mr. Thomas
Thomson, Brevitatis causa; so that he cannot bear Witness, with this Addition
that he is not only a Judge, but also Clerk: and whose evil design against Mr.
K. must in this Paragraph appear, which renders him incapable to be Judge,
Witness, or Clerk, viz. It Is known to himself wh^^ ( A.) Prevarication he used
to Mr. K. speaking with his Tongue that, which was not only contrary to Truth,
but even to his knowledge. And besides entered upon a secret Inquisition of Mr.
K's failings (if we may so speak) practiced upon persons of ^s own Family for
Information against him; yea, after the Libel was formed and read in public.
4. As for the other Ministers of this Presbytery, or Synod, and Laick Elders,
who are adduc'd, as Witnesses; with very great respect to these Gentlemen, it
is offered by the E. of R. and his Curators, at least by these, who are
commissionated by his I.o. and also by Mr. K that they cannot here be adduc'd
as Witses; for the Reasons contained in the former Paragraph, viz. because they
are Judges, not doubting, but they would tell the truth; only it is an evil
Preparative without a Precedent 5. As to Jo. Broun Merchant (if this be the Jo.
Broun in the List) he cannot be received as a Witness, in regard it is offered
to be proved by his Oath, that he has been upon Mr. J. and the Libellers
Consultations on this Affair, and that he has given advice there anent; and so
Guilty of partial Counsel. 6. As to James Broun, the said Johnson, his
Deposition can make no faith against Mr. K. he not only being within the years
allowed for Witnesses; but also granting he were past the years, it is offered
to be proved that he has appeared officious by enquiring at others what they
knew in this Affair; and he not being come to the years of Understanding; it is
more than presumable he depends either upon Hearsay, or in Revenge against Mr.
K. he having left his School in-Pique, and to this day minds it; for he never
owns Mr. K. more than the greatest stranger on Earth. (See Sect. 24, 25, etc.)
7. As to (b) Mr. Wear's Letter, which is listed, as a Witness, no respect can
be had thereto; seeing, Test, non Testimonia probant; and all Witnesses must
be examined in presence of the Defender, and Assize; that is, in presence of
Mr. K and his Judges. 8. These Witnesses that live without the jurisdiction of
this provincial Synod, it is humbly offered to the consideration of this
reverend judicature, whether they appearing by a (c) Citation founded upon the
Warrant of this Presbytery, or Synod, will oblige them to appear; or, if they
must have a Warrant from another judicature; for in case this Synods Warrant
does not teach them without their jurisdiction, such Witnesses, who appear by
Virtue of so incompetent a Warrant, seem to be Vltronious, and so cannot be
admitted. Upon all and sundry of the Reasons above written, the E. of R. and
his Lo. Curators for their Interest, and Mr. K. Schoolmaster of Kelso, appeal
from this Presbytery and Assistants, in so far as the matter is Ecclesiastical
to the next Provincial Synod of Mers and Tiviotdale, meeting at Kelso, or where
it shall happen them to meet for the time, and summon you the Presbytery and
Assistants and Libellers, Apud Acta, to appear there before the said Synod; and
in so far as the matter is Civil, appeal to the Judge ordinary; and thereupon
the Commissioners for the E. and the said Mr. K. take Instruments

Sic Subscribitur, Geo. Pringle. Alex. Potts. Ja. Kirkwood.

Rem. (a) Of this business about Mr. Thomson you have a large account Sect. 3.
to which we here refer you. (b) This Mr. Wear, second Minister at Lithgo, 1658
or 59, was turned out by the Public Resolutioners, (as they then called them,
he being a Remonstrator (for there was a deadly fewd between these two Parties
at that time, though both Presbyterians, but the latter, by far more strait
laced, than the former) and went to Ireland, where he continued till our late
Indulgence, granted by K. Ja. at which time, these in Lithgo, that favored his
way (both the above mentioned Parties Uniting in one against the Episcopal)
called him back to be Preacher in the Meeting House there. While he was yet
living in Ireland and preaching in a Meeting House in Culrain, and not the
least word of his coming back to Scotland; he sent one of his Sons to be
educacated by Mr K. having only heard of his name or fame. And when he came
himself, about 3 years thereafter, and was settled Minister in the
Meeting House there, he put another Son to Mr. K's School. In a word; though Mr.
K. did constantly keep the Church, never so much as once going to the
Meeting House; yet Mr. W. and he lived most friendly and neighbourly, visiting
one another like two Brethren, and that after his Sons were gone from his
School. As to the Letter here mentioned, and adduc'd as a Witness, at least
given up to Mr. K. in the List of Witnesses, he knows not so much as one single
word, that is in it; for, though he pressed hard in face of a judicature to have
it produced and read; which thing Mr. J. would on no means suffer to be done.
Hence you may easily conjecture, what be the Contents of the said Letter; for
certainly, if it had made any against Mr. K. it had been produced: and to
conceal it, if it make for him, is a great act of injustice. This is downright
Mr. Couden 's Principle above related, Sect. 20. viz. What makes against Mr. K.
ought to be recorded, but if othewise there is no need. (c) Some Witnesses were
cited after a most illegal and strange manner. The Kirk Officer forsooth, wrote
Letters so to me, ordering them to appear. Thus was Mr. Colvil, Schoolmaster
in Jedburgh; summoned. Mr. Tailor, Brother-in-Law to Mr. Glen, who, as we told
you, Sect. 12. did dispute with his fellow Witnesses, while they were deponing,
came from the Viscount of Arbuthnet's House in the North, about 86 miles
distant from Kelso, upon a bare Letter, as he confessed himself to Mr. K. and
deponed, which is a thing altogether contrary to Law, and make; him an
ultronious Witness. Yea, the Presbytery of Kelso dare do far greater things
than these. They can send their Officer to other Kingdoms without an Order from
any Person therein to Summon witnesses to appear before them. This they did to
one Marg. Home in Work. And is it not very pretty, think you, thus to fetch
Men's Wives from England to stand before the Church Judicatures in Scotland? If
this Woman did appear, she also was an ultronious Witness, for no Law obliged
her to do it. It were tedious, but very pertinent to tell you here, how illegal
and informal they were in their Citations of Mr. K. Only take this touch. His
Summons did not bear particularly at whose instance he was to appear: but only
in a kind of general terms, viz. At the Instance of some of the Inhabitants of
Kelso. They might as well have said, At the Instance of some body in
Tivlotdale, yea, or of Scotland; for, M^jus and minus non variant speciem. Nor
was this their Officer's fault, his Warrant expressly bearing it. At last, they
altered their style, as you will see, Sect. 25. Part. 4.

Oct. 3. 1695. Notwithstanding the said Appeal legally made, and the Reasons
duly given in to the Moderator and Clerk of the sa^d Committee within 10 days
according. to the Act of the General Assembly; yet they meet again this day to
consider and cognosce the said Affair, out by the influence of three very
worthy Gentlemen, the business is referred to the Synod, which was to sit
within 12 days. You will have a brief touch of this days Action in that
abovementioned Paper to be given into the Synod at Jedburgh, 21 of Apr. 1696,
Sect. 13 Part. 4. Paragr. 5.



24.
15 Oct. ^5. YOu will get a large account of this Synod in that frequently
mentioned Paper given in at Jedburgh, to which we refer you Sect. 13. Pa. 4.
Only we cannot but he ^e again tell you, that it is Mr. K's great Complaint, that
this Synod never heard him speak so much as one single wo^d in his own defense.
Though they sat 3 days, and almost 2 nights, manly upon his Affair in Synod,
Committees and Sub committees, yet they never so much as once called him before
them (except to near three Witnesses depo^e) till they had past Sentence; though
some persons of Honor amongst them u^g'd again and again that Mr. K. should be
called to give his Sense of some words in the abovementioned printed
Information, Sect. 7. A. 7. R. (a) which thing M J. opposed with all his power,
most confidently asserting, that the said words could not admit of another
sense, than what was put on them. By whom, pray? By whom! by whom, but the
Libellers? By the Libellers! Ay, by the Libellers with Mr. J 's help; for
certainly Nullisidianism, Erastianism, Hobbism could never have entered their
Noddles, unless he had instilled it into them, and made them to speak like
Parrots. Here Is one of the strangest things in its kind, that even was heard of
in the Wo^d: The adverse Parties Gloss or Sense upon words is approved; and the
Author of these words, being the other Party, not so much as suffered to open
his mouth upon the head: yea, not permitted to enter the Room, where his
Judges, and the other Party were sitting. Law and Reason obliged them to hear
at least what he had to say for himself; though no tie of Duty bound them to
consent, or accord in the Matter.

A remarkable Passage. It Is very pertinent here to give an account of a
business, which we hinted at already, Sect. 12. and there promised to touch
more fully here. Though it seem a thing of no great Importance in it self; yet
will be found to be very serviceable in several Points of his Process. It Is
this. One B. Thom. Servant to J. B. Notar-publick in Kelso, being cited to
appear before this Synod, to depone against Mr. K. was called in, and her Oath
taken. This being done, the Mod. asked Mr. K. if he had any thing to object
against her, why she might not depone in this Process. Mr. K. after he had
taken a glance with his Eye of the Woman's Countenance, answered, he had nothing
to object against her, having never, that he knew, seen her, or heard of her in
his Life before that time. And suspecting, that she was to depone upon
Hearsay, as many had done before her; asked her, whether she was to declare
any thing, as she was informed by others? Or what she had seen, or heard
herself done or spoken amiss by him? I am, answered she, to declare what I have
heard another say of you; for I never saw any ill in you my self; nor ever had
the occasion to see it. Mod. says Mr. K. This Woman is not to depone against
me, but against some other Person, which I am apt to think is the Woman in
Blakader. If she has any thing to lay to my Charge, let her declare it here
before me. If another Person has inform^d her of any ill in me, she cannot
depone, till that Person be present, and they be confronted. Up rises Mr. S.
saying, Mod. since this Woman was cited, and has appeared, I think she may
depone. With Mr. S 's leave, Mod. answered Mr. K. since the other Woman is not
present; yea, nor cited to be here, this Woman ought not to depone, it being
contrary to Law, that any Person depone in absence of the Person against whom
they depone, or their Proctour; for Mod. you do not know what the Woman in
Blakader may have to say against this Woman, why she cannot depone in this
Matter. Mod. replied Mr. S. since the Woman has not only been cited, but has
appeared, and her Oath taken; we cannot now send her home without hearing what
she has to say in this Affair. Mod. answered Mr. K. One fault ought not to be
the Cause, or made the occasion of another. It was a fault in the Kirk-Session
to cite the one without the other; and now to make this Woman depone in the
others absence, especially it not being her fault, that she is absent is
another Fault greater than the former, upon many accounts, particularly,
because it is contrary to an Express Act of Parliament, requiring that all
Witnesses be Examined in presence of the Parties or their Advocates, 18 Act. K.
James 7. Sess. 2. First Parl. 14 June 1686. That which Mr. S. founds his
Argument on, is a matter of inconveniency only; for there is no real evil in
the thing, only a trouble to the Woman to have appeared in vain, and to return
again at another time. Whereas Mod. I found my Argument upon a Principle of
Equity and Justice, that ought to be done both to the Woman in Blakader and my
self, but chiefly to the Woman in Blakader; for nothing this Woman can say,
will in Law militate against me, since she is only to depone on Hearsay.
Notwithstanding all Mr. K. could say, Mr. S. being, it seems ashamed to be run
down by a Country Domi^ee, (as they commonly call them) still urged that Bessy
should depone; yet added no new reason for it, partly repea^ing what he had
said formerly, partly telling that the Committee had done so. To which, Mr. K.
answered, That two Blacks made not a white; they were to walk not after the bad
Examples of others, but according to the Rules and Principles of Justice and
Equity. In sh^rt, after a long debate, Mr. K. finding that Mr. S. was like to
carry the P^int, craved that it might be recorded in their Register, that he
made this Objection; or that the said Bessy depon'd with a Qualification; viz.
in absence of the Person against whom she depon'd. At this Mr. S. with several
of the Brethren, cried out, that upon no account they would do that; for,
thought they, this is to record our own Doom; and to publish to the World, that
we have done unjust things. Mr. K. still urged the thing, saying, he craved
nothing, but what was most just and equitable, and pertinent to the purpose.
What? cry two or three together; Must we Record every thing he pleases? Well,
Mod. answered Mr. K. If ye will not Record it, ye cannot hinder me to do it;
and with that, he throws the Instrument Money down on the Table, saying, I
protest against your procedure in this particular, etc. Then indeed they looked
one to another; till at length, the Mod. says, Mr. K. take back your Money, and
remove a little; and you shall have the mind of the Synod in-the matter. He
with these Commissionated from the E. being removed, the Synod very quickly
came to a Determination, there being an absolute necessity, that one of three
should be done. Either the Woman was to go home without deponing, or they were
to Record their own Illegal Procedure; or suffer Mr. K. to protest. All three
were mighty biting, and galled some of the Synod to the very heart. Others saw
not the Inconveniency, or rather the Evil of the first; and therefore said,
What hurt is there that this Woman go home at this time? She, and that other
may come both together, at another occasion; the last two, said they, are
intolerable, we cannot admit of either of them. The Evil of the first, (which
was only discerned by a few) is very considerable; for, 1. It Is an infallible
Demonstration, that the Synod condemns the Procedure of the said Committee (24.
Sep.) who examined a vast number of Witnesses, merely upon Hearsay, in all
absence of those, against whom they deponed and consequently accuses them of
Injustice; and so in Law renders Null that they did. 2. This Bessy Thomson,
from whom, it seems, they expected great things (though in effect to no purpose)
cannot depone, but in presence of that Woman in Blakader. whom they dare not
adduce, though the chief Person of any, that should appear in this Particular,
and Mr. K. has provoked there is to it, and that by way of Instrument, as is above
related. It was upon the consideration of these two Heads, which moved Mr. K.
to be so eager and pressing, that the said Bessy should go home, as she came;
and the Contrary moved Mr. S. and others to be so forward, that she should
depone; for, as by the one, Mr. K. was to gain a great Point; so they on the
other hand, lost one no less. In short, Mr. K. being called in again, was told
by the Mod. that Bessy was to go home without deponing, under which Oath she
lies to this day (1 Jan. School.) and now likely will lie till she go before the
Great Judge of the World. We cannot here omit to tell you, that this Bessy was
again cited about half a year thereafter to appear upon that same occasion
before a Committee. Mr. K. seeing her and no other Woman else within the
Church, said, as 'twere in a surprise, but with a smile, Mod. Bessy is come
back again, but in the same Circumstances she was in before, viz. without her
Neighbor in Blakader. Go home, Go home, said Sir John Pringle to her, till you
have your Neighbor with you. It Is more than probable, if this worthy Gentleman
had not been present, they had caused Bessy to depone, contrary to the Judgment
of the Synod. We leave to you, to make what Inferences you think fit from these
two appearances of Bessy, and the very odd Circumstances relating thereto. Only
in general, you clearly see, that what makes against Mr. K. they put it into
their Register; but what makes for him, they suffer the Wind to carry it away.
We could give you some hundreds of Instances; but shall only name this one for
all. This day (15 Oct. 1695.) Sir J. Home of Blakader, a Member of the Synod,
did declare in face of that Judicature, that he was not at home, but in the
Fields a great way from his House, Tithing his Tenants Corn at that time; when
the Libellers allege he was in his Croser, and his stirring therein, parted
Mr. K. and the Woman, struggling together. Now know, that Mr. K. asked Mr.
Gaudy, Clerk to the Synod, if this so Solemn a Declaration of Sir J. H. was
Recorded, or not; and found that it was not. Ay but, had it concerned the other
side of the House, it would not have been omitted.

We now go on to tell you, that the Synod adjourning about 6 a Clock, a
Committee sits in James Duncan's till near Midnight; Mr. K. all that time
waited on in the said House, expecting every minute to be called, but was not;
nor the whole following day, the Synod, Committee, and Sub-Committee sat till
12 at Night. After Midnight, Sir J.H. and Sir J. P. went to Stitchel, 2 Miles
distant, and returned next Morning between 8 and 9, but before they entered the
Church, a Fital stroke was given. The Synod had passed a Sentence, which has
been since the occasion of much Debate, great Trouble, and vast Expense. If it
had pleased their Wisdoms to have delayed the matter, till these two worthy
Gentlemen came, very likely things would have come to an Accommodation; for
these two Gentlemen did what lay in their Power, both the said two Days and
Nights to b^^ng them to a happy Conclusion. And though they were exceeding weary
(and no wonder) going to Bed about three a Clock, having Supped at two, yet got
up betimes and drew a Paper before they came from Stitchel to be Subscribed by
Mr. K. which certainly would have given Satisfaction to the far greatest part
of the Synod. Sir J. Pringle went strait to the Church, and as he was entering,
he hears the Vote going about. Sir J. Home came to Mr. K's House, and showed
him the said Paper; but before it was well read over, word came that a Sentence
was past: So that all the great Labor and Toil these two Persons of Honor had
taken, came to naught. Many of the Brethren sore Repented this afterward, and
sought for an Accommodation, but could never have it in the terms they then had
in their offer; as you shall see in its place.

Follows the Sentence of the SYNOD. Sess. 5. ante Meridiem. Kelso, Oct. 17 1695.
25.
THe Synod having received the Report of the Committee anent, Mr. J. Kirkwood,
Schoolmaster of Kelso his Process, together with the following Overture; viz.
That the Committee, taking to their serious Consideration, the Complex Affair
of Mr. K's Process, judges him unfit to be either Precen^or, or Session-Clerk;
and allows Mr. W. Jaque, Minister of Kelso, with the Session of Kelso, to
provide a fit Person for these Employments; Ay, and while the School of Kelso
be provided with a Qualified Doctor for these Offices; and he, who shall
Precent, or Officiate as Session-Clerk, shall have a Quarter of an Years
Advertisement, before they provide another, who is to be Tried, and Approven by
the Kirk-Session and Presbytery of Kelso, (and what concerns the Libel to be
refe^^ed to a Committee for further Consideration and Enquiry) And in Case
Parties do not agree anent the Examination, and Trial of the Doctor, for being
Precentor and Session-Clerk, they shall make Application to the said Committee.
Which Overture being Read, and Maturely considered, the Synod by Vote approved
the same. And further, the Synod Nominates and Appoints the following Persons
for to make up the said Committee, viz. Mr. Semple, Mr. Vetch, Mr. Wilson, Mr.
Couden, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Orock, Mr. Noble, Mr. Dalgliesh, Mr. Boid, Mr. Edgar,
Mr. Home, Mr. Calderwood, Mr. Gordon, Mr. Dysert, Mr. Bell, Mr. Guttry, with
the Mod. Ministers. My Lord Polworth, the Lord Mersinton, Sir John Riddle of
that Ilk, Sir John Home of Blakader, Sir John Pringle of Stitchel, the Lord of
Wadderlie, Francis Gladstones of Whitlaw, Adam Tait, William Young of
Spittle-Land, Ruling Elders; Impowring them either to determine in the foresaid
Affair of Mr. K. committed to them, if they see cause, or to call a Synod, Ad
hunc Effectum; whereof Nine shall be a Quorum, Six of the Nine being Ministers;
and the first Meeting of the said Committee, is hereby appointed to be the
second Tuesday of November at Kelso. Extracted out of the Records of the Synod
of Mers and Tiviotdale, by

Sic Subscribitur, Jo. Gaudy, Cle. Syn. Pro.

Mr. K. with these Commissionated from the Earl, being called in to hear the
Sentence Read; and it being done, lest it should be said he did things
Precipitantly, begged Liberty, before he gave an Answer, that the said
Commissioners and he might retire alittle into the Church-ya^d, to consider the
mattet apart; which desire was very readily granted. In short, they found the
Sentence to be most unjust; in regard it does palpably encroach upon the Earl's
^or our, Right and Interest, by taking from his Lordship, that which he and his
Predecessors have peaceably possessed past Memory of Man, and putting into the
hands of Mr. J. and his Elders, and consequently quite razes and destroys the
ancient Constitution and Custom of the place; and altogether renders Null, and
of ^one Effect the Call and Contract made with Mr. K. and by an Infallible
consequence is most injurious to his Right and Interest, depriving him of the
Emoruments and Profits, which the Earl and others in a most formal manner bound
and obliged themselves, should accrue solely to him. And besides the Material
Injustice in the Sentence, they found a wonderful slip in its Form, by
declaring Mr. K. unfit for the said Offices, and yet gives no Reason for the
same. Upon these, and other grounds, they go in again to the Church, and
Unanimously represent to the Synod, that they could not comply with this their
Sentence, for the Reasons above named, and others. And therefore appealed from
them in matters Ecclesiastical to the next ensuing G. A. and in matters Civil
to the Judge ordinary, as Instruments at more length bear.

REMARKS upon the Sentence of the SYNOD.
26.
WEre it not, that you are to have a pretty large Account of the Actings of
this Synod, in that above mentioned Paper given into the Synod at Jedburgh
(Sect. 13 Part 4) we could not pass here so slightly several things of very
great moment, as to Mr. K's part; and yet matters there are not delivered so
fully and lively as could be wished, in respect he was then ^ot a little
straightened in time, several other businesses of no small Concern occurring. Nor
can we now, at least we will not, make any alteration in that Paper, lest our
Adversaries should think, that we wrong them by making things appear in another
dress, than once they were in. All we shall say here, may be comprehended in
these few particulars.

1. You see in the Sentence, that the Overture of the Committee being Read, and
Maturely (as they say) considered, is approved by Vote of Synod. By Maturely,
here certainly is meant Duly, or Seriously; whereas in effect it ought rather
to be taken in also ^ Native and Proper Signification; viz. Farly, Speedily, or
Hastily. We hate to Jangle about the various acceptance of Words; but far
rather love to speak home to the matter in hand. In short therefore, we da^e
positively assert that the Synod, and its Committees had sit and ^o (...) the
Affair 3 Years, as they did 3 Days, and yet all that time never once call M. K.
and others concerned to see what they had to ^a^ for themselves, the business
could not be Maturely, or Duly considered: that is, Canvass'd as it ought to
be, Modo and more debito; as Justice and Law require. It this be not done, it is
to pass Sentence against a Person (Indicta Causa) without hearing him. You may
as well not Cite him before you, as not to call him in, till it be to hear his
Sentence read. It Is all one, as if you should send him word by your Officer; or
desire one of your number to acquaint him, that a Sentence is past so and so.
Now, is not this down right Mr. K's Case? Yea, and the Earl's also. Sentence is
past on both, without hearing them speak one word in their Cause. And yet M. J.
forsooth, the Chief and Principal person of the opposite Party, is permitted to
sit amongst the Judges, and plead his own Cause. If this be not Partiality in
the Judges, there never was any in the World. 2. Lo, here is a Sentence without
any Reason, except the Will and Pleasure of the Judge. A new sort of thing,
never, that we know, heard of in the World before. Ay, but there is much worse
in it, than perhaps you are aware of. See you not something wrapped up within its
bosom, like Poison: Deadly Poison. It Is not much unlike the thing, which some
call Couper-justice; first to hang a man, and then to appoint an Assize; to
make Enquiry, whether or not, he deserves so severe a Punishment. We need not
be at great pains to make Application; he that Runs may read, the thing being
as clea^, as the Sun at Noontide. The Synod, you see, by their Sentence
declare M. K. unfit to Officiate, as Session-Clerk and Precentor; and yet they
appoint a Committee to consider, whether he be guilty of such Faults, as render
him unfit for the said Offices. Now, pray speak Ingenuously; Think you that
these Men, who by their Sentence Pronounced, as they say, after Mature
Deliberation, have declared him unfit this day, will by another Proclaim him
fit to morrow, contradicting the who^e Synod; and consequently Condemning both
them and themselves as guilty of Injustice. All Judges, you know, ought to be
(In Aequilibrio) in a state of Indifferency to Condemn or Assoil a man
according as they find just cause for either of these: Whereas there is a kind
of necessity laid on this Committee to adhere to the Sentence, which they have
already passed. They have now a strong Bias to draw them to one of the sides.
It will be aforc'd Putt and Stretch, to make them to Revoke what they have done
in this point. It Is hard to Imagine, what answer can be given to satisfy any
Indefferent Person in this matter. Perhaps you will say (yea, you must say it,
otherwise it is not possible you can free your self from the abovementioned
Preposterous, and Arse-ward way of giving men Couper justice) that it is not on
the account of any Clause or Article in the Libel, that the Synod declared M.
K. unfit for the said Offices, but for some other reason, which they thought
not fit to name in their Sentence. This is to run out of the Dub, as we say,
into the Mire, a thing far worse than the former. By this means you condemn a
man without either Libel, Citation, or Hearing: Nor will you tell him,
wherefore you do it. O how will Postery stand Amazed to hear of such Wild Acts!

The most astonishing thing in all this Business is, that the Synod (at least
by far the greatest part) did pass this Sentence, not knowing upon what ground
they did it. Some of themselves told M^. K. since, that the Reason why they
declared him unfit, was on the account of the Differences between the
Kirk-Session and him: which thing, said they, we do not remember was ever so
much as moved or tabled before the Synod, but only considered by a few in
private. To this Mr. K. replied, 1. That it was a very great fault in these few
leading Men so to impose on their Brethren, as to make them act blindly in a
matter of such, Importance: and was also a sign of great weakness (to call it
no worse) in these Brethren to be so easily imposed upon. 2. It Is an act, said
he, of great Injustice to pass a Sentence on any Person without first hearing
what he has to say for himself. You do not know, but Mr. K. could have
instructed, that these differences between the Kirk-Session and him, had their
rise from them and not from him: and to punish him for their Crimes is a most
horrid Iniquity. And therefore he re^orted the Argument upon Mr. J. and his
Elders; saying, they were more unfit for their respective Offices on the
account of the great Differences no only between them and Mr. K. but (which is
far more considerable) between them and the greatest part of the Parish;
especially those of the best Quality and Note in the place. And certainly, if
matters were well considered, it will be found that these Debates and
Differences in the Parish do arise more from the wild carriage of the Members
of Session, than from any other Person concerned with them. The last Observe we
shall make here on this Sentence, is Mr. K's sad Complaint, that
notwithstanding he gave in to the Synod Reasons of Appeal, containing very many
gross and palpable Faults, whereof the said Committee was guilty; yet no regard
was had thereto, as it such a thing had never been; for they did not so much as
once call for him, either to hear the said Reasons, or the Depositions of
Witnesses read over. People are hugely astonished, when he tells them that he
never once saw the Depositions, not heard them read over in his Life: and you
know very well that a particular account of Circumstances does often make a
business appear quite another thing from what it seemed to be at first view.

27.
November. 12. 1695. This day Mr. K. was summoned at Mr. J's Instance to appear
at one and the same moment before the Sheriff at Jedburgh, on the account of
the said Brew House or Vault, and before the Committee at Kelso, for an
expression in his defense of the last Article of the said Li^e^. The words are;
Mr. J. sitting in judgment with his Elders in a surprise, struck Mr. K. through
the heart with a Thunderbolt from Heaven, or rather Hell, to wit, that horrid
Calumny about the Woman in Blakader. An explication of these words you have in
the Remark D. on the said Defense, Sect. 7. Answer to the 15 Article. Now let
the world judge, how unreasonable it is, especially in a Minister of the
Gospel, to require that his Neighbor perform things which are simply
impossible, viz. to be at one time in two places 6 or 7 miles distant. It Is a
silly Answer to say, that he may be personally present at the one place, and by
his Proctour at the other. To pass, that thereby he may sustain great hurt as
to his Plea, and also be put to greater Expenses. besides these two Reasons, we
say, know that Mr. Ports Mr. K's Proctour was summoned also at Mr. J's Instance
to appear at Kelso before the Committee for some Words he had spoken, that did
not savor well in Mr. J's Ears: so that Mr. K. was put to seek a new Proctour,
and to inform about the particulars of his Plea. Thus to vex Mr. K. and to put
him to much needless Trouble and Expense, is, it seems, Mr. J's delight and
preasure. You will have more of this kind of stuff thereafter; but one piece
you will find blood-red, like the finest Scarlet, dazzling the Eyes to look
on it. In plain terms, you shall see Mr. K. at one and the same time summoned at
Mr. J's Instance, both before the Sheriff at Jedburgh, and before the Lords of
His Majesty's Privy Council, with about 50 Witnesses to depone against him,
among whom was his Proctour, Mr. Potts. Of which Business in its place, Sect.
10. Par. 5. What name to give this so strange kind of dealing in Mr. J. we
leave to the Judgment of others: whether to call it, a malicious Act, or an
evil Design, etc. Call it what you please: certainly he designed little good to
Mr. K. ^^e aimed to have a hit at him one way or other. But this day he was
disappointed; for there was not a Quorum; only met 6 Ministers, without so much
as one ruling Elder.

28.
DEcember 3. 1695. This day, Mr K. was again summoned both before the Sheriff
and Committee at Mr. J's instance; as also at the instance of the Libellers
before the Committee: Mr. Potts also at Mr. J's instance before the Committee:
Lastly, Mr. K. Baily Pring. and Mr. Potts, were all cited before the Committee
at the instance of Mr. Tho. Thomson, Minister at Ednim. Mr. Potts went to
Jedburgh, to defend Mr. K's Plea there: Baily Pringle could not attend, being
hindered by business: so that Mr. K. behooved to Act for them and himself also,
in all the above mentioned Pleas. Being called in, he immediately cast his eyes
up and down amongst the Judges, and not seeing so much as one single Gentleman,
or Ruling Elder, present of all his 5. that were appointed by the Synod; he
asked the Mod. if all the Members, nominated by the Synod to be his Judges in
this Affair, were duly Advertised to be present at this Meetting. After a
pretty long silence, one answered, All our Presbytery were Advertised on our
last Presbytery-day. ^o were those in ours, said another. That Is not enough
Mod. replied Mr. K. Some might be absent that day; How were they advertised?
But Mod continued Mr. K. The chief thing I desire to know, is, Whether, or not,
these Honorable and Worthy Gentlemen, the Ruling Elders have got
Advertisement? Such as My Lord Polwart, the Lord Mer^inton, Sir. J. Home of
Blak^der, etc. To this Question, none giving a positive Answer, Mr. K.
continued thus; Mod. The Reason, why I enquire so narrowly into this matter,
is, that I know certainly that the former Committee that sat in Spring and
Summer last, met frequently without Advertising several Members, especially the
Gentlemen; particularly that Grand Meeting, as to any Action, as of Sept. last,
when above 30 Witnesses were to be Examined: at which time, not one of the
Assistants were present, except Mr. Conden: And certainly, if these Worthy
Gentlemen, had been at that Meeting, the many gross and illegal steps made that
day, would not have been committed. And Mod. I must beg liberty to tell you,
that I have too too much ground to suspect, that your Meetings are Packed, and
made up on purpose to carry on an unjust design. Mod. I expect, and hope that
you will pardon this freedom. I am so exceedingly concerned in this Affair,
that I am forced, I know not how, to speak many things much contrary to my
Inclination. Not only my Fortune and Livelihood, but that, which is far dearer
to me, my Reputation and Credit; yea, I may say, my very Life is ^^stake. I can
instance, Mod. several Gentlemen, that told they were not Advertised to meet
the said 24 of Sept. particularly, Sir John Pringle of Stitchel. And if he,
that lives so near, got no Advertisement, much less would they get, who live at
a distance. Sir J. Pringle, answered My. Glen, was then in England, either at
London, or the Bathes. This Gentleman, replied Mr. K. that now speaks, is none
of your number, and therefore ought to be silent; and, if he speak it ought to
be Truth he says. I offer Mod. to Instruct, that Sir John Pringle was at home
in his own house at Stitchel, several days before the said 24 of Sept. and
particularly that day: And how can this he unknown to Mr. Glen, who lives, we
may say, at Sir John 's very Gate, judge you. This day Mr. K. said the Mod. I
advertised Sir John my self, as I came by, that we were to meet on your Affair.
Mod. answered Mr. K You must pardon me, to say, that that is not a due and
timous advertisement. Members, especially Persons of Honor, such as he is,
ought to be acquainted by a Letter some day* before the Meeting. Who knows,
Mod. but Sir John might yester right appoint to be this day with some Persons
about a business of Concern, which tie like, if he had been timously advertised
of this Meeting, he would have delayed till another time. After some Reasoning
to this purpose, Mr. J's and Mr. Thomson's Libels were read, to which Mr. K.
gave this Return, viz. That neither Bailyff Pringle, Mr. Potts, not he were
obliged to answer the said Complaints in regard they were a part of the
Process, which now by Appeal is lying before the G. A. in matters
Ecclesiastical, and before the Judge Ordinary in Civil, as the said Appeal and
Instruments taken thereon, at more length bear. Mr. J's Complaint or Libel
against Mr. K. is, for the Expession above mentioned, in his Defense to the
last Article of the said Libel. That against Mr. Potts, was also for some
Expression, that seemed unsavory in Mr. J's ears, which Mr Potts had spoken in
time of Pleading before a Committee. Mr. Thomson's Libel against all three,
was, for Asserting in the Reasons of Appeal on that famous 24 of Sept. Sect.
27, Reason 10. Obj. 3. that he prevaricated, or spoke that as a truth, which he
knew was false* of which business you have a particular Account, Sect. 3.

The Fourth PART. Follows what passed at Edenb. before the G. A. and its
Committees, from the 17. of December. 1695. to the 7 of Jan. 96. Relating to this
Plea.
1.
IT were tedious to set down every particular, that past before these
Judicatures; to say nothing of private Conferences. We shall therefore only
give you a brief touch of some Material Points. Know then, that Mr. K.
according to Custom, gave into the Committee of bills a Petition, complaining
of the Injustie done him by the Church-Judicatures, mentioned in the former
Parts of this Work, and seeking to be re^ress'd of the same by their Wisdoms.
With this Petition was also given in the Protestation taken before the Synod,
17 Ost. then last, containing the Reasons of Appeals. These two Papers being
read, the business was recommended to 4 or 5 Ministers, in order to ^^pea and
prepare matters: Time and Place being appointed for Parties to meet with these
Minister. Mr. K. punctually observed the Diet^ but not so much as one of the
other Party came to the Place appointed That their meeting might not be
altogether in vain, these Ministers desired Mr. K. to give them some account of
the Affair: And that they might be assured of the Truth of what he said he
produced a vast number of Authentic Papers. After two full hours, poring into
Matters, these Gentlemen told Mr. K. they had enough of it for that time; more,
than their memories could well retain. Next day, Report being made to the
Committee; viz. That is was a mighty reasons and intricate Affair, and would
require a long time to consider all Particulars. It was again recommended to
these same Ministers with some few more added to them.

Mr. K. faild not to keep Diet; but none of the other side came. Their Excuse
was, that Mr. J. being to Preach next day, could not wait on. After some
Conference with Mr. K. they appoint him to meet in that same place on Monday,
precisely at eight a Clock in the Morning; and they would advertise the other
Party to meet all. Accordingly Mr. K came, and after he had waited above an
hour, looking every minute for Mr. J's coming, but all in vain; at last two of
these Ministers and he, went to his Chamber, where after some little debate,
between Mr. J. and Mr. K. Whether the Appeal had fallen, or not; of which
matter, you will hear more fully within a little. M^ K. being removed, these
two Ministers and Mr. J. had a pretty long Conference.

2.
THe Committee meeting at 10 a Clock, and Report made, Mr. J. began thus: I
desire, said he, Mod. to know how this Affair comes in before this Judicature.
By way of Appeal, answered Mr. K. Appeal! replied Mr. J. I remember, there was
something like an Appeal made; but that is fallen, in regard the Reasons were not
given in to the Mod. and Clerk of the Synod within 10 days, according to an Act
of the G. A. The Reasons, answered Mr. K. were given into the Synod Instanter,
at the making of the Appeal, as Instruments expressly bear, so that it had been
superstit^ous to have repeated the same Reasons thereafter. Mr. J. still urged,
that the Act of the G. A. does expressly bear, that two Doubles, or Copies of
the Reasons of Appeal be given in Writing, the one to the Mod. the other to the
Clerk of that Judicature, from which the Appeal is made; and that within 10
days. To this Mr. K. gave Answer, Dying* ^od. That Act of the G. A. was made in
favor only of the Appellant; and that in Case he has not his Reasons in
readiness at the time he Appeals: therefore it is that he gets 10 days to
repare and give Copies thereof to the Mod. and Clerk. But supposing he has them
ready at the Minute when be makes Appeal; pray, Mod. what need is there, that
he keep them 8, 9, or 10 days, and then travel up and down the Country, perhaps
20 or 30 Miles East and West to find the said Mod. and Clerk? In this case you
make an Act, which is made for a man's advantage, to tend to his hurt and damage
Is it not far more agreeable to sound Reason, and to the Principles of Justice
and Equity, that he free himself, if he can of needless trouble and expense?
Which thing may be easily done, especially where the reasons of Appeal are very
few, and strong, as in the present Case. Have you no more Reasons, than what
are mentioned in your Instrument, said the Moderator? Though I had no more,
answered Mr. K. but what are in that Instrument, it is sufficient to make me
refuse to comply with the Sentence of the Synod. Is not this enough, Mod. that
I can instruct, that the said Sentence does strike against the Honor, Right
and Interest of the Earl of Rox, and it hugely prejudicial to my self, by quite
razing and destroying the Contra^t made between my Noble and Worthy Pa^ro^s and
me. ^ut Mod. continued Mr. K. if I had met with that Justice and Equity, which
Law allows me, 'could have given you far more Reasons, than what are contained
in that Instrument. If the Synod, I say had ordered or permitted their Clerk to
give me the Double of the Process, particularly the Depositions of the
Witnesses, you should have had a good store of Reasons, and perhaps such, as
hardly ^he like ever before this time were given by any person. Pray, Mod.
further, said Mr. K. Whence shall I have my Reasons of Appeal? Shall I seek
them out of Virgil, or Horace? You will not ^e them there indeed, answered one.
Certainly then, relied Mr. K. I must have them from the Process; either as to
the iniquity of matter, or illegality of form. One of the Members desired the
Mod. to ask by what Law, Mr. K. craved the Extract of the Depositions of
Witnesses. By Act of Parliament, answered Mr. K. citing the 18 Art. Sess. 2
Parl. K. J. 7. in that Act, replied one, relates to Civil matters only. With
this Gentlemen's l^^ve. ^od. answered Mr. K. (...) well to Ecclesiastical, as
Civil matters, (...), it is a Maximin Law; Ubi let non distingui, nec nobis
^istinguendum. That Act of Parliament is in General, an^ therefore (...) to
(...) the Judicatures in this Kingdom; as well Ecclesiastical, as Civil. And i^
sides, Mod. (...), that any man give me a just and satisfying Reason, why it
should hold (...) to Civil, and (...) Ecclesiastical Judicatures; yea, on the
contrary, if any Moderation, Favour^ or Clemency, may or should be granted by
Judicature, the Church, are would think, ought to be more ready to do it than
the State: But Mod. it is not a favor I seek; it is what Justice Equity, L^^,
and (...) Did you not take Instruments also, said the Mod. in the hands of the
Clerk of the Synod, when you Appealed? That I never failed to do, answered Mr.
K. when I (...) Instruments is (...) Public No^ar, and with this he produced
the Instrument; which being read, and (...) with the other, they di^^^^'d in
some things. Whereupon said the Mod. (...) do not quadrate. They do not
contradict are the other, answered (...) K. That of the Clerk of the Synod is
not indeed so full and particular as the (...) Mod. (...) tell you, (...) given
me it in the words ^ took M; with thing (...) one, he accus^^ the Clerk of the
Synod of justice. (...) Mr. K. (...) Instrument do (...) indeed. What, said
that Gentleman, the Clerk of the Synod, (...) ^^^^ster of the Gospel, is far
rather to be (...) Mr. K. This Gentleman who spoke l^st (...) Instrument under
the Public Notar's hand ought to be of more faith (...).

^* The Public (...) of the Synod. 2. Four Famous (...) other ^as not and
Witness. 3. What the Public (...) a thing was (...)* Whereas that of the Clerk
(...) Mod. that (...) Affirming Witnesses (...) more Faith, than (...) is a
Party and only as a Member of the Synod, but in (...) especially (...) of
Kelso, against (...) the Head No (...) Minister (...) by that Right we laid
(...) to the Offices of being (...)* By that (...) Right, answered Mr. K. (...)
to (...) Office of being (...) and with this he offered to (...) of Roxb. power
to (...) Session hold (...) others concerned in the Parish, have power to (...)
the same this Hundred years bygone; that is to (...), if the (...) and others
present a Person (...) qualif^^^ for the Offices under debate he ought to (...)
install^^ no^ is it in the power of the Kirk-Session (especially such an one,
as that in Kelso i^) to reject him or to put a other in his room. This has been
the Constitution in that place, notwithstanding all the Revolutions in Church
and State, past memory of any Man living; and was never called into Question
till this ho^r. Every Judicature, replied Mr. Monterieef* has power to choose
their own Clerk. This Gentleman (answered Mr. K. not then knowing, whether he
was a Minister, or Ruling Elder, he apearing somewhat Sparkish) seems not to be
very well versed in the Judicatures of this Kingdom. Every Judicature has
power, says he, to choose their own Clerk! Mod. The High Coun^^^l of
Parliament has not* The Lords of Privy Council have not. The Lords of ^ession
have not. No Sheriff, no Commissary, that I know has Poker. These are all Civil
Judicatures, replied the Mod. or some other of the Members; for Mr. K's memory
could not (...) home to Mr* Chamber every particular or circumstance of this
kind, nor was he ^o (...) to mind, who spoke, as what was spoken. With your
leave, answered Mr. K. They are (...) at all Civil. The Commissary is rather an
Ecclesiastical Judge. ^ut Mod. (...), I shall pass these Courts, and come
nearer home, even to your own door. Know (...) the Kirk-Session of the City of
Edenb. has not power to choose their own Clerk* The Magistr^^^^ do it. Yea,
they sell that place: and got 50 ^^ Mark Scots from Mr. William Henderson for
it* and at this day pay him 300 Marks a year, because he is put out of that
Office^. And to my certain knowledge, the Magistrates of Li^^go place the
Session-Clerk in that B^rgh; son in my time M^. Seton Minister there was fully
resolved to settle in that Office, Mr. James Nicol. one of my School-Doctors
after the Death of Will. Bizor. and had ordered him to Precent on Sunday, as a
trial. But Bailyff James Smith sent him word, that if he went up to the
Precentor's place for such an end, without Liberty from the Magistrates, he
would cause to pull him down by the Neck. In Ha^inton also, the magistrates put
in the Session-Clerk and ^ce^torn to name no more^^. Not one Member offering to
give any return, M^ K. spoke further, thus; Mod. I humbly beg liberty to (...)
you, that this business under present debate does not bo^ing to this
Judicature. It Is a (...) Plea depending before the Lords of Council and
Session. Lo. Mod. there a the Process, showing to the Committee a Declarator,
with the Sa^^ons and Execu^ons, seen and returned, being only quoted by
Advocates on both sides. He further added to this purpose him not so much
concerned as the Earl and others; my righ^ is but (...), and temporary, being
derived from my Noble Patrons during my time, which may ^d very share. And,
therefore I crave that you forbear to enter upon this Point, which in stated
before another Judicature, to which properly it belongs. We will not meddle
with the Earl's Right, replied the Mod. It Is a common mistake Mod. continued
Mr. K. to think that the Office of Session (...) is purely Ecclesiastical;
whereas the Recording of Baptisms and Ma^^ing (...) frequently the ground and
foundation of a Civil Plea, and that wherein the Sentence^ a Civil Judge,
especially a Commissary lays great stress. A famous instance might b^^ given
about Mr. Christ (...) or of Medicine, who was Married 1639, etc. The
Circumstances of which Plea (...) to be here related. Mr. K being removed and
call^^^la against Where (...) Mr. K. sake the Mo^. (a very Descreet, and
Ingenious Gentleman, Minister (...) deliberately in this Affair; and therefore
we will take the Advice of (...) Immediately two Members of the Committee of
Bills are sent with Mr. K. to the Committee of Overtures, which was then
s^^ing. One of the (...) two Members (...), a Minister in Arg. (if Mr. K's
memory fail (...) of whom you will heal in the followin G. A. (...) 16^7 (...)
this Affair at this time, turned the Current anc^^e^ way, than whether it was
like to him, as (...) will hear in its proper place Sect. 6. (...) (...), the
Advice of the Committee of Overtures was, that a Sa^-Committee should be chosen
out of both these Committee to sit that night and Consider matters, which a
^^dingly was alon^. Whether many of the Adverse Party was present, or not, Mr.
K. cannot informed be was not (...) in general, that they were all much pa^^d
with the business, finding the Arguments he had used un-answerable. And
therefore a Report (...) his streeting being made to the Committee of Bills,
and Mr. K. called in; the Mod. spoke thus (...) ^^^^e glad Mr. K. to be quit of
your Affair. You are no more to be before us. Your business is ans^^^ed to the
Assembly. I heartily thank you, Mod. replied Mr. K. for the pains you have
taken in by behalf and it humbly, beg you all pardon for the great trouble have
give you And thus he parted with that Judicature for that year. Next Jan. by
another Appeal, he returned again to that same Judicatura; that samed we say in
name, but made up, at least for most part, of different Members whereof (some
as you will bear) were pretty rude, and indiscreet to him: and therefore to
tame them a little, be carried them down to Hell, and caused them to go round
the whole Confines of Eternity, which made them to set as mu^e as Fish. Sect.
6. Part 5. We had not a fit occasion to tell you, that the day after Mr. K. had
the debate before the Committee of Bills about the Session-Clerks place, some
of the Members told him in face of that Judicature, that the present
Magistrates of Lithgo had quit their Right of placing the Session-Clerk and
Precentor, and put it into the hands of the Kirk-Session. To which Mr. K
answered, that it was not his Business to enquire, whether that was so or not;
nor upon what Ground it was done. And grant it was so; it does not follow, that
the Earl of Roxb is obliged to cede from his Right because the Magistrates of
Lithgo have parted with theirs, and who knows, but their Successors may recall,
what they have done A. Remark on the Direction of Mr. K 's Petition. Mr. K. was
challenged, though not directly, yet openly in face of the Committee of hills by
two or three Brethren, that his Petition was not directed after the ordinary
Form. He not being spoken to by the Mod upon that Head, nor directly challenged
by these Ministers, opened not his mouth, not knowing well what they meant In
private he asked one whom he knew he might be free with, what the matter was,
It Is, answered the Gentleman, because you direct your Petition, To his Grace,
His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Reverend Mod. and an Whereas other
Petitions run only, To the Reverend Mod. etc. For, you know, they look not on
the Commissioner as an Essential Member of the Assembly, in regard he gives not
his Vote. Mr. replied Mr. K. I will not at present enter upon that debate,
Whether he be an Essential Member, or not. All I say, is, that his Grace
sitting there, as representing the King himself, I humbly conceive, he ought
not to be passed by, as a Cipher, or a Person not to be regarded; Yea, were it
for no other reason, yet methinks, on the Account of good breeding, one in so
super eminent a Station ought to be taken notice of in the First place.

But, Sir, I have more to say for my self upon this Head, than perhaps others
will pretend to. You see, by my Petition and instrument, that my Plea is partly
Ecclesiastical, partly Civil. Now, Sir, I must tell you, to my sad Experience,
that the Church has already dipped too far into the Civil part of my Process.
They have far transgressed their bounds, and got over the Hedge into their
Neighbor's Fields* This, Sir, you saw, I did hint at before your Committee.
But, if my business come to be debated publicly before the G. A. as I hope it
shall, I will be necessitated to be more plain Now, Sir, you know, that it is
the Office and Duty of my Lord Commissioner to see that ye keep within your own
Bounds; and that by no means ye encroach upon any man's Right and Property: and
if his Grace should find that ye attempt to transgress your true Limits, he can
cuth you, and order you to retire, which if ye refuse to do, its in his power
to dissolve you Mr. Kirkwood, said the Gentleman, that is a very thorny Theme:
we will let it alone at present. I shall be glad to discourse at large upon it
with you at a more convenient time. I know very well, that there are many good
and learned men of your judgment; but it is as sure there are some among us, who
think otherwise. The great difficulty is to aright to ride the marches, as we
say, between Church and State. We often ^ide them, answer Mr. K. as the Scots
and English did in the days of our Predecessors, sometimes we broke in upon
them with fire and sword; at other times they did the same to us. It Is a very
fit comparison, replied the Gentleman; I have often found it so. And with this,
Company coming in, they were necessitated to break off that Discourse.

3.
THE Committee of Bills by the Advice, as you heard, of the Committee of
Overtures, having transmitted this Process to the G. A. and they being to rise
that same day it came in before them, referred to the Commission, which sat
down 7th Jan. 9^. On which day Mr. K. gave in a Petition. ^^^destly begging,
that they would either immediately fall on his Business, or else send him home
to his Charge, appointing him a peremptory time, when to return. By the way
know, that though Mr. K. all occasions, pressed hard for dispatch on the account
of his Employment, yet his Affair seldom, or never came in. but with the last.
Home he is sent at this time, and ordered to return 4th of March thereafter; on
which day precisely, he returned. As to what was done on the said 4th of March,
and two days thereafter in Mr. K's Business at Edenb. before the Commission, we
refer you to the 18, 19, 20, and 21 Paragraphs of that Paper, given in to the
Synod at Jedburgh, Sect. 13. Though the account there given be far from being
full and complete, yet we shall let it pass as such, because we shun
Repetitions. So now at length, we return back with the Process to Mers and
Tiviotdale.

4.
AT Kelso, Jan. 28 and 11 Feb. 96. Though this Plea was depending before the
Commission at Edenb. by a Reference from the G. A. as is above-related, of
which thing, if you have any doubt, you may see it in their printed Acts;
notwithstanding, we say, that this Process was duly and legally, after much
debate and consideration, transmitted from the Committee of Bills, and that by
the advice of the other Grand Committee of Overtures, to the G. A. and by that
Judicatures referred to their Commission, and there formally Tabled by a
Petition given in, and accepted as such; yet Mr. K. is again and again cited to
appear upon that same head before inferior Judicatures at Kelso. But it fell so
out, that in neither of the said days there was a Quorum; only Mr. K. went into
the Church, and having produced his Summons protested for Cost, Skaith, and
Damage, and Remeed in Law, as Instruments at more length bear.

5.
AT Kelso, 17 March, 96. You may remember, that the Synod (17 Oct. 95, Sect.
30, Part. 3.) by their Sentence declared Mr. K. unfit to be Session-Clerk or
Precentor, and an allowed the Kirk-Session to put in a fit person in these
Employments, until the School was provided with a qualified Doctor for the said
Offices. Now, though Mr. K. thinks he had and still has just ground to complain
of this Sentence, as you have heard, and will further hear afterward or yet
that he may go along with them, as far as Law, Reason, and Conscience will
permit, he notwithout much Trouble and Expense having provided a person well
qualified for the said Officers, gave in to the Presbytery of Kelso the
following Address.

To the Reverend the Moderator and remanent Brethren of the Presbyery of Kelso
The Address of Mr. James Kirkwood, Schoolmaster there.
Humbly shows,
THat on the Consideration of the Differences between the Kirk-Session and the
said M^. K to judges it not convenient that he at present Officiate as
Session-Clerk, Precentor or Reader. Therefore be nominat^s, ^a^es, and
constitutes Mr. H. Lickly, School-Doctor, being a Person qualified in Paris,
and with Testimonials, and willing when required, to qualify himself according
to Law, to exerce these Offices during the said Mr. K's pleasure; the Sallary
and Casualties belonging to these respective Offices being always paid into,
and collected by the said Mr. K. for his own Use. This Address, or what may
follow thereupon, being no wise prejudicial to the Right of Presentation
belonging to the E. of Roxb. with the Concourse of the Heretors and others of
the Parish of Kelso; and also being without Prejudice to the said Mr. K. and
his Succ^ssors (...) coming, conform to the ancient Constitution and Custom of
the place. And your Answer

Sic subscribitur, James Kirkwood.

The Answer given to the said Address. Kelso, March 17, 1696.
THe which Day, Mr. J. Kirkwood, having given man Address to the Presbytery,
desiring his Doctor to be admitted as Precentor and Session Clerk in Kelso, the
Presbytery finding thereby that it comes in to them per Saltum, neglecting the
Session of Kelso, therefore they refer it to the Committee or Synod, for
Advice, which of them shall first happen to si^, Extracted out of the Records
of the Presbytery, by

Sic. subscribitur, John Simson, Cl^^b.

Rem. Know that Mr. K. in all the steps of his Process (except his pleading
before Judicatures, did still act, by the Advice and Concurrence of Persons
concerned in his Affair, and particularly as to this present Address, he was
advised to give it in either to Presbytery or Session, which of the two first
met, in regard the Sentence of the Synod expressly hears, that the Session and
Presbytery were to try and approve that Person, who was to Officiate as
Session-Clerk and Precentor. ( Sect. 30. Par. 3.) So that not only Mr. K. but
others also thought it a matter much indifferent, to which of the two
Judicatures they should make Address; especially since Mr. J sat in both. And
suppose it was some little mistake, yet it was not a Fault, much less a Crime:
And besides, it was very easily helped, ^^ly by telling Mr. K. that it ought to
be given in to the Kirk-Session. Certainly he had done it with the first
Opportunity. But you see the matter carried forward to the Committee and Synod;
where, as Mr. K. was informed, 'twas c^oak'd by Mr. J. as soon as it was
motioned. In a word, Mr. K. never once heard one Syllable of it after that day
he gave in the Address, Further know, that Mr. J. would not have suffered Mr.
Lickly to pe^form the said Offices: for, when he went away to Sir William.
Baird of New Both, to Teach his So ^s, he flatly refused him a Testimonial. We
must not here wrong Mr. J by concealing the Reasons of his refusing. One, we
confess, was a very heinous Crime: for about 10 days, after Mr. Lickly came to
Kelso, there being no Sermon in the Kirk in a very tempestuous Day ( Dec. ^^)
the stranger, a No^^blin, not so strait laced, you know, as we in the South,
sla^t into the meeting house to hear the Curate Preach. The other fault was a
Privative one; no real guiltiness in the young man* but rather a kind of Fatal
necessay. which was that he brought no Testimonials with him of any worth. One
he had from the Curate, or, as Mr. J. calls them Incumbent, under whom he
officiated for some Years as Session-Clerk and Precentor, and Schoolmaster of
the Parish in which he was born, and had lived from his Infancy, except the
time wherein he was a^ A^erdean College; and for that he had a very ample
Testimonial from the University. Yet both these were so mighty tastless to Mr.
J's Palate, that he spit them out of his mouth, as if they had been covered
over with dung. Lastly know, that one Mr. J. Forest, successor to the sai^ M^^
Kickly was treated after the same manner by Mr. J. though he did not pretend he
had the least fault imaginable to charge him with: only because he had not 1
Testimo^ial from one of his Communion (so Mr. J. did word it) tho be had a very
ample one subscribed by Mr. J. Grub, Minister, M. J. Strange Sess Cl. Al. Craig,
and David Smith Elders, in the Parish of, Finneven, alias Out^^ovv in Angus, in
which Parish the said Mr. Forest was born, and had lived all his Life, except
while known at the College of S. Andrews. Now good Reader, consider the matter
seriously* From whom (...) in the world could Mr. Forest have a Testimonial,
but from those he got it? Is it not therefore great iniquity in Mr. J. to
refuse Testimonials?

6.
KElso ult March, 96. This day Mr. K. appearing before the Committee, and
Seeing only 9 Members present of 26, that were appointed, which number made
indeed a Quorum; yet still, as he had just ground, suspecting a pack^, Meeting,
said to the M. he humbly desired to know, whether, or not all the Members of
that Committee appointed by the late Synod to sit and cognosce about his
Affair, were advertised, that this day they were to meet upon that head. The M.
answered; ^e knew not. M. replied Mr. K. I must humbly beg your pardon, if I be
earnest and pressing in this Point. It Is a business wherein I Am highly
concerned. And besides the present Circumstances require that I be inquisitive
in this matter. This I lea^ having by an Appeal been carried before the G. A.
by which judicature, after many hot debates before its Committees, it was
referred to its Commission; by which, after no small debate, it was sent back
again to be cognosc'd by you. Now, I Say, Mod. Seeing so weighty and
considerable a Circumstance (if a passage of so high a Nature may go under so
mean a name) has happened in this Plea, since it was before this Judicature; Is
it not most rational; Yea, I may say, absolutely necessary that all these, who
are appointed to be my Judges, be advertised, that the Process is again
returned to be judged by them; and that this day they are to meet to consider
the said Affair. And, Mod, that which makes me the more jealous of their not
being advertised is not only, that your meetings are thin, and very unfequent,
the bare Quorum; but often short of that, as the last two, in neither of which
there was one. I must therefore again take the freedom humbly to crave to know,
if all the Members be advertised, especially the honorable and worthy
Gentlemen. Mr. Wilson Minister at Melros, one of the members replied They were
not obliged to answer any such Question; and to ask such Questions was a
Sal^ni^al Design in Mr. K. and his party, and ought to be looked on as such*
Immediately Mr. Glen. Minister at Stitche being present, tho not a Member,
cried out, that what Mr. Wilson had spoken was truth, and he won'd back it, and
own it, tho not a Member. Upon which opprobrius Expressions of Mr. Wilson and
Mr. Glen, M. K. took Instruments, not only in the hand of the Clerk of the
Committee, but also in the hands of a pubick Nota^. After these Instruments
were taken. M. K. spoke thus; M. said he, What th^se two Gentlemen call me, or
say of me, I do not much value, though their words be pretty severe and biting,
in that they assert with the hight of confidence, that I have a Satanical or
devilish Design by asking such questions; which thing neither they, nor any man
on Earth is able to instruct. But that which does exceedingly amaze me, and may
justly do all that hear the same, is, that they say, my Party has a Satanical
design by my question; a very strange and unaccountable business. I think, M.
they ought to speak with greater respect to those of my Party, the most noble
E. of R. and his Lordship's most honorable Curators, the Marquis of Tweddale,
^ high Chancellor of Scotland, the Countess of Roxb. with many other persons of
great Dignity, all concerned in this Plea, and have their Commissioners here
present to act in their name. Immediately Mr. Wills. and Mr. Glen flatly denied,
that they spoke of M. K 's Party to the great admiration and stumbling of a
vast number of Spectators, particularly of the five Persons, that are witnesses
to the protestation in the public Notar's hand. Mr. K. being removed and
called in again, Mr. Gaudy, Clerk to the said Committee, pressed him very hard
to receive back the Instrument-money; but he positively refused to accept it:
whereupon it was laid down on the Table; and after an hour and an half, given
out of Mr. J's hand, to W. Bell Kirk-Officer A few days thereafter, Mr. K.
having a public Notar by him craved the Extract of the said Instrument from
Mr. Gaudy, who answered, that he was forbidden by the said Committee to give
it, whereupon Mr. K. took Instruments. This day also a Libel was given in by
Mr. J. against Mr. K. upon two heads. Of the one you have already heard, Sect.
33. P. 3. and elsewhere. The other is, that in his Petition to the Synod, 19
March, 95, He charge the Kirk-Session as Forgers of Hellish Calumnies, to
divide him and his Family; of which also, you have an account already. Sect. 7.
Art. 1. Part. 3. Mr. K. craved up this Libel, but it was refused him; whereupon
he told them, that he found it to differ from what it was formerly; and it is
like, said he, if it come in again it may appear in a third shape. He answered
in general that both these points were parts of the Libel or Process, and
therefore must come in therewith; the one in the first Article of the Libel,
the other in the last; of which, Sect. 7. Part 3.

7.
AT the close of this day; Action, an additional, or new Libel was presented to
the Committee; but Mr. K. got not a sight of it for several days, after the
Committee was risen: nor did they so much as let him hear it read; otherwise it
is like he had appealed from them, as going beyond their Instructions: for by
the Sentence of the Synod-above mentioned ( Sect 30. Part. 3.) they were only
to consider the Libel already exhibited. This new Libel is ushered in with a
Petition to the Committee: after these two Papers follows the Committees
Sentence or Interloquitor, without hearing Mr. K. speak one single word upon
the head, or suffering him to see, or know upon what ground such an
Interloquitor passed. These three Papers, viz. The Petition, the new Libel, and
Interloquitor of the Committee were delivered to Mr. K. four days after the
rising of the Committee, not without great Ceremony. They were sent by Mr. J.
with his Officer, who was most peremp^orily prohibited to give them out of his
hand, till he got a Receipt from Mr. K. He as positively refused to give any
such thing under his hand: but bid the Officer bring with him as many Witnesses
as he he pleased to attest the delivery of the said Papers: Or if he thought
not that sufficient, he might call for a Notar Public, to take Instruments
upon the head. Back he goes to Mr. J. and tells him Mr. K's words; and within a
little returns again with two Witnesses at his back, hearing a new Commission.
I am ordered said he, by Mr. J. to deliver these Papers to you, providing you
give me a Receipt; which if you refuse to do, I am commanded to take these two
Men witnesses of your refusal. And I take them Witnesses, answered Mr. K. that
I am both willing and ready to receive them from you or any man; but will not
give it under my hand, because it is not the Custom in such cases. Was it ever
heard, that any man gave Receipts for Summons, Libels, Sentences, or the like?
Back again he runs, and gives Mr. J. an account of his diligence. Presently an
Express is sent to Mr. G. at Sprouston for advice, how to carry in so important
a matter. To conclude, within 2 or 3 hours the Officer returns, and delivers
the Papers, with some little Apology. The said 3 Papers following in Order.

The PETITION. To the Right Reverend the Committee of the Synod of Mers and
Tiviotdale meeting at Kelso; The humble Petition of J. Thomsom, W. Christy
Mich. Fisher, J. Laidly, John Thomson.
SHOWS,
8.
THAT the Petitioners did long ago exhibit to the Presbyttery of Kelso, with
assistant Members of the Synod, a Petition against Mr. J Kirkwood, and a Libel,
containing diverse Articles; some part whereof is Notour; some confessed, and
some proved, which they humbly conceive sufficiently discover him to be a
Person unworthy of the Office of a Schoolmaster, especially in this place, as
may appear by the Brief or Summary of his ill Deportment hereunto annexed. But
understanding, that some things in the said Libel are not fully proved, which
the Petitioners humbly conceive has been by reason, that some Witnesses, who
were adduc'd for Probation, were not examined; others were not fully examined,
Interrogatories proper for discovering the truth not being put to the^; and
others not appearing, who were summoned.

May it therefore please your Wisdoms (in Consideration of what is here
contained in the Paper annexed, together with the great Damage sustained by
this Town and Parish, through the want of a Schoolmaster, to Educate their
Children in Piety and Learning; as also the Influence that the said Mr. K. has
in creating and fomenting Division and Differences in this place, to the great
discouragement of our reverend Pastor, and obstruction of a Gospel Inter^st)
either to proceed without further delay to censure him according to the demerit
of his offenses or, if any doubt remain, as to any particular necessary to be
proved, to direct Summons to such, whose names shall be given, to appear the
next Diet of your meeting, that they may be examined for your further clearing
in that affair, and we shall ever pray, etc.

Extracted by J. Gaudy, Cl. S.
Sic subscribitur, J. Thomson, W. Christy, Jo. Thomson.


The addititional, or now Libel. A Brief Summary of what is either Notour, or
extracted out of his own Papers, or the Depositions of Witnesses against him,
humbly offered to the Consideration of the Committee of the Synod by the
Libellers.
9.
AR^. 1. That the School is under a great Decay, and almost broken, and
unlikely ever to recover, while he is in it, by reason of the evil Fame he is
under, and the not profiting of Children either in Learning, or Religion under
him. A. 2. That he entered without the Approbation of the Presbytery, never
having presented any Grant by the E. of R. and his Curators to the said
Presbytery; not having been tried by them, as he should have been according to
the Act of the G. A. 7 Feb. 1645, and the Act of Parliament, June 12, 1693, and
diverse others. A. 3. That he has no Testimonial from the Kirk-Session, or
Presbytery of Lithgo, where (there is cause to believe) he was very offensive
to all fearing God. A. 4. That the bad Fame he is under by his own Confession,
and raised by himself, not without presumption of Guilt in the Matter
concerning the Woman with Child; and from which he never purged himself, is
sufficient, if there were no more, to render him incapable to be a School
Master in such a considerable Place as Kelso; and will render him contemptible
to his Scholars, who are not ignorant of it. A. 5. That he is a Man of corrupt
Principles in matters of Religion, as his Book, and Deposition of Witnesses do
declare, which incapacitates any Man from being a School Master in a Reformed
Church, where Children should have a Religious Education. A. 6. That by the
Deposition of Witnesses, it is plainly manifest, that he is a Man of a profane
Spirit, which cannot but be very influential to the corrupting of Youth in
their Morals, who are under his Education. A. 7. That it is plainly proved;
yea, and notour, that he has no Authority over his Scholars, to keep them in
good Order. A. 8. That he is much addicted to lying, and self-contradiction, as
may appear by his Information to Sir J. Home of Blakader; and the false
Information he has given to the C. of Roxh. to incense her against the
Ministers and Elders; and the false Information he has given to many others;
and the Contradictions, that are in his Papers, and between his Informations by
word, and his Papers and verbal Confession. A. 9. That he is guilty of manifest
Slanders, both against the Minister and Elders, as by his Papers may appear, by
reason whereof he can never be an useful Schoolmaster in this place, there
being cause for all well-affected to withold or withdraw their Children from
his School. A. 10. That he has manifestly combined with the Party which
opposes a Gospel Ministry in this place, and is Clerk to the Curate for
Clandestine Marriages and Baptisms. A. 11. That his behavior has been most
insolent and unbecoming before the Judicatures of the Church upon several
occasions, when he has been called to appear before them, as has been
observed by all Beholders. A. 12. That he does what in him lies to be
vexatious to the Minister, by Summoning him before the Lords; and also by
Summoning him to the Commissary Court, and by Petitioning the Bailyff to settle
him in the Profits and Emoluments belonging to the Precentor and Session-Clerk,
and that since the Sentence of the Synod against him. A. 13. That he has most
maliciously and grossly slandered the Reverend Mr. T. Thomson (in his pretended
Appeal to the Synod) as a Prevaricator and a Liar. A. 14. That he has
maliciously, without any Cause, arrested Mr. J's Stipend, in the hands of Sir
W. Ker, and the Chamberlain, after a Charge given to them for the Payment of
it, notwithstanding that he knew well, that Mr. J. had never received a
Farthing from them, nor their Tenants, since he came to Kelso; and that they
were obstinately resolved to withold it from him. A. 15. That he has run to
such a Hight of malice, as to procure the Minister and Elders with the
Precentor, and his Landlord, to be stag'd before the Baron-Court of Kelso, and
to be dealt with in a most unjust and inhumane manner, as is Notour to the
whole Country, having before threatened the same. A. 16. That notwithstanding
all his former Pursutes and Practices aforementioned, to be vexatious to the
Minister and Elders, and that the Menister had given in Caution to the Clerk of
the Session for answering whatever should be decreed concerning the Emoluments
of Session-Clerk and Precentor, as by the Order of the Lords of Session for
loosing the foresaid Arrestment may appear; yet he took out Letters of
Inhibition against the Minister and Elders, and served the same against all the
Elders, to their extreme Vexation; whereby it is manifest, that he makes it his
Business to disturb the Peace of his Neighbors, and to obstruct the Success of
the Gospel in this place. A. 17. That he has indust^^ously handed about a most
scandalous and malicious false Libel against the Minister, giving it out in
Town and Country, that he was to exhibit the same to the Presbytery against
him* whereby he has made it his Businnss by his Lies and Calumnies, to destroy
his untai^^ed Fame, and to expose his Ministry to Contempt.

Extracted by Mr. Gaudy, Cl. S.
10.
BY the right of Order, the Answer to this Libel ought to follow; but, because
that was not given in to this Committee; yea, nor to any Judicature
vvhatsomever before this hour, though it was always ready at a Call, we shall
first put an end to this days Work, by giving you here the Sentence or
Interlequitor of the Committee, which they passed not only without hearing
Mr. K. speak one Word on the head, but without his knowledge; for, as is
above related, he got not these Papers till 4 or 5 days after their rising.

The Sentence or Interloquitor of the Committee. Kelso, March 31, 1696.
The which day the Committee taking to their consideration the whole Affair of
Mr. K. which has created much trouble to the Judicatures of this Church, and
desiring that the same might be brought to an end; and considering a Petition
of the Libellers, whereunto a Paper annexed, containing a Summary of what they
Judge confessed, or proved, and Notar against him; and the Committee not having
time to enter upon a particular Disquisition of the several particulars of that
Affair, Do refer the whole to the Synod, and humbly Overtures, that the Synod
would take it into their serious Consideration, and finally determine the same;
and in the mean while that Mr. K. be allowed a Copy of the said Petition, and
Paper annexed, that he may make Answer to it, without further delay at the
Synod, with Certification, if he don't answer it, it be taken for granted that
he confe^eth the whole. The Committee also appoints that the said Mr. K. be
summoned to appear before the Synod; and that an Order be given to summon all
Witnesses, that may give light in the said Affair; and that the names of any
Witnesses be given to Mr. K. ten days before the Synod. Some of the Brethren of
the Presbytery of Kelso signifying to the Committee, that Mr. K. gave in an
Address to them, that his Doctor might be admitted to be Precentor and Session
Clerk of Kelso; and that the Presbytery had referred the same for Advice to
this Committee or Synod, which of them should happen first to sit, by reason
that it came to them per Saltum, neglecting the Session, the Committee desires
the said Presbytery to bring it into the Synod. Extracted forth of the Minutes
of the Committee, by (...) Mr. Gaudy, Cl. S.

Thus we have given you word by word the abovementioned three Papers; with a
true account of what passed before the Committee, relating to Mr K's Affair,
leaving to your serious Consideration to draw what Conclusions you think fit
from the many o^^ passages, that occur almost in every Meeting. The last thing
Mr. K. did in this Meeting, was, that he craved an Extract of the Process,
particularly the Depositions of the Witnesses; without which, he said it was
impossible he could give a legal and pertinent Answer to many of the Articles
of the said new Libel. This most just and legal Request being possitively
denied, he protested, and took Instruments thereupon.

11.
WE are here to make some Answer to the abovementioned Petition and Libel; but
such you must take as we can give you, being most unjustly denied the means and
help, that Law not only allows, but enjoins to be given us, 18 Act. K J. 7th
Sess. 2 Parl. 14 June 1686, expressly appointing the publication of the
Testimonies of Witnesses.

An Answer to the Petition and Paper annexed thereto, given in against Mr. K.
to the Committee of the Synod, sitting on his Affair, last of March, 1696.

BEfore we make any particular Answer, let us observe in general. 1. By these
Papers it is most evident to all that see them. That the Libellers (or rather
Mr. J. Composer thereof) have had the use of the Process, particularly the
Depositions of Witnesses, which discovers great partiality and injustice in
the Judges who positively refused the like Benefit to the Defender, though Law
and Reason plead for him; and though he most earnestly, and that frequently by
way of Instrument has craved that Favor, or rather Justice of them. 2. It
evidently appears by the said Papers, that Mr. K 's Accusers are become (as
'swere) his Judges; yea, have already given out Sentence against him. Some
things, say they are Notar; some confessed by himself; some proved by
Witnesses: Hence they infer, that he is unworthy of the Office he bears.
Whosoever seriously considers this whole Affair, cannot but stand amazed
thereat. All the Divines in Mers and Tiviotdale, with an equal Number of very
knowing and worthy Gentlemen (for most part) the ruling Elders (not to mention
Correspondents from other places) have met in Synods, Committees,
Sub-Committees, 20 or 30 times about this Business, and have considered it with
all the advantages imaginable, as to the Libellers part, yet could not find
ground for a Sentence against him: And certainly never were men (we mean the
generality only) more desirous to find a fault in their Neighbor, than they
are. An evidence of this may appear from a Proposal one of the great Champions
amongst them made before a Committee, after the Business had been canvass'd by
a Synod, 2 days, and most part of 2 nights, and yet no ground could be found
for a Sentence. Come, said he, since we cannot have two concurring Witnesses for
one Fault, may we not pass Sentence on the Depositions of two Witnesses on
several Faults? For example; one depon'd that Mr. K. is dissaffected to the
Government, in that he did not whip one of his Scholars for drinking K. James
's Health at his Table. Another, said he, spoke Bawdy, telling a story about
Keegrels. This Brother's Opinion was rejected, especially by the Gentlemen, as
a thing contrary to Law, and never before practiced. But Mr. K's Accusers
clearly see sufficient ground for a Sentence: This is Notar, say they, That he
confesses; the^ other is clearly proved by Witnesses, etc. Now, is it not,
think you, a very strange and wonderful thing, that five silly, simple,
ignorant, and illeterate Men should see more, than a vast Number of learned
Divines, and most knowing Gentlemen? It Is commonly said, that Ignorance is the
Mother of Devotion: but here is a greater Mystery. Ignorance furnishes the
Understanding with such Light, that it can clearly see that, which is not. Yes
indeed: It can easily do that, when leavened with Malice, Envy, and Interest.
We could adduce a good number of most convincing Arguments to show the great
desire in the Judges and Libellers to find a Fault in Mr. K. were it not
tedious here to relate them. Pray, consider; 1. The vast Number of Things they
charge him with; above a hundred Points or Articles, if they were well
reckoned. 2. How they exhibit Libel after Libel; Libel after Libel. 3. The
great Multitude of Witnesses, that have been adduced, and that not all at once.
First, a List of one and thirty besides some, like Led-Horses, that were not in
his List, yet examined: and all th^se not doing the Jobb, then another List;
yea, the same Witness^s sifted and examined over again after new Citations. and
you see here more Lists designed, and some of the old Witnesses to be tried the
third, or may be, the fourth time. And if you read on, you shall s^e a whole
Troop of Horses, interlin^d with some Foot, marching into Edenb. and there
staying 13 or 14 days, to the advantage of some, their own great Damage and
Expense, and the astonishment of the whole Nation. 4 The wild, illegal, and
unjust, or rather the hellish Me^hod, which was taken in the Examination of
Witnesses, as is above-related. 5. The strict and narrow Enquiry, that has been
made through the whole Country to find out his Failings. Some of the very
Judges (Ministers we mean) in a private manner a king his Scholars and Tablers
what evil they knew of him. Others enquiring into public Innes, if at any time
they saw him drunk. And especially Mr. J. writing Letters to every place where
Mr. K. lived, particularly to Lithgo and Culros. 6. How that after many things,
wherewith he was charged, were found to be abominable Lies and Calumnies (as
that Business in Blakader) yet his Judges did never assoil him from them: but
still received in new Libels, being fully, it seems, resolved never to give
over, till they hit him one way or other, All these, with many other that might
be adduced, cry aloud, how fain (as we say) they would pick a hole in his
Blanket; whereas true Christianity, yea Humanity it self enclines rather to
hide the Imperfections and Blemishes of our Neighbor, than thus to blaze and
^ublish them to the World. This cannot be retorted against Mr. K. for what he
does of this kind, is for his own Defense.

Particular Answers. Though we could easily with one single stroke cut off the
Heads of all these 17 Giant-like Monsters, by saying, They are mere Chimera's,
that is abominable Fictions, cross Lies and Calumny, except some few things,
that are most legal and just in themselves: yet to satisfy those, who are of a
lesser capacity; or, that are not acquainted with the true Circumstances of
things, we shall give you a short hint at each of them. To the first Article,
he answers; It Is both false and absurd. In a word; it is a most malicious and
base Calumny, to say that the School is under a great Decay, and almost broken
for the Reasons here mentioned. It Is also most absurd not only in the Libellers
to charge Mr. K. therewith, but also in the Judges to listen to them in such a
matter; there never having been any previous Visitation (as Law, Reason and
Custom require) upon that head; nor any kind of Trial made about his Knowledge,
Diligence, Attendance, or what other thing relates to his Office. Mr. K.
speaking one day in face of Synod upon this head. Mr. Borleans, Minister at
Bedrule, rose up, and spoke thus, at least to this purpose. M. said he, Mr. K
in this matter is in the right: The method we have taken is indeed preposterous
and backward, as if we were driving the Plough before the Oxen, etc. At which
not one man opened his Mouth, but sat all mu^e for some time. Yet, as soon as
they began to move, they drove on the same course, Answard sti^ as before, till
at last they run themselves headlong (like the Herd of Swine in the Gospel)
over such a high Precipice, that now it is simply impossible they can recover. In
other terms, we humbly conceive, that neither the Presbytery of Kelso, nor yet
the Provincial ^ynod of Mers and Tivio^dale, will never be thought impartial
Judges at a Visitation of Mr. K's School. Pray mistake us not; there are yet
many of them that never bowed to Baal in this matter: yea, as to the Gentlemen,
Mr. K. knows none. But, shall we tell you the true Causes or Reasons why the
School is under a decay? If you knew things, and considered them aright with
all their Circumstances, you would wonder, that it is not in a much worse Case
than it is. In short therefore know, that Mr. J. and his Elders have taken all
means and methods imaginable utterly to ruin it. 1. He has dispersed Letters
through the Kingdom, wherein he represents Mr. K. the vilest Wretch under the
Sun: a Man, he writes, destitute of Mother-wit; destitute of Grace; of corrupt
Principles, corrupt Morals, etc And you may be sure, since he takes such
freedom with his Pen, he will by no means spare to show out the like Venom with
his Tongue upon all Occasions. Yea, in the very Pulpit on the Lord's Day, not
only in his Sermons and Discourses to a Congregation of 2 or 3000 People
together, but even in the public Prayers of the Church, he belcheth out to God
himself most horrid, most dreadful, and most malicious Expressions; as you
shall hear in their proper place. Expressions, we say, designed on purpose not
only to diss^ade, but to affright and terrify Silly, Simple, Poor, Ignorant
Souls from putting their Children to Mr. K's School. Sect. 15. Part. 5. 2. He
and his Elders, forsooth, by themselves, without the concurrence of one single
Heretor, erected another Grammar School in the place; and used all means
possible to carry away Mr. K's Scholars to it. Of this School and its Master,
you will have an account in the following Part. 3. They made the Report to go
up and down the whole Country, that Mr. K. was certainly within some few Days
or Weeks to be turned out with disgrace; so that people thought it a great
folly to send their Children to him. Hence for 2 years and more, scarcely so
much as one Scholar came to his School. 4. To be good Examples to others (we
have just reason to think by Mr. J's Instigation) the 3. Ministers of the
Presbytery, who had two of them their Sons, and one his Brother with Mr. K.
took them away, which made others to do the like; and you may be sure would
hinder many to put their Children, or Relations to his School. Lastly, think
you not, but these base, lying, malicious Libels have done much hurt of this
kind, especially amongst People that are not well informed in Matters, and are
not acquainted with Mr. K. Now, to conclude: Let any indifferent Person
seriously consider the Matter, and he shall be convinced that it is not only a
most unreasonable and absurd thing; but a mighty wicked and malicious Act in
Mr. J. and his Elders, first to do what lay in their power to break Mr. K's
School; and then to stage him as the Cause of it. It Is truly such a notorious
wickedness in them, that we know neither what name to give it, nor what to
compare it with. In a word; it is a Complex Wickedness, not very unlike as if 5
or 6 lewd Fellows should in the nightime, break into their Neighbor's House,
and not only plunder and pillage it, but even beat and wound some of the
Family, and murder others. And the next day one of these wicked Villains
informs against some honest Person, as guilty of the said Villainy: Others of
them stand not to swear it was so; and may be, some sit with the Judges, and
give out Sentence. Act. 2. He answers that his Entry was most legal, having a
formal Call from all concerned: which Call was duly intimated by the Bailyff of
the Place, in the name of the Earl and others, first to the Elders (there being
no Minister at that time) next to the Presbytery. Nor did either of these make
the least show of any Objection of this nature. An account of this you have,
Sect. 4, 5, etc. Part 1. to which we refer you. As to the Act here mentioned, 7
Feb 1645, Mr K. still was, and yet is ready to be tried by any Church
Judicature in Scotland, in relation to the Contents of the said Act. And
certainly you will readily acknowledge, that it was not very proper for him to
press the Members of Presbytery to try him. All of them knew very well, he was
past a Candidate, and sufficiently qualified that way, having given many Proofs
of his Skill in that Art. And to confirm this, and all other Clauses of that
nature, they did so far approve his Call, that 4 of 6 (there being no more in
the Presbytery for the time) put their Sons, Brethren or Friends to his School.
As to the Act of Parliament here cited, which they say makes against his way of
Entry. A most wonderful and monstrous Act indeed! Pray, what in Nature can be
more absurd, than to allege, that a Non-ens, a mere Nothing should start up
and worry a Man? Mr. K. entered Schoolmaster, 16 May, 1692. How then can an
Act, which had no Being till the 12 of June 1693, do him hurt? Art. 3. We have
said too too much already on this Point. Sect. 7. P. 3. Answer to the Article.
As also it comes in again, Sect. 28. Rem. 4. of this Part. There is here a very
strange Expression, which we cannot pass without saying something to it. There
is cause to believe, say the Libellers, that Mr. K. was very offensive at
Lithgo to all fearing God. If you sound this Business to the bottom, you will
find it the most Hellish and dreadful Reflection, that ever a man charged his
Neighbor with* A reflection indeed! A wonderful Reflection, not on Mr. K.
only: but on thousands of People in and about that Burgh; with whom he
conversed most familiarly and Neighbourly, without Offense, as to all
appearance, they doing him many Acts of kindness, and he according to his power
returning the like to them. So that you must of necessity infer from the words
of the Libellers, that all those thousands of people, to whom he was not
offensive, were persons not fearing God in the Belief of Mr. J. and his Elders.
Will any other Christian, think you, in the world subscribe this Article of
their Faith?

It Is a most dreadful Assertion, and a clear Demonstration that they are
altogether void of Charity, the chief of Christian Virtues, thus to condemn to
Eternal flames (without Repentance) so many thousands of People; and that not
only such, as perhaps are of a different Persuasion from them in some things;
but even these of their own Principles. To pass all others, take this one
single Instance, which may well serve for ten thousand. Dare you say that Mr.
W. Tullidaf, one of the Chief Pillars of your Church, was a person, that did
not fear God; and that at the very time, when he was lying Prisoner in
Blackness-Castle for adhearing to his Principles in matters of Religion? Now
that Mr. K. was not offensive to him is evident from his Letter, Sect. 15. Part
2. And to give you a further Demonstration of this Point, or an infallible sign
that Mr. Tullidaf was not offended at Mr K. either as to his Principles, or
Morals; pray, connsider, that after he was relieved from Prison, and the Scene
of Affairs in this Kingdom quite altered, and he advanced to be Principal in
the University of St. Andrew's; yea, and Mr. K. rabbl'd and thrust out of his
Charge, merely on the Account of his Principles in matters of Church
Government; yet that worthy person was so far from being offended at his
Judgment in matters under debate, or his carriage otherwise, that he used all
means he could to get him settled, as a Member of that University. Of which
business you have an Account in that 15 Sect. Part 2. And further, if you
consider things aright, you will find this Expression of the Libellers a
terrible Reflection, not only on People in and about Lithgo, but generally
through the whole Kingdom; for the Libellers can give no reason, why Mr. K. was
offensive to Persons there more than else where. He lived 6 Years immediately
before he went to Lithgo in that Noble Famiiy of the E. of Kincardin, to which
many Persons of the greatest Quality of the Nation did frequently resort, and
heard him twice a day perform Family Worship. Now, if his carriage had been
offensive, would that Noble E who was a Person of great knowledge; and so could
descern a fault as soon as any man, have suffered him to continue so long in
his Family, and that in so Honorable a Station, as to be Teacher and Governor
to his eldest Son? And if any should doubt, whether or not, the E. was pleased
with Mr. K's carriage, he can produce Letters under his Lo. hand, while
officiating as Secretary at London written to him, expressly bearing that he was
exceeding well pleased with it; and this his Lo. did write in so familiar and
kind a manner, that Mr. K. did often blush to read them, some whereof he can
yet produce. It might also be asked our Libellers, to whom Mr. K. was offensive
the two years he attended My Lord Bruce, Son to the said E. at the College of
Glascow; for thousands in that Country came to know him during that time.
Perhaps they will tell you, These were dark and cloudy days, days of Ignorance
and blindness: days, when Sin and Iniquity did abound without Check; yea,
scarcely so much as taken notice of. Now, blessed be God; it is otherwise. We
have the bright Sunshine of the Gospel among us. We will not, yea, we dare not
suffer sin to pass without its due punishment, etc. To pass therefore the 9 or
10 years he lived in the City of Eden. in the said Dark and Cloudy Days, what
will the Libellers say, as to the two years and a half he lived there,
immediately before he came to Kelso? Dare they say, that none of those, he was
not offensive too there, do fear God? It Is a most horrid business, even to
think it. Ay, they dare not only think it, and say it; but Subscribe it; yea,
They Believe it, as an Article of their Faith. O Dreadful! This is no less,
than to avow, that the prime of our Nation, persons of all ranks and degrees of
either Sex, that live in, or resort to that City, are altogether void of the
fear or Grace of God. Pray, is the Reverend Doctor Rule, Principal of the
College and one of the first Ministers of that City, in whose Parish Mr. K. and
his Family lived, and with whom he frequently and very familiarly conversed; Is
h^ also void of the fear of God? Yes, yes, He beyond any man; for he gave Mr.
K. a Testimonial, showing to all the World, that he was not offensive to him;
and you know that it is a Fundamental Article in the Libeller's Creed, that he
was offensive to all fearing God. That was in Lithgo, say they; not in Eden. By
this means they make Mr. K like Proteus, who could turn himself into any shape.
In the E. of Kincardin's Family he was good, in Lithgo wicked: in Eden. he
became good again, but now in Kelso, he is worse than ever. Methinks he should
return to Eden. and there die a good man. The last Remark we shall make here,
is on the strange way the Libellers word this part of their Article; There is,
say they, cause to believe he was very offensive to all fearing God. They do
not, you see, pretend to have Knowledge in this matter; for that is simply
impossible; and is too too weak a ground to rely on in a business of this kind.
And therefore they have done wisely in betaking themselves to a third Fort,
viz. Faith, which amongst Christians is no thing short of Knowledge, being a
firm persuasion of a thing either by Divine Revelation, or Inspiration: If they
have it by Revelation, let them show us Chapter and Verse in the Word of God.
If by Inspiration, they are obliged to make good their Assertion by doing some
Miracle, otherwise we are not bound to believe them. A 4. It Is answered, He
knows no bad Fame he is under, by his own Confession; nor did he ever confess
any thing, for which he has cause to be ashamed^ neither is he obliged to purge
himself otherwise than he has done, leaving to his A^cusers to file him, if
they can. that other thing he would say on this Point, he refers to the Answer
given to the 5th. Ar. of the former Libel, Sect. 7. Part 3. A. 5. See Answer
and Remarks of the 7th Ar of the former Libel, ^ect. 7. Part 3. As to what is
depend upon this Head, Mr. K. can say nothing, till he know what it is, only he
thinks it great injustice done him to conceal either the thing it self, or its
Author, Perhaps it was depon'd by the Witness, who openly told the Judge, he
had a prejudice at, or wished evil to Mr. K. as to his Body, though not to his
Soul. A. 6. He can say nothing, till he see the Depositions, and then he doubts
not but after Circumstances are considered, that plain manifestation here
spoken of, will vanish into smoke. It Is not impertinent here to repent that
ridiculous Interrogature, put to Mr. Robert Colvil, in face of the Synod, viz.
Whether, or not, is Mr. K. a Man of a Profane Spirit? Which Interrogature ought
not to be asked any ^ortal, God alone knows the Spirit of Man. Whereas the
Question ought to be to this purpose: Did you hear Mr. K. speak such or such
words? Did you see such a gesture in him? Saw you him Commit this or that act?
By which words, gesture, or act, the Judge is to infer that he is a man of a
Profane spirit. Yet this is not to be done, till he be heard, what he can say
upon the matter. Who knows, but he might be personating at that time this or
the other Man in Words, Gesture, or Action? As in that business about the
^eegrels, Sect. 17, and 18. Part 3. A 7. At Answer is already given (till
Particulars be condescended on) in the 12th. Ar. of the former Libel, Sect. 7.
Part 3. A. 8. He is not conscious to himself so much as of one Falsehood; far
less of a Lie in all his Papers, nor did he ever misinform any person (to his
knowledge) in any one particular. A. 9. Is much in kin to the pr^ceding, and
therefore he positiv^ly denies it. A. 10. Is a gross falsehood, and a base
Calumny A 11. He is not conscious of any miscarriage before the Judicatures,
the several times he has been very rudely treated by many of the Members,
particularly at the Synod of Duns; of which, Sect. 20. And suppose he were
guilty of some Misdemeanor that way; (Nemo ex omni part Beatus) he does not
see, that the Libellers are to charge him with it. A. 12. He has done nothing
of this kind, but what Law allows for securing what justly belongs to him, and
vindicating his good Name, which Mr J. and others have most unchristianly
endeovoured to rob him of. A. 13. He says nothing in that most legal and just
Appeal, but what is Truth. As to the particular here mentioned. 1. It Is not the
Libellers Concern to challenge it, let Mr. Thomson prosecute it, when he will.
2. They in a most confident manner assert, as a certain truth that which it is
not possible they can know; so that, if it be not a Lie, which they say
certainly comes very near the border of one. We ought not to Affirm any thing,
which may be, or not be, for that is to confound Knowledge and Opinion, which
no wise man will do; far less a Christian, specially in the manner this is
done. A. 14. Mr. K 's arresting Mr. J's Stipend is a most legal and just
Action; and to challenge it, is to challenge the supreme Law of the Kingdom,
and to accuse the Lords of Council and Session of Injustice, not to say, that
it is a very great fault to bring into a Church Judicature a Process that is
depending before their Lo. A. 15. Is of the same Nature with the former; so
that one Answer may serve for^^oth. We must here not only vindicate Mr. K. from
the Calumnies he is charged with; but persons of a far higher Degree, the Noble
E. of Rox. and those his Lo. has placed, a^ Overseers of his Affairs at Kelso,
Sir W. K. of G. and others. Know therefore that this business has since been
brought before the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, who
have Condemned Mr. J. and his Elders in the Matter. But of this business you
shall have a more particular Account, Sect. 12. part 5. A. 16 Take the same
Answer which you have to the former two; for, as there, so here, what he has
done is most legal and just, There is one thing here, which we must not pass
without a special Remark. You see how Mr. K. is charged with terrible things in
this Article; and the Conclusion the Libellers infer is most dreadful. Whereby
it is manifest, say they, that he makes it his business to disturb the Peace of
his Neighbors, and to obstruct the success of the Gospel in this place. For
Answer know, that Mr. J. was in very bad Circumstances, when he came to Kelso,
and his Cautioner (as some say) little better: therefore, when Cords seem weak,
a wise Man takes the more plies. But this is not the reason, which moved Mr. K.
to secure himself after the manner here describ^d. Know therefore that there is
wrapped up within this Article a great Fallacy; or rather a gross Falsehood, if
not a malicious Lie: for Mr. J. and his Cautioner cannot be bound for more,
than what is due since his Entry. Mr. K. is not so ignorant, as to allege that
Mr. J. is liable for any thing before he was Minister in Kelso: so that the
Elders are inhibited, not so much for the time since Mr. J. Entered, but for
that before. Mr. K. therefore retorts this most malicious Calumny on Mr. J. and
his Elders; They have made it their business not only to disturb his peace and
quiet, but most unjustly to rob him of his livelihood; and by forging Hellish
Lies against him to make him odious in the eyes of the World. And hence it is,
that ^hey by their wicked and unchristian carriage toward Mr K. and others,
have exceedingly obstructed and marred the success of the Gospel in this place.
A. 17 Has several Branches, as have many of the rest. In general therefore, he
denies that he handed about a slanderous Libel, giving out in Town and Country,
that he was to exhibit the same to the Presbytery; or that he made it his
business by Lies and Calumnies to destroy Mr. J 's Untainted Fame, far less to
expose his Ministry to Contempt. In particular, he confesses, he saw that
Libel, which was given in against Mr. J. by the E, and others to the G. A. and
heard it read in face of the Judicature, Jan. 1696. There is one word here,
that well deserves a Remark, Mr. K. has made it his business, says the Libel,
to destroy Mr. J 's Untainted Fame. The Libellers, or rather Mr. J. (for he is
the Composer of all them Papers) had been more wise to have omitted here the
Word Untainted, for few in Scotland, are ignorant how exceedingly his Fame was
blotted in Ireland; how filthily all be-spotted in Biggar; and now here in
Kelso, how it is quite Be-smeer'd over with Mire and Dirt.

An Account of what pass^d before the Synod at Jedburgh, Apr. 1696. A Preface
to the Paper then given in.
12.
MR. K. was exceeding perplexed how to carry under his present Circumstances,
when he reflected on the whole Process, and considered the way and manner of
its procedure, with the many strange and various Accidents, which occasionally
fell out almost at every Meeting. Hence things were so far from being like to
be brought to a conclusion, that they daily multiplied and increased
exceedingly. It was with him, as with Hercules, when he fought with the Serpent
Hydra, which, they say, had 50. Heads; and when one was cut off, two started up
in its room. At first he was charged only with 2 or 3. Crimes; next 15; and now
with 17: so that he saw no end: but still new Forces levied against him; and
always the last more numerous than the former. But that, which vexed him worst
of all, was that he never once came to an open sight on the Points of his
Libel, being always attacked by Surprise; nor was this his fault, but the
Judges. In plain terms, they never heard him debate, nor reason Matters with
his Adversaries. Yea, his Judges, at least a vast number of them, do not to
this day understand the true ground of the Plea, neither in general, nor as to
this and the other Point. And this is not only, because it is a very Intrigate
and perplexed Business, and now is become mighty tedious, consisting of
hundreds of Points and Clauses; but chiefly on the account, that there are
daily coming in new Judges, Persons altogether unacquainted with the Affair,
every Synod receiving new Correspondents from places about, besides several
Ministers lately planted in their own bounds, and always a good number of fresh
and new elected ruling Elders; to say nothing of such, both Ministers and
Elders, as were absent at former Diets; and especially on the consideration of
that, this Plea has been cognoss'd in the Interval of Synods by Committees,
frequently consisting scarcely of the 20th part of the Synod. All these know
very little of the Process. Now when it comes in before a Synod, presently it is
put into the hands of a Committee: they make a Report by way of an Overture;
immediately that goes to a Vote, so that the Body or f^r greatest part of the
Synod know little in the said Affair. All such must of necessity walk, as they
are led, being little better than blind, and so are obliged to follow those
they most affect. Such certainly was Mr. K's Case in the late Synod (15 Oct.
1695.) Committees and Sub-Committees sat days and nights, yet never once called
for him, nor yet the Synod, till he was to hear his Sentence read. These with
many other Considerations, which we have not will to mention, moved Mr. K. to
give the following brief Account of some few material Points of this Plea,
which might be as a Specimen of the rest, and perhaps provoke both Judges and
Libellers to bring matters to a public Debate. He knows very well, that
Persons concerned in the other bide, will think he is too tart and bitter in
his Expressions. But he hopes, and expects, that whosoever shall seriously
consider this whole Business, that he has just ground for for what he says, and
that his words are no ways Hyperbolical; but rather come very far short of what
may be said. And grant there be some few words, or Expressions exceeding the
Subject; this is no new thing: the best of Writers use it, and are not blamed
sor't. And yet, if you seriously ponder all Circumstances, and compare Words
with Deeds; the Expression with the Action, you shall find as little of that
kind here, as any where else. Men, called to it should speak Truth: Black ought
to be called black; white white. You know very well, that the Spirit of God
tells, That he, who justifies the wicked; and he, that condemns the Just,
even they both are an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.15. Mr. K. has this to
say for himself, that he has been exceedingly oppressed by Mr. J. and others
many ways. We need not be particular; the thing is so obvious, that he, who
runs, may read: and you know the common Saying, Oppression makes a wise
Man-mad. Pray, consider, how unjust and unreasonable it is, to blame a Man for
relating matters of Fact in his, own defense, and pass others, who forge Lies
and Calumnies to disgrace him. We need not again put you in mind of that
hellish Calumny about the Woman in Blakader, nor of that abominable and cursed
Missive, which Mr. J. sent through the whole Kingdom (we may say) showing to
the World, that Mr. K. is void of Grace, etc. Nor how in another Paper, he
calls him; The Devils Agent; Factor for Hell, etc. Of which you shall have a
Touch, Sect. 26. We have prefac'd too long. Lo, now follows the Paper, which
makes so great Noise every where. Lest our Adversaries should think that we
wrong them, we shall make a Remark, leaving you to it by a Letter, as formerly.
And since the said Paper is pretty large, both on the account of the Remarks
(which are not parts of the Paper given in the Synod) and that we may the more
easily Refer to, and from it, we shall divide it into Paragraphs, which was not
done at first.

The Paper frequently above mentioned, which was given into the Synod at
Jedburgh. Paragr. 1. To the Right Reverend the Moderator, and Remanent Members
of the Provincial Synod of Mers and Tiviotdale, met at Jedburgh, 21 April,
1696, is humbly offered by Mr. K. Schoolmaster of Kelso.
13.
A Brief Answer (A) to a Paper (B) called, A brief or Summary of his ill
Deportment, annexed to a Petition of Ja. Thomson, Jo. Laidly, W. Christy, Mic.
Fisher, Jo. Thomson, Elders there, exhibited to the Committee sitting on the
said Mr. K 's Affair in the Kirk of Kelso, 31 of March, 1695. With which Answer
there is given a short Account of some material Heads and Points of the
Process, in regard many Members of the Reverend Synod, who are to be Mr. K 's
Judges, do not know the true State of things, especially the Correspondents
from other Synods, and several other Synods and ruling Elders, that were not
Members formerly. And although the said account comes infinitely short of a full
and exact Relation of the whole Business, yet it will give some small light to
the better understanding of the main Affair; at least, it will furnish ground
to enquire further into the whole Process.

Rem. (A) This brief Answer you have in a few Lines. Paragr. 23. (B) This you
had, Sect 9. The Libellers give it this name in their Petition, Sect. 8.

Paragr. 2 Mr. K. on the 12th of March, 95, giving into the Kirk-Session of
Kelso, a Petition, showing the Right he had to be Session-Clerk, Precentor, and
Reader, and to the profits or Emoluments thereto belonging, in place of getting
any formal or legal Answer to his just desire, had two very gross Crimes, viz.
Adultery, and Rape or Force, most illegally and unchristianly laid to his
Charge by that Judicature, and as illegally by them referred to the Presbytery;
and much more unwarrantably considered, discussed, and referred by the said
Presbytery to the Synod, as the Reasons of Appeal from the Committee (24 Sept.
95) to the Synod at more l^ngth bear.

Paragr 3. Notwithstanding both Session and Presbytery were most forward and
eager (the business passing both these Judicatures in one day, if not in one
hour) to carry it before the Synod, yet hearing by Sir J. H. of B. his
Declaration, that they were trepan'd by their Informers, most unjustly desisted
from prosecuting the Business before the Synod; so that Mr. K. himself was
necessitated to bring it in by a Petition. In the first place, he can^t but
here confess and acknowledge, that he met with as much Equity and Justice from
that Synod* as ever a Man did from any Judicature. The Result was, that some of
their Number should be sent to the C. of R. some to Sir W. K. of G. and some to
Mr. K. to see, if things could be brought to an accommodation; for which end, a
Committee was appointed, made up of the Presbytery of Kelso, and 12 assisting
Ministers and Ruling Elders. The Countess being greatly offended, partly at the
manner of Mr. J ^s Entry to the Kirk of Kelso, partly for his falling so foully
on Mr. K. and that so early, even at his very first coming to the Place, Was
altogether inexorable, and absolutely refused to admit Mr. J. into her
presence, though much pressed thereto by many Persons of Honor; so that this
Design of reconciling Parties came to naught. And therefore the Committee
behooved to sit, and cognosce on the said Crimes, Mr. K. pressing them thereto.
At the first and second Diets (30 Apr. and 16 May, 95. nothing was done, though
both Meetings were pretty frequent: only Mr. K. humbly desired to know, if they
were a Quorum, and what number made one: and if they were a Quorum, he craved
he might be formally process'd; and his Accusers condescended on, with several
other very pertinent and necessary things, as Instruments then taken at more
length, bear. To which most lawful desires the Committee gave no return. The
Libellers bearing that Mr. K. was to pursue them (for he had raised a
Declarator before the Lords) and finding themselves at a Loss about the two
abovementioned Crimes, raised a new Libel, and presented to the Committees,
which Libel consists of 15 Articles, but may be well branched out unto 3 or 4
Fifteens. Mr. K. in his Defenses to the said Libel desired of the Committee to
know, by what warrant they took on them to cognosce any other thing than what
was stated before the Synod and recommended to them by that Judicature;
otherwise, said he, it were to bring in things per Saltum, besides many other
evils, that follow thereon. And therefore he thought not himself obliged to
answer to any new Article, till either he was assailed from, or condemned for
the said Crimes, as appears in his Defenses and Instruments; especally,
considering that many of the things contained in that new Libel were Civil
Matters, and therefore fell not under the Inspection of a Church Judicature.
Notwithstanding these and many others most rational and convincing Arguments
the Committee went or to prosecute the Business in a most illegal manner, which
made Mr. K. and these commissionated from the E. of R. to appeal from them to
the then next ensuing Synod in matters Ecclesiastical, and to the Judge
ordinary in matters Civil, craving conform to Law, 10 days to give in their
Reasons of Appeal, which accordingly was done. Notwithstanding this Appeal, the
Committee proceeds and examines Witnesses, not waiting till they saw, whether
or not there might be given in such convincing Reasons, as ought to be of
sufficient force to put a stop to their procedure, being, it seems, resolved to
pass on in spite of Law and Reason. Paragr. 4. It Is here most pertinent to
show, what strange kind of a Committee s^at and acted that day (24 Sept. 95.) A
Committee indeed! The Presbytery, and one single Assistant. Mr. Couden,
Minister at Duns; and if this was a Quorum, Records will declare. But that,
which is far more remarkable, is the Number, the Nature, and Circumstances of
the Presbytery. A presbytery! A wonderful Presbytery, a Presbytery consisting
of one single Man. There are but nine Churches in whole: Morbattle ^ vacant;
Mackerston not in Fellowship; (A) Mr. Dalgleish as is supposed) not returned
from the North; four were Witnesses, and depon'd that same day against Mr. K.
viz. Mr. J. Mr. G. Mr. Th. and Mr. S. Mr. B. withdrew, at least in the
afternoon, and the day following, for reasons known to himself. Io, 8 of the 9,
only rests (B) Mr. Glen in Stitchel, to represent the whole Presbytery of
Kelso. As to Mr. Noble, Minister at Ecford, of the Presbytery of Jedburgh, but
as yet an assistant of that in Kelso (C) whether he was present or not, he
knows best. Now let the World judge, what sort of a Meeting that was; and
whether a Quorum or not. Mr. K. did suspect something of this nature, when they
refused at their first meeting to tell him, what number made their Quorum, as
is related. But that, which is worst of all, and crowns the action of that day,
is, that the said Witnesses deponing against Mr. K. not only sat with the
Judges; but (D) acted as such, and heard one another depone. Strange kind of
Judges; and as wonderful a sort of Witnesses; certainly ultronious; for they
voted that the business should come to their Oaths. But above all the rest Mr.
Th. T. Ministe at Ednim, justly deserves the greatest applause; for he
performed the Duties of 3 several Personr Judge, Clerk, and Witness; and the
last two so prettily, that in one minute he personated both; for calling the
Rolls of 31 Witnesses, after he had named three, he came to himself, and said
with a loud voice, Master T. T. and with the next breath, but in another Tone,
moving himself a little out of the Seat answered, I am here. But too much of
this days Action: A more particular (E) account shall be given in its proper
place and time: and it is like there shall not be found in the Records of any
Judicature, Ecclesiastical or Civil within this Kingdom, such gross
Informalities, Illegalities, and acts of Injustice in the like case, as shall
be demonstated from this present business.

(A) See Sect. 9. Part. 3. (B) Sect. 10. P. 3. (C) Mr. K. has inquired at many
of the Witnesses, whether Mr. Noble or not was present, and not one of them
could say that he was, (D) S. 9. P. 3. (E) You have account of this Affair
(such as we can give you without the help of Authentic Papers) S. 8. etc. P.
3. which was not given at the composing of this Paper. Paragr. 5. On the 3d. of
Oct. thereafter was another Meeting; to which there came three Worthy
Gentlemen, Sir J. Pringle of Stitchel, (who had never been present before) and
the L^irds of Watherly and Buckham; by whose Influence and Votes, yet not
without difficulty, the business was referred to the Synod. The Vote was (A)
Proceed to a Sentence, or Refer? And was carried Refer. And thus it came in
again before the Synod. 15 Oct. 95. Rem. Never certainly in the World did any
person see, hear, or read of such a wild and Monstrous-like Metamorphosis, or
Transfiguration of Creatures, as appeared on the 24th of Sept. 95, and this
day. These strange Changes of Bodies in Ovid's Works are as nothing in Compare
of what was to be seen here. Yea, Proteus, who, they say, could turn himself
into any Form, sometimes appearing like Fire, sometimes like Water; yet did it
not so nimbly and easily, as these we speak of Saw you not just now, how one
sitting Clerk turned himself in a trice to a Witness: Mr. Thomas Thomson, said
he, as Clerk; Here I Am, said he again, as Witness. Was not this nimbly done,
and with great ease; only by hitching himself a little off the Seat, and
somewhat altering his tone, and 'twas done. It Is true; he was at some more
pains, and it cost him more time also to come off the Bench and perform the
rest of the duties of a Witness. Come, Brother, Mr. Thomson, said his fellow
Witness; and depone you, and I shall be Clerk. Come you also, Brother, Mr
Gaudy, said another Witness, and I Will Moderate in the mean while, etc. And thus
were they transformed sometimes into one shape, sometimes into another; like
Hodg-Podg or a strange Confusion, of Creatures, Mingled mangled through one
another. There were, we told you, 6 Members in whole, 5 of the Presbytery of
Kelso, and Mr. Couden in Duns; 4 of the 5 were Witnesses; yet sat Judges, and
Voted that they themselves should swear and depone, and that after an Appeal,
Pray, are not these Vltronious Witnesses? They not only fit by in a Passive
sense, hearing one another depone; but are the most active Members of that
Judicature, some officiating as Moderator, others as Clerk. Lastly these same
very Persons, who were Witnesses the said 24. Sept. do this day vote that they
may pass Sentence upon what they themselves depon'd; and would have done it, if
the three above named Gentlemen had had not opposed it. Paragr. 6. Mr. K. must
here in the first place thankfully acknowledge, that this Synod took exceeding
great pains to bring things to a Conclusion; and some Gentlemen of Honor, with
not a few of the Brethren did what in them lay to carry matters to (...)
Accommodation. Near three days were spent by the Synod, Committees, and
Sub-committees in that Affair. Days! Yea, rather Nights and Days; for twice
they sat, till about 12 a Clock at Night. Yet Mr. K. must be pardoned, if he
take the Liberty to tell, that the said Judicature was guilty of great
Failings. They considered indeed the whole Process; The Libel, Mr. K's
Defenses; The Remarks of the Libellers on the said Defenses; The Depositions of
the Witnesses with several other Papers; and yet never so much as once all that
while called for Mr. K. to hear what he had to object, either against the
Witnesses themselves, or their Depositions, He had not objected against them,
before they depon'd, not being present to bear; nor any for him; nor Neuters
permitted to enter, doors being kept full. And though he has once and again, and
that by way of Instrument required to see the Depositions; yet to this minute
his just desire is denied him, albeit there be an express Act of Parliament in
his Favors. Paragr. 7. 1. Who knows, but Mr. K. may instruct that he was
Alibi, when he should have done, or said such or such things, depon'd by the
Witnesses? 2. It Is most certain, that a particular Relation, or an Account of
the Circumstances of a business does very often take off the f^^te and edge of
an Argument, otherwise seeming very pungent. This will be found to be Mr. K 's
Case in many Points. 3. Is it not a very common thing, that Words and Sentences
be sometimes mistaken, and misconstrued, even by the Learned of Men, till
persons more nearly concerned, and acquainted with Circumstances, or rather the
Author himself give the true sense and meaning thereof That this makes for Mr.
K. can be demonstrated, when require'd. And therefore it was, that some Worthy
Gentlemen in that Synod, when a debate arose about the Sense of some words in
his Printed Information about the Plea he had with the Town-Councel of Lithgo,
desired Mr. K. might be called, who best knew the meaning; but that justice was
denied him. Should Mr. J. meet with the like usage for many Expressions uttered
by him in the Chair of Verity, before thousands of People, a black (A) Doom
would pass upon him. His words at the first look seem to have a most fearful,
and grim Aspect; but after that he puts his Gloss on them, and gives an account
of Circumstances, the words become abundantly (B) smooth, and no ways
Antichristian, or Uncharitable. The Expressions are, That a Scociety of People,
Episcopally Inclined were a Communion of Devils, and a Company of Profane Men
and Women: and this said, even when they were going about the Holy Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper. Item, That all their Teachers are Soul-Murderers, (C) with
many others of that Nature. Rem. (A) A black Doom will pass, etc. That is,
Certainly he would he Condemned; Mr. K. alluding to the ancient custom of
People, who, sitting Judges, put into a little Box a black Bean, when they
Condemned any Person; and they who were for affoiling him put in a white Bean.
(B) When a Person of Honor spoke to Mr. Semple about these Expressions of Mr.
J. He answered that, when the Brethren were going to rebuke him for them, he
put a such a Gloss on them they were satisfied with it. If Mr. K. had met with
the like Favor; or rather justice, it is more than probable, that he would have
satisfied them also. (C) take this one for all. When by Act of Parliament the
Episcopal Clergy were Prohibit to Baptize or Marry, some persons in Kelso, who
formerly were of the Episcopal Communion, did go to Mr. J. desiring him to
Baptize their Children, who caused them Solemnly engage before the whole
Congregation that they should never again go to that Schismatical
Meeting House, nor hear any Episcopal Minister Preach. Others there were who
had no freedom to have their Children Baptized by him, and finding a difficulty
to get an Episcopal Minister, sent for one from England to administer that
Sacrament. The next Sunday after Mr. J. Baptizing a Child in the Church, took
occasion to inveigh bitterly against it; saying, there were some rather than
bring their Children to the House of God, to be Baptized, would rather send for
a man out of another Nation, and Sacrifice their firstborn to Moloch. Paragr.
8. Hence did arise another very great failing, in that Judicature, viz. That
they passed Sentence against Mr. K. not being heard, by judging him unfit to be
Session-Clerk or Precentor; and that after a serious Consideration (says the
Sentence) of the Complex Affair of his Process. Whereas, if he had received
according to the Practice, and Law of this Kingdom an Extract of his Process,
parcicularly of the Depositions of the Witnesses, and had been permitted to
object against the illegal procedure of his Judges and the Witnesses, and their
Depositions; certainly the said Complex Affair, would have appeared with a far
different aspect; especially considering, there were many Members of that
Synod, who were not present at the former, and consequently knew not the true
state of matters. But mainly in regard the whole Scene of things was quite
altered; and a new Libel raised and received in by the intervening Committee,
contrary to any power given them by their Constituents, the former Synod. And
if the Laws not only allow that all alleged guilty persons stand by the Judge,
and hear every word the Witnesses depone against them; but also expressly
ordain, that the Clerk of whatsoever Judicature in the Kingdom, he obliged to
give, and that Gratis, to the said alleged guilty persons, Copies of the
Depositions before advising. How much more ought Mr. K. to have had the
Depositions of the Witnesses led against him, in regard he was not present when
they depon'd and were examined by the abovementioned strange kind of
Judicature, made up of one Assistant, and a Presbytery consisting of one single
person; on which sandy Foundation the whole Structure is built. Paragr. 9. A
third failing, and that a very considerable one, is, that the Sentence of the
Synod is without any Reason; or Because, as if the Judgment and Will of that
Judicature were sufficient to make a Law. Paragr. 10. A fourth is, that after
so narrow an Enquiry and Search has been made into this business, as hardly the
like has been in our Age, yet after all Mr. K. must still lie under the stain
of so many gross Crimes, and be kept from the Profits of these Offices to which
he has right. Either there was ground for a Sentence to condemn him, or to
assoil him. If the former; why did not Sentence pass against him? If the
latter, why was he not assoild? That there was not ground, is now evidently
manifest to all the World; otherwise, why is a new Libel raised? Why more
Witnesses summoned? Why the old re-examined? Can another Reason under the Sun
be given, but that they have Succumb in their probation of the former Libel?
And why Succumb? Certainly, it is not, because the Judges were not their
friends, for some of them have been too too favorable to them. Nor it is for
want of Witnesses; for they had abundance of them: Mr. K. received Lists of
above forty; and besides these (which is a very great iniquity) they Summoned
and Examined more than were in his Lists. Neither, because the Witnesses were
not habile, or fit to do that, which was required of them. No certainly, for
better they could not have had in the whole World, They are such, as cannot,
but know Mr. K 's failings, if he be guilty of any in the view of Man. His own
Domestic Servants, who see his carriage night and day depon'd against him. His
Tablers, and others his Scholars. The Pedagogues, and Doctors of his School,
with whom he conversed every day most Familiarly; to mention no more. Lastly,
it is near an Impossibility it can be on the account, that a strict enough
Method, or way of Examining the Witnesses was not taken; for both Lawful and
Unlawful means were used in the matter. They were not disturbed with Spectators
in the Action; for contrary to Law, it was done with close doors; and all that
might carry away their failings, shut out. Several Witnesses, were suffered to
stay within, when others depon'd; some lurked within the Church. One of the
Accusers cried out with a loud voice, while the Witness was dictating his
Depositions, (A) Remember the Green-Bray-side, which infallibly implies, that
that Witness had Communicated his mind to him before. Yea, the very Judge
himself told the present Deponent, that the Prior Witness confessed such a
particular about the Six Senses. Many depon'd upon Hearsay in the first
Speaker's absence. In a word, they were examined Super Inquirend^s, in Matters
Extrinsick to the Libel, and contrary to all Reason and Law particularly an
Article of the Grievances given into His Majesty with the Claim of Right, or
Instrument of Government. But, besides these seeming legal ways of finding out
Mr. K 's failings, clandestine and private courses were taken to win at him:
Common Inns were enquired into, if he was at (B) any time overtaken with drink,
His (C) Tablers and Scholars were privately in some houses of Kelso asked by
Members of the Presbytery and others about his failings in his House or School.
Were the Lives and Conversations of all the men in Scotland so sifted and
searched, as his has been, scarcely one of ten thousand would come off
Shot-free. This business with Mr. K. looks liker a Spanish Inquisition, than
what is in use amongst those, who profess greater Christian-Meekness, and
Charity, than they judge to be in that People. Rem. (A) What Ja. Thomson, one
of the Libellers, meant by this Expression, Mr. K knows not (B) If the
Libellers had been informed by any person, that Mr. K. was once drunk in his
Life, though 20 or 30 years since, it had been laid to his door: Malice is a
working thing. (C) This they have not only told to Mr. K. but given it under
their hands. Paragr. 11. A far shorter, and much surer way might have been
taken; either by the Libellers or Judges, to know what sort of a man Mr. K. is;
whether, as to Manners, his Life and Conversation, his Humor and Temper of
Spirit, his way of living with his Neighbors, his Judgment and Opinion of
things; or what else concerns one man to know of another. There is a very
Worthy person, a Grave, Prudent, Knowing and Learned man; and, which is best of
all, (as far as one Man can see into another) a Pious and Godly Christian; one
of your own Number; one, whom most of you know to be such, Mr. Geo. Mullighen,
late Minister at Bowden, now at Moffet. This Gentleman, though sufficiently able
to teach any School in Britain the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, yet was pleased to
be School-Doctor about eight years under Mr, K. at Lithgo, so that none in
Scotland can be fitter to give a true Character of him than he; who conversed
so long with him, and that so familiarly and intimately, that they seemed
rather one, than twain. During all the said time there was never the least
appearance of any Jar imaginable, never an angry word, or wrong look between
them. Now, let Mr. J. and Mr. Mullighen be put each in a Balance, supposing
them equally good and knowing men; and then judge, whose Verdict; or Testimony
deserves the greater Credit. The one speaks what he knows; the other by
Hearsay only, and as he is informed, or rather what he knows not. The one is
well acquainted with Mr. K. and knows him, as far as one can know another,
having had many years most intimate Converse with him: the other never had the
occasion of any Converse; yea, never saw him in the face, until he was out of
Countenance with him; so that it is not Mr. J 's word you give your Faith to;
but to some other Person, whom you do not know, but he may be Mr. K 's great
Enemy. What Is Mr. Mullighen 's judgment of Mr. K. may be well Collected from
what he said of him and of his Process, when he was a Member of this Synod, and
of the Committee, which did first sit on the said Process. As also from what he
said before the Committee of Bills at Edenb. And if any yet doubt of what is
aboverelated about Mr. Mullighen 's and Mr. K 's Carriage at Lithgo, he may be
informed by himself. Let him declare upon Oath, or otherwise, if by Mr. K 's
Words. Gesture, or any other manner or way he perceived him inclined, or given
to any sort of vice whatsomever, Lying, Swearing, Backbiting, Uncleanness,
Drunkenness, or what else you are pleased to name: Yea, which is more, let him
give but one single Instance of any of these: or of any one unjust, and
fraudulent Act he knows Mr. K. did to any whomsoever during the said eight
years, or any time since. But would you know Mr. J 's Opinion and Judgment of
Mr. K? What Character he gives him? Hell it self cannot devise a Blacker. And
this he does not round and whisper into the ears of one or two; but sends it
through the World by Missives, to a Person he had not seen for 45. years
before. Mr. K. (he writes) is void of Grace, destitute of Mother-Wit; at least
greatly defective therein, of Corrupt Principles; Corrupt Morals, with several
other most Calumnious Expressions. And in other Papers, he calls him Malicious,
(A) Contentious, etc. That which moved Mr. K. to insist so much on this Point,
is, that his Adversaries upon all occasions object against him that Plea he had
with the Town-Council of Lithgo. to which Objection he answers, that it is the
only Plea he had in all his life. And to convince the world of his Innocence in
that famous Contest, be oppones, the several Interloquitors, and Sentences of
the Lords of Council and Session in his favors: As also that Act he obtained
against them before the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, Sept. 1692. All
which, is sufficient to demonstrate to the world, that not Mr. K. but it be
Town-Council is blamable. It Is very pertinent to add, that that same Provost,
the Lord of Pardivin, who was the man occasion of Mr. K's leaving Lithgo, used
much means to get him back again about a year and an half thereafter; as can be
instructed both by Writing, and the Testimonials of Worthy Gentlemen^, whom the
Provost had desired to be on the meeting, which was once and again appointed
upon that Head. Mr. K. met indeed with exceeding great Injustice from that
Town-Council, but that, which is done him by the Kirk-Session and Presbytery of
Kelso as far exceeds the other, as the Light of the Sun that of the Moon. The
one concerned only his Purse; the other, Purse, ^^a, and Life too.

A very necessary Remark. Amongst the many black Titles given Mr. K. by Mr. J.
and his Elders, these are a part; That he is Contentious, Litigious, Vexatious,
Malicious: Yea, he delights to be such; or, as they word it in their last
Libel. He makes it his business to disturb the Peace of his Neighbors, etc.
That Mr. K. is not of such a Temp^r of Spirit, as they represent to the World,
may evidently appear from his 8 years living with the said Mr. Mullinghen in so
great Peace and Harmony, that there never happened, so much as once between them
the least show of any debate. Perhaps you will say, this flowed from Mr.
Mullinghen's calm Nature: and not from Mr. K's. We desired you to ask Mr.
Mullinghen, what sort of a Man Mr. K. is. If he be such, as Mr. J. and his
Elders say he is, certainly Mr. Mull. could not be ignorant of it, either as
Mr. K's carriage to himself, or others: He would see or hear of it. But that we
may put this Business beyond all doubt; Mr. K. not only appeals to Mr. M. but
to all that ever were Teachers with him in his School. It Is like, he can say,
what few, or perhaps no Masters in Scotland dare do, that in his life he never
had any debate with those that were Doctors in his School. The truth of this
assertion he leaves to be attested by many thousands, who have been his
Scholars; let them declare, if they can, that ever they saw the least shadow or
appearance of discord. And shall the testimony of Mr. K's Adversaries be
preferred to that of many thousands of indifferent persons? But Mr. K needs not
be much moved with what they say, considering that they treat the noble E of R.
and his Lo. most honorable Curators after the same manner, by accusing them of
the hight of Injustice and Inhumanity. Article 5 of the said Libel. Of, which
business hereafter. Paragr. 12. The fifth Escape, or failing in that Synod is
that, though Mr. K. in his Reasons of Appeal from the Committee to the Synod, did
evidently show that he had met with great injustice from the Presbytery of
Kelso, yet that Presbytery, at least many of them were continued to be his
Judges in the Committee, and others acted as Proctors against him, particularly
Mr Glen in Stitchel. And therefore he thinks fit here to add another Reason,
which certainly may convince all the World that the Presbytery, of Kelso cannot
be Judges in this present debate between the Kirk-Session there and Mr. K.
because they are Parties, and highly concerned in the matter, both as to Credit
and Interest; and therefore cannot but run along with the said Kirk-Session;
yea, they are more concerned on many accounts, than the other. Mr. K. did never
before this time adduce this Argument, but now being necessitated to defend his
own Reputation and Interest, he must be pardoned, if he use all lawful means
for that end, He will not say that the Presbytery of Kelso had a Prejudice at;
though perhaps now they may: but certain it is they mightily are biased in the
present debate. For the better understanding this so material and necessary a
Point, be pleased to know, that the rise and occasion of this Contest between
the Kirk-Session and Mr. K. is about the Profits, Casualties and Peranisits
belonging to the Offices of Session-Clerk and Precentor or Reader; to which
Profits Mr. K. lays claim by virtue of his Call and Contract subscribed by the
E. of R. and others concerned: which call and contract is founded on the
uninterrupted Custom and Constitution of the place paff memory of any man
living. The Members of the said Presbytery in time of vacancy coming to supply
that Church did by eating and drinking in the house of J. Dun. Fewer in Kelso,
spend and consume the said Profits, and passed an Act, ordaining the Elders, or
some of them to collect the same, for what use, the Act it self will declare.
If for the use of the Poor (as some say) then the Presbytery spent the Poors
Money, and the Poor Mr. K's which is worse than the other. Mr. K. did take
Instruments against W. C. Collector of and Intromettor with the said Dues and
Profits, that he and his Constituents should be liable to refound the same to
him. Now is not the Presbytery of Kelso, who are the Constituents, very much
concerned to defend their own Act and Actings in the Matter? And if the Elders
shall be found obliged to be countable, to Mr. K. for their Intromissions seems
it not very rational that the Presbytery, who by their Act ordained the Elders
to collect the said Profits, shall be liable to satisfy them? So that it is the
great Concern of the Presbytery, both as to Credit and Interest to oppose Mr.
K. in the Action under debate; and by an infallible Consequence they are most
incompetent Judges in this Process, being so strongly biased. Papagr. 13. A
sixth Injury done to Mr. K. by that Synod, is, that they positively refused to
give him the Extract of the Process, some of the Articles of the Libel being
founded on Papers in their hands, it is simply impossible he can purge himself
without the production of the said Papers. And the Inj^ry is so much the
greater, that there is an express Act of Parliament, ordaining the Clerks of
what Judicature soever to give, and that gratis, the Doubles or Di^positions to
persons concerned. It was a very strange Answer, which the Synod gave to Mr. K.
when he and others required an Extract. They could not give any Extract, said
the Synod, till the Cause was concluded, as Instruments bear. What is this,
pray but to give at him (as we say) a Candle, after he is dead? It Is gratis
dictum here to pretend, that the Judicatures of the Church are not liable to
civil Laws. Whatever may be said in other cases, there is not the least shadow
of Reason in this under debate. But on the contrary, the Church ought rather to
be more for it, than the State, and readier to allow the alleged guilty Person
all the means and methods he can in Reason desire for cleaning himself from the
pretended guilt, if he can; especially, when there is no Canon, or
Ecclesiastical Law to the contrary. And further the Church lays claim to civil
Laws, when they make for them, and why may not others also have the same
privilege and benefit, when it suits their Case, and is in it self most
agreeable to Reason? And besides, the Church observes the other particulars
mentioned in that Act of Parliament, and why not this under debate? Let a
reason be given. Lastly, it is a Maxim in Law, vbi Lex non distinguis, nec nobis
distinguendum. The Act of Parliament is general, and therefore Mr. K. craves
the benefit thereof. Parage. 14. A seventh very remarkable Escape in that Synod
is, that they did drive the Plough before the Oxen by declaring Mr K. unfit for
the said Offices, and yet not condemned for any fault; for the Sentence
mentions none only seems tacitly to imply some such thing; but like the Oracle
of Delphus, leaves people to conjecture what it is. In effect, and by
infallible Consequence, the business is a plain Hysteron-Proteron, a Monster in
Nature, where the Effect precedeth the Cause. He ought first to have been found
guilty of some Crime or fault deserving Deprivation before he could be laid
aside. it is a mighty preposterous Act, first to hang him, and thereafter to
appoint a Committee to sit on his Assize. Paragr. 15. An eight Error is, that
supposing Mr. K. to be unfit for the said Offices, yet the Method that is taken
for supplying the same is most sinistrous and illegal, in regard it encroacheth
on the E. of R. and others their Right; for if the Person, whom his Lo. and
others concerned present, be not legally qualified, they ought to be
advertised, in order to name another. It Is true, what the Synod did in that
matter, is qualified, until, says the Sentence, the School of Kelso be
provided with a qualified Doctor, etc. The Synod here takes on them what is not
in their power to do. This qualification razeth and destroys the ancient
Custom and Constitution of the Place, and takes away Men's civil Right and
Property Mr. K. always was, and still is willing that his Doctor supply his
place in the performance of the said Office, providing no persons Right be
thereby encroach'd upon. Paragr. 16. Lastly, Mr. K. here ends, as he began with
some thing very commendable in the said Synod. They thought not fit themselves
to decide this Plea, but left it in the hands of some very honorable and
worthy Gentlemen, My L. P. the L. M. Sir J. H. of B. and several others, to
whose determination Mr. K. would not fear to commit his very Life. But even
here. Later anguis in herba. Pray, what the better is Mr. K. that he has a good
store of excellent Swords, if they be locked fast within the Castle, when he
stands in need of 'em? Not one of these fore named Gentlemen, with many others,
ever owned the said Committee. And how could it be expected, that my L. P. or
the L. M. would come off the Bench at Edenb. to sit and cognoste a pitiful
Cause at Kelso Had these Lords and other Gentlemen kept Diets, no question
things would have come to a good Conclusion. But how could they come to Diets?
Some were not advertised, others shifted to have any hand in the matter; which
is evident, that of four Diets together, there was but once a Quorum. Paragr.
17. Upon all these and several other most pungent Reasons, Mr. K. and these
commissionated from the E. appealed from that Synod to the then next ensuing G.
A. in matters Ecclesiastical, and to the Judge ordinary in matters Civil, and
protested for Cost, Skaith, and Damage, and Remeed of Law. And thus the
Business went in before the G. A. Dec. last. Parg. 2^. It Is needless here to
give a particular account of what passed at Edenb. before that Reverend
Judicature. Yet it must not be omitted here to show, that Mr. K. does
acknowledge with all thankfulness, that he had to do with mighty discreet
Gentlemen, and that he saw nothing in them relating to this Affair, but Justice
and Equity. They heard all he had to say with great patience, nor were his
Adversaries suffered to speak, at least in Public, but when he was present.
After some pretty warm debate before the the Committee of Bills, and its
Sub-Committees, and a touch before the Committee of Overtures (for the Business
went in thither also for Advice) Mr. K. though not without difficulty, gained his
Point, and got the Cause carried in before the Assembly, Mr. J. opposing the
thing as much as he could. The Assembly without any debate, referred it to the
Commission; the Commission put into the hands of 8 or 9 very worthy, grave and
judicious Gentlemen; who scarely being well entered upon the Business, did cast
it back again upon the Commission, saying It was a ticklish Point, they would
meddle no more with it. And in truth it was no wonder they startred, when they
heard how the matter came in, and out of the Session and Presbytery, and into
the Synod. A very strange procedure indeed! And may justly amaze all that hear
the same. Paragr. 19. The Members of the Commission being and (it seems) very
curious to take a look of this Monster, called in M. J. and Mr. K. and inquired
at Mr. K. how the business came in before the Kirk-Session, and what passed
there. Of which Mr. K. having given a full account, 'twas further asked, how it
came in before the Presbytery, and what passed before that Judicature. I cannot
tell, replied Mr. K. I was never before that Judicature in my life. They did
things without me; as if I had been no ways concerned, was you not cited before
them said the M. Not as all, replied M. K. At which they were all exceedingly
astonished. Then, and not till then, M. J. spoke, saying; I wonder how M. K.
can say he was never before the Presbytery of Kelso; whereas he was frequently
before that judicature. Pray, M. answered M. K. Let me have liberty to give a
Return to what M. J. has laid to my charge. By what he says, I Am guilty, not
only of a most gross false-hood; but of a horrid and damnable Lie: for, if I
was frequently before the Presbytery, no question, but I know, I was;
especially being so much concerned in the matter. I again repeat my words, I
was never so much as once before the Presbytery of Kelso, nor ever cited, or
defined: or called in before that judicature. What M. J. says is nothing to
the purpose being neither Ad-Irleminon Eodem tempore That judicature he means,
is a Committee, made up of the Presbytery of Kelso, and so many Assistants,
appointed by the Synod to fit on M. Ks. Affair, Now this is not the Presbytery
of Kelso for a Mare and a Foal is not a Mare, Nor had this judicature a Being
at that time but was afterward appointed by the Synod. In short, said M. K I
was not before that judicature; to which the Kirk-Session of Kelso made their
Reference. So that, if M. J. mean not the said judicature to which the
References was made, what he says, is altogether impertinent, and makes
nothing to the present purpose. Now, whosoever shall consider this passage,
will certainly find that M. J. was not only guilty of a gross impertinency; but
of speaking that, which is a manifest falsehood, if not a most horrid and
malicious lie. And, if M. K. had not been present to answer for himself, it
could not but have passed for a certain Truth.

Paragr. 20. After this Jangling, the Mod. says to Mr. K. How came your
business in before the Synod? That Is the oddest passage of all, replied Mr. K.
The Presbytery having considered and cognosc'd the affair, referred is to the
Synod, that was to fit within eight days; but had no mind, as the event proved,
to carry it before that Judicature; or if they had a mind, they designed that
that Judicature should follow their footsteps, by passing Sentence on a person
unheard; for questionless, if they had resolved to have prosecuted the business
legally, they would have ordered Mr. K. to be summoned to appear before the
Synod. And therefore he himself was Necessitated to give in a Petition, showing
what Injustice he had met with from the Kirk-Session and Presbytery, and
desired that the Reccords of both these Judicatures might be produced, as the
said Petition at more length bears. While Mr. K. was thus going on in giving an
account of matters, one of the Members of the Commission says, What are we
doing? This is not our point; the first thing, we are to do, is to consider,
whether the Appeal stands, or falls. It would seem the Commission was somewhat
desirous to know a little of the business; and from this Touch, as En ungue
Leonem, they might guess what was to follow. In short, the Appeal was found to
be faulty, partly occasioned by the Clerk of the Synod, his not giving Mr. K.
the Extract of a Protestation in the words in which it was taken, as by the
same Instrument taken in a public Notar's hand can be instructed; partly by an
(A) Omission in Mr. K's self, and so the Process returned back again where it
was.

Rem. (A) You have an account of this Omission in Mr. K. and of the failing in
the Clerk, of the Synod Sect. 2. But it is more than probable, that it was
neither of these Reasons, which moved the Commission to remit the Process to
the Judicature from whence it came. Know, that they were put to a very Hard
look, a sore Dilemma; for the Marquis of Tweddale, then, My Lord High
Chancellor of Scotland, sent Mr. Hay, one of his Lo. Attendants, into the
Commission, while they were considering the matter, to tell them to be
Circumspect in what they did in that Affair* for let them know, said his Lo.
that things perhaps may come to be re-examined by a higher Jadicature. After
this, they had neither heart no^ hand to meddle more in it; but were glad to
have some fair Pretense to send it back, as it came. Paragr. 21. it must not be
omitted here to show, how strangely Mr. K. was misrepresented to those that
were his Judge^ at Edenb. amongst many other gross Falsehoods they were told,
that he went not to Church, but always to the Meeting House. One of the Judges
asked Mr. K. in private, if he ever heard Mr. J. Preach, or any other
Presbyterian Minister. Mr. K. standing a little astonished at such Questions,
at last said, that since Presbytery was settled, he never heard an Episcopal
Minister when he could have a Presbytererian within the Parish, and that he was
Mr. J's constant ^earer. May I believe you, answered the Gentleman? A Minister
he was. Sir, replied Mr. K. I shall Instruct what I say, by a thousand
Witnesses. At which he lift up his eyes and hands to the Heavens, saying, We
are otherwise informed. Mr K. had never spoke with this Gentleman before in his
life. Another of his Judges told a Gentleman, who was speaking to him of Mr. K.
about the present debate, That they were informed, he was the greatest enemy
the Kirk of Scotland had* This also was a Minister, to whom Mr. K. to this hour
never spoke Paragr. 22. When Mr. K. returned home, he thought to have found his
Enemies, where he left them, and in the same posture; whereas they had not only
changed their Camps, but appeared quite another thing; like men of another
World. They had Cashiered and Disbanded most of their old Forces, and Levied
great numbers of Recruits; men, whom Mr. K. had never seen before. In plain
terms, Mr. K's Accusers had raised a new second Libel, quite Cancelling and
Destroying many Articles in the Old, and putting a New Face, or Dress on
others; as also adding a good number of things not heard of before, and
presented the same by a Petiton to the Committee, that was appointed by the
late Synod to sit on the former Libel. The Committee received in the said new
Libel; and passed Sentence thereon, by referring the matter to the
Consideration of this Reverend Synod. Whereas the said Petition with its Libel
ought to have been rejected and thrown over Bar, as a thing without the Limits
of their Power to Cognosce, it not being recommended to them by the late Synod
to receive in any new Accusation, but only to consider the Contents of the
former Libel, as the Sentence of the said Synod bears. And supposing the said
Committee had been empowered (as they were not) to receive in new Libels; yet
they ought not to have passed Sentence, even by a Reference without hearing
what Mr. K. had to say upon the matter. But this is do Now thing; it is that,
which Mr. K. has met with all along, first to be judged, then heard. If he had
known, what was in that new Libel, it is very like, he would have taken another
Course, than what he took. Paragr. 23. And therefore in short, he now gives
this positive Answer. viz. That he strictly adheres to the very words in the
first Libel subscribed by his Accusers; and that in the same order. Matters
came in before the Judicatures of Session, Presbytery and Synod: and till the
said Libel be Discussed, he absolutely refuses to give a particular Answer to
any new thing laid to his Charge: tho he sees no difficulty to make Returns to
all these new Articles; for to run on at this rate, there is no end; but to
proceed in Infinitum, which Method, God and Nature Abhors in Humain Affairs.
Wherefore Mr. K. most humbly and earnestly begs, your Godly Wisdoms may after a
serious Consideration o^ the Premises, take such fit methods, as will bring
this sad and lamentable Contest to a happy Conclusion. And expecting your
Answer, he shall always pray, etc. Mr. K. cannot but foresee, that several
Words and Expressions in this paper will startle and offend some Persons*; but,
he hopes, those only, who are biased with Prejudice, Interest, Opinion,
Friendship, or some such worldly, and selfish Motive. He is sure, no
indifferent Person, who impartially considers this whole business and fully
knows, how he is abused in the highest degree, both as to his good Name and
Fortune; but he will Confess, that he is exceedingly concerned to use all
lawful means and methods to maintain his own and his Posterities Reputation,
and Credit in this World. Some perhaps will say, this ought to be done without
Reflection, and not in bitter and invective words. Mr. K. answers with those
Noble and Famous Romans, Scipio, Africanus, Lelius, and others, in a Case of
this nature: Siquis est qui dictum se inclementius existimauit esse, sciat*
responsum, non dictum esse quia laesit prior. And is it not a common Maxim
received amongst Christians, especially Kings, Princes, and great States;
Bellum non infero, sed repell^, to defend and justify their many barbarous,
cruel and bloody Acts? Hence it is that, if any person assault hi^ fellow with a
design to Murder him; though the person assaulted should happen to kill the first
Agressor, yet by the Laws of all Nations, and in Reason, whereon Laws are
Founded, he is free of ^urder; but only to be looked on, as one, that has
committed Manslaughter, which is not punishable by Law; because he did it in
his own defense. Know that every Page of this Paper was Subscribed by Mr. K. We
designed, when we began to Transcribe this paper, to have given you a good
number of more considerable Remarks; but finding, they will highly increase its
bulk, we altered our Resolution. Only we here desire you may take a second
glance of the 19 Parragraph, wherein Mr. J. does most shrewdly bewray a great
deal not only of Weakness, but Wickedness; for certainly he knew that Mr. K.
was not before the Presbytery of Kelso at the time under debate: yet that he
might make him a Liar, a most Notorious Liar (for such would he be, if Mr. J.
had then spoken Truth) he in a most Fraudulent and Malicious manner attempts to
prove it; but with the greatest impertinency imaginable, bringing in mere
Chimera's; things that had no being, no existency at that time. His Faith, it
seems, is much stronger than St. Peter's, who walked on the Waters, for he can
ride on a Nothing. In a Paper which he gave into the Synod 20 Oct. 96. (of
which in its place) he Fiddle-faddles wonderfully (they say) about that Mare
and Foal, telling that a Foal takes not away the Essence of the Mare; a Mare
is a Mare, says he, whether she has or wants a Foal. We confess this to be
true, yet we still aver; that a Mare and a Foal is not a Mare; or that the
Presbytery of Kelso with 10 or 12 Assistants. But we shall willingly grant that
Mr. J. and his Chymera's are purely Mr. J Mr. K. here is shooting hood-winked
at a Mark; for he never saw that malicious Paper, he only got some small
account of it from these, who heard it read in Synod. When it comes to his hand
in the dress it appeared in before that Judicature, he hopes, he shall be able
to give an answer. P^rragr. 21. Mr. K. is represented to his Judges at Eden,
(particularly to a Minister of that City) as the greatest Enemy the Kirk of
Scotland has; whereas many wise and learned men say, that Mr. J. has done more
hurt to the Presbyterian Interest, than ten thousand of Mr. K's Principles.

An Account of what passed at Jedburgh 21 April 1696.
14.
MR. K. being called in before the Synod, was asked if he had his Answer ready;
He replied he had. There Is a Committee, said the Mod. appointed to considerit.
I hum^ly crave, it may be read in f^ce of Synod, answered Mr. K. That shall be
done, replied the Mod. but the Committee is first to consider it. I desire Mod.
to know who are upon that Committee; said Mr. K. for there are some here,
against whom I humbly conceive I have relevant Objections, why they cannot be
my Judges. You may object against whom you please before the Committee,
answered Mr. Semple. Mod. replied Mr. K. I humbly desire that the Synod may
consider my Objections. This was flatly denied. The Committee meeting, Mr. K
was permitted to read over his own Paper, one of the Members looking all the
while on its double. As he read he was frequently stopped; especial^y by Mr.
Anderson Minister in the West-Kirk, Correspondent from Lothian, for reflecting
as he alleged, against the Synod. This Gentleman (said Mr. K. not then knowing
what he was, yet seeing him to be a Stranger, and consequently unacquainted
with the Affair) considers bare words; for certainly he knows little of the
Subject, about which they treat If the words be conform to the matter, there is
no ground of Complaint: and these cannot be Quarelled without the knowledge of
this; unless you allege that the Synod and its Committees are Infallible.
After these words he was permitted to read it over; yet he found by their looks
and otherwise, that it was very unpleasant to their Palates.

. 15.
THe day following Mr. K being called before the Synod, the abovementioned
Libel given in by the Elders is read in his presence before a vast number of
People besides Members; which being done, some of the Ministers, and Ruling
Elders desired that his Answer should be read also; others were positively
against it, saying, that it was a paper full of Reflections against the Synod,
and other Judicatures of the Church. They are not Reflections, answered Mr. K.
but a true Relation of matters of Fact. The Members especially, that had not
been on the Committee, and only had heard that there were many very Strange
Passages in the said Paper, but knew not particulars, were pressing it should
be read. Yea, some of the Spectators partly out of a Principle of Curiosity,
partly of Justice, took the freedom to say pretty audibly, that it was most
reasonable it should be read. After a long and warm debate, Pro and Con; What,
said Mr. K. shall a base, lying, scandalous Libel be read in face of a Synod,
and before some hundreds of People, that never once saw me in the face before
this time, and I not permitted to give it answer? It seems you are resolved to
affront me. I I have subscribed every Page of that Paper, if it be such as you
allege; you have the greater advantage of me. Mod. I crave it may be read;
otherwse, I Will protest against you. Then at length his desire was granted. After
this a Question was moved, whether Mr. K. or another should read it? Some, who
had no will it should be read at all, said that Mr K. read too slowly; and the
Paper was long, but in effect the reason was; because Mr. K. read it too
distinctly, and with too audible voice. After some debate amongst the Brethren
(for Mr. K. opened not his Mouth on this head) he was ordered to read it. He
scarcely had read a Page or two when he was stopped, especially by Mr. Anderson.
This Gentleman, said Mr. K. is as unfit to be a Judge, as any I know; for he
hates to be informed. The Mod. desires Mr. K. to proceed. Within a little he is
stopped again by Mr. J and others. Yea, the 3 and 4 time. At last he takes Money
out of his Pocket, and lays it down on the Table, saying, If he was stopped
again, he would protest against them, and so leave them. How come you, said
one, to write such things, as are in that Paper? I must write, answered Mr. K.
conform to the Subject. If you had given me better Matter, you should have had
better Discourse. It Is not possible for any man to make a good thread of such
Nasty, Durty, Tatty, Tarry, Hairy Wool, as you have put into my hands. After a
little jangling he was permitted to read it all over without further stop; yet
not without many Gapes and Glowers, Spittings and Coughs; and not a little
laughter of the Spectators, not to name some of the Members. Mr. K. being
removed and called in again, was told he behoved to wait on till the next day;
which being come, and he called in, Your business, said the Mod. is referred to
a Committee, which is to sit at Kelso last Tuesday of May in order to ripen and
prepare things for a Synod, which is to meet at Duns last Tuseday of July next,
which is to put an end to your Affair. Mr. K. though not a little displeased with
continual Dilatures, and their making of him trip sometimes West to Jedburgh,
sometimes East to Duns; yet was glad to hear they had now at length appointed a
Synod, which was to put an end to so tedious and expensive a Plea. And
therefore said he to the Mod. That things may be prepared so, as you say, I
humbly crave an Extract of the Process, particularly of the Depositions of
witnesses, with some other Papers, without which, it is simply impossible for me
to purge my self; and you know that the Laws and Practicks of this Kingdom
allow that benefit to all Persons in my Circumstances. I crave also, that Mr.
J. may condescend upon his Informers; for I have too too match ground to think,
that some of the Witnesses are Informers, which is contrary to Law. Mr. K.
being removed, there was a very hot debate in the Synod, whether to give an
Extract or not, most of the more knowing and judicious men were much for it,
particularly a very worthy Gentleman, the Lord of Tresons, and Mr Th. Steel
Sheriff Substitute in Tiviotdale, which two Gentlemen had never sat on this
Plea before. But above all, Mr. Orock frequently before mentioned, press^d hard
that an Extract should be given; and on the Contrary, Mr. S. was tooth and nail
against it. His great Achillian Argument (which in effect is no Argument, at
most an In-artificial one) was, that the former Synod, had by a Vote refused an
Extract, and so they could not now grant it. I hope, Mod. answered Mr. Orock,
that Mr. S. does not think the Synod Infallible. The Lords of Session do often
recall their own Sentence upon second thoughts; and why may not we do the like?
Some, as Mr. K. was informed, were for giving an Extract, but not Subscribed by
the Clerk, others motioned that he should be suffered to see the Depositions
and other Papers in the Clerks hand; but not get them into his Custody: But
neither of these two came to be debated. After a long Contest, it was carried
by Vote of Synod to adhere to their former Sentence; and so to deny Mr K. all
he desired. Being called in, he was told the mind of the Synod: and therefore
expecting no Justice from a Judicature, that denied him the ordinary and legal
means, whereby alone he could purge himself from the Calumnies, he was Charged
with, he Appealed from them in matters Ecclesiastical to the next ensuing G: A.
and in matters Civil to the Judge ordinary, as the said Appeal and Instruments
taken thereon at more length bear; which was likewise done by the Comnissioner
from the Earl. After Mr. K. was gone: Take up your Committee now, said Mr.
Orock. I knew he would Appeal, answered Mr. J. before he came from Kelso.
However, replied Mr. O. we ought not give him occasion.

Mr. K. is loath to be so positive, as to aver that Mr. J. made a Lie in face
of Synod; if he affirmed so confidently, that he knew Mr. K. would Appeal
before he came from Kelso: If it be not a Lie, we say, truly it comes near to
the borders of one, for it was not possible he could know it. Mr. K. indeed,
certainly knows, that he had no design to Appeal, till he saw Injustice done
him.

16.
REasons of Appeal. By Mr. K. School Master of Kelso from the Provincial Synod
of Mers and Tiviotdale, met at Jedburgh, 21. April 1696. to the next ensuing G.
A. of the National Church, when, and where the same shall happen to meet: which
Appeal was made 23 of the said Month of April between 10 and 11 hours in the
Fore-noon, as Instruments and Protestation taken in presence of the said Synod,
in their Clerks hand; and in the hands of Alex. Don, Notar public, by the said
Mr. K. and A. Potts Writer in Kelso, Commissioner; Appointed by the E. of R.
and his Curators to that effect for his Lo. Interest, as the said
Protestations, craving Liberty to give in Reasons of Appeal to the Mod. and
Clerk within 10 days, conform to an Act of the Assembly, at more length bear.
Mr. K. Schoolmaster of Kelso has right to the Office of Precentor and
Session-Clerk, and to the Benefits thereto belonging; and he being impeded from
the same by Mr. W, Jaque Minister in Kelso, and his Elders; and also being
Libelled by his said Elders, as guilty of many horrid Crimes, gross
Immoralities, and Corrupt in his Principles; as several Libels given in at
several Diets to the Presbytery of Kelso, Synods of Mers and Tiviotdale, and
Committees thereof, as the said Libels in the hands of the Clerks of the said
Judicatures at more length bear. Mr. K. being obliged by the Law of God,
Nature, and Nations, to defend himself against the Malice of Wicked Men; and
that his Innocence may appear to the World, and he put into possession of what
is his Right, he before the several Judicatures, being attended by the E. of R.
his Commissioners, gave in his Defenses. Which Process having gone through the
several Judicatures, and no Conclusion therein; but rather Injustice and
Iniquity committed against the said Mr. K. not only by the Libellers, but by
several of the Members his Judges; at length it did arrive, and come to the
said Synod met at Jedburgh. Mr. K. not doubting but that Justice should have
been done in this Affair by the said Synod, he and these appointed by the E. of
R. did attend^ the same, while it sat, being three days; and having heard
patiently a most malicious, scandalous and lying Paper read against him, and
which came in before the Synod Per Saltum, not being begun at the Presbytery;
and he having read in his own defense a Paper in answer to the said scandalous
lying Writ, and alleging most justly that the Synod could not meddle with that
new Paper, or Libel until the former Process (as false and scandalous as the
other) were discussed, and be either Condemned, or Affoil'd: and the said Synod
having heard both Parties, would not Reject that scandalous lying Paper, last
given in; neither would they enter upon, nor discuss the first and second
scandalous Process, but carried themselves partially toward the Defender, by
Hectoring, and Impeding him, when giving in his Defenses, and by frequent
stopping him reading his Information, they not forgetting the former Injustice
done in the preceding Synod, Committees, and Presbytery; so that they would run
on in their former Channel. Wherefore, and for the Reasons underwritten, the
said Synod is a most incompetent Judicature to Judge, or Determine in these
Processes, or any part thereof, between Mr. K. and the Kirk-Session of Kelso.

1. The Ministers of this Synod (except perhaps some Correspondents) and
plurality of the Elders, being the Members of the former Synods, (and the
Presbytery of Kelso making a part thereof) cannot Judge on this Process, in
regard of their Partiality, Informality, and Injustice already committed by
them, while Members of the Presbytery of Kelso, and Members of the former
Synods, viz The last Synod, and its Committees, with the said Presbytery and
its Assistants; these two Judicatures having entered upon this business without
owning Mr. K. though the Party most concerned, and at their Advising, Arguing and
Pleading upon the matter, did call for Mr. J. and allow him, his Agents and
Elders to be present, and refusing that benefit to the Defender, Mr. K. and
these commissionated by the E. of R. Whereas, if he had been present, as often
as Mr. J. etc. he would have convinced the Judicatures; and his Innocence would
have been made appear. 2. The last Synod, made up of the Members of this, as
said is, by their Sentence declared Mr. K. unfit for these Offices whereunto he
has right, and that without calling for him, or hearing him; except when they
were giving their Interloquitor, or Sentence As also he is declared incapable
by them without any Reason, Foundation or Because; or without condescending
upon any Probation against him. And though they by their Sentence declare him
unfit for his Offices, yet they do not condemn him for any particular Crime, or
fault laid to his Charge; neither do they assoil him from their Scandalous
Libels; which is altogether contrary to Reason, and Law Ecclesiastical or
Civil. And seeing the Members of this Synod have been so Gross in their former
Judicatures, who doubts, but they will adhere to their Asts and Actings already
illegally gone about; so that Mr. K. cannot expect Justice from them. 3. The
Members of this Synod, contrary to their former Acts and Sederunts did receive
in against Mr. K. while they were sitting in Committees, new scandalous lying
Libels or Paper, against him, and that Per Saltum, without discussing the old.
How therefore can justice be expect^^ from such Judges? 4. The Members of this
Synod in their said Commitees, or in their Judicature called the Presbytery of
Kelso, with so many Assisting Ministers and Ruling Elders, did act contrary to
all Law and Reason, and contrary to the very light of Nature, and the
Principles of Christianity in the matter of Examination of Witnesses (24 Sept.
95.) as most evidently appears from these following Particulars. For even after
Appeal made from them to the Synod upon most rational and just grounds and
convincing reasons, as the said Appeal at more length bears; Yet the Members of
the said Presbytery (who are all mightily biased in this Plea, both as to
Credit and Interest, as is at large most convincingly made appear in that Paper
called, A Brief Answer, etc. given in by Mr. K. to the said Synod at Jedburgh,
21 April 96.) with one single Assistant, Mr. Couden Minister at Duus, did
proceed to the Examination of a List of one and thirty Witnesses (besides these
not in his List, which is a great Iniquity) whereof two only were designed, so
that Mr. K. could not know, who they were he was to object against, there being
3, 4, or 5, of the same name in Kelso, to pass, who are in the Country: some of
which Witnesses were Ultronious; some hugely possessed with Prejudice, and
greatly biased; some both Judge, Party and Witness; yea and Clerk too; many
present at others Examination; some interrupted by Fellow witnesses, when
deponing; and prompted by the very Judge to confess, by telling that the
Prior-Witness confessed such a particular. Many Depon'd upon Hearsay only, and
that in abscence of the Persons, who should have spoken such things; which
method the following ^ynod did condemn by a Vote, after a warm debate, Mr. K.
had about Bessy Thomson, ( Sect 29. Part 3) A great number of Witnesses depon'd
whole Wagons full of Exotic Stuffs, such, as Keegrels, Gigrels, or Jigrels,
etc. and that Super Inquirendis, on general Heads, which is a thing Contrary to
the Claim of Right, and one of the Grievances of the former Reign, given into
his Majesty with the Instrument of Government. Lastly, to name no more, several
Depositions not making for the Libellers, are not minuted, And all this done
with close doors, contrary to an express act of Parliament. This was the great
day of Action, on whose sandy Foundation is built the whole Fabric of this
Process. Should all the particulars relating to this days work be here set
down, the world might stand amazed thereat. It looked rather like a Stage Play,
than a Meeting of Divines. There is a Touch of this in the said Brief Answer.
Now can any rational man expect Justice from persons, guilty of so many gross
Escapes, as abovementioned. 5. This Provincial Synod in their former Meeting,
not only proceeded illegally against Mr. K. as above; but did encroach upon the
Property of the Earl of R. and other Heretors of the Parish of Kelso, by
Empowering the Kirk-Session there to Act in, and present to the Offices
belonging to Mr. K. and that in manifest contempt of Authority, and the said
Patrons their legal Right, and contrary to the ancient Constitution and Custom
of the place, past memory of man. And, if Heretors by the present Constitution
and Law of this Kingdom, have a hand, power or vote, in calling, or presenting
a Minister to their Church, much more a Precentor, or Session-Clerk, who is to
Record and put in Register the Marriages and Baptisms, which happen to be in
their Parish; which business does rather concern Civil, than Ecclesiastical
matters. All which being Considered, Justice in this Process cannot be expected
from this Synod. 6. This Synods Illegallity, Partiality, and Injustice, appears
in their present meeting at Jedburgh, that they not only adhered to their
former Acts passed in the former Synod and Meetings above-represented; but
also, contrary to the practice of the Civilized Heathens, refused to give to
the Defender the Names of the Informers, tho pressed thereto by way of
Instrument; and tho it was urged that the same ought to be done, in respect
these Informers might be Witnesses against him. 7. This Synod contrary to the
Municipal Law of this Kingdom; contrary to the minds and inclination of some of
their Members. who appear to be most judicious among them, positively refused
to give Mr. K an Extract or Double of the Process, containing the Depositions
of the Witnesses, though again and again pressed thereto; and tho is was known to
them all, that there was a particular Article of the Libel against the Defender
founded upon a Petition given into themselves, and in their own hands; and though
they Libel against the Defender upon that Petition; yet they refuse to produce
either the Principle, or give an Extract thereof. As also tho it be known to
this Synod, that of all the Witnesses, that were summoned, who were upwards of
40, yet Mr. K. heard none of these Examined, except three, his own two
School-Doctors, and Andrew Robson in the Floors, so that there is an Assolute
necessity for the Defender to have an. Extract or Double of the Depositions of
the Whole Witnesses who were examined, seeing he was not present, when, nor
knew what they deponed; for if he had been present, Lawful objections might
have been given in against the Witnesses, and their Depositions, yet
notwithstanding this Synod positively refused to give Extracts thereof. 8. To
such hight of Partiality and Injustice some of their judicatures are arrived,
that they not only refuse to give Extracts of paper in their hands; but also
they discharge there Clerk to give the Defender the Extract of Instruments
taken in his hands, tho upon most just ground against two of their own number:
so that some times Mr. K. gets Extracts of his Protestations, but not in the
words he takes them at; other times that benefit is positively denied him; as
Instruments taken in a public Notars hand can evidently make appear. Lastly,
the method and way taken to prove Mr. K. guilty of some horrid Crimes, is the
most sinistrous and back-ward course, that ever was heard of. An account of
this you have Sect. 21, part 3. And therefore we shall not repeat things here.
Only let no tell you, that Mr. Vetch. Minister at Westruther, one of them that
should have depon'd upon this head, was justly petted at this new Contrivance;
and therefore positively refused to depone. Edgar of Whathelly, very wisely
followed Mr. Vetch, his own Pastor's footsteps. Mr. K. has just ground to
suspect, that one of the Reasons, why they refused him a Double of the
Depositions, is, because they have no will he should see the many extravagant
and wild things, that are in them; particularly the Depositions of those, that
were both judges and witnesses at one time.

By all Which, this Synod, or any Member thereof are most incompetent judges in
this Process. And therefore Mr. K. appeals from this Provincial Synod to the
next ensuing G. A of this National Church in so far as the matter is
Ecclesiastical, and summons you the said Provincial Synod, with the Libellers
and all others concerned, Apud Acts, to Appear before the said G. A. when and
where it shall happen the same to meet. And so far as the matter is Civil, he
appeals to the judge ordinary. And thereupon the said Mr. K. takes Instruments.
To which appeal of the said Mr. K Allex. Potts Commissioner from the E. of R.
and his Lo. Curators adheres in every particular, as above mentioned; and also
protests and takes Instruments.

A general Remark on the Reasons of Appeal. You have here such Reasons, as Mr.
K. had at the time; but if either Extracts of papers, as Law and Equity
require, had been given him; or had he been allowed to debate, and reason
matters fairly with his Adversaries before the judicatures; or yet had he then
known the things, which Providentially are come to his ears since (tho he knows
but yet a few) you should have had both more Reasons, and more convincing. But
to supply this want, at least in part, you may take a review of matters form
Sect. 8, to the end of the 3 Part.

17
KElso, 26 May, 1696. The Committee appointed by the late Synod at jedburgh,
meeting here, M. K. went in to them, and asked, if they were met about his
Affair; and being told' they were met for that end, he gave into them a
Protestaion subscribed with his hand: the Double whereof he read, one of the
Members looking on the Principal; whereupon he took Instruments both in the
hands of their Clerk, and in a public Notars. The Sum of the Protestation is;
1. That his Appearance there might be no ways prejudicial to his Appeal. 2.
That since he was firmly resolved still to adhere to the terms of the said
Appeal, he judged it altogether unecessary to put himself to needless trouble
and expense thereafter to attend any Church judicature below the G. A. of their
Delegates 3. He protested against their procedure in this said Affair; and for
Cost, Skaith, and Dam^g^, and Remeed in Law; as the said Instruments bear.

18.
STichel, 16 july. 96. It would be very tedious to give you a particular and
full account of this passage, and all followed thereon. In short; Know, that
Mr. S. (no question with the advice of his Brethren, whom he left at Ednim,
where they were assisting the Minister there at the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper) went to Stichel, and told Sir J. P. that the Synod was to meet at Duns.
28 of the said month, and would certainly pass a Sentence very unfavourable to
Mr K. And therefore he desired Sir J. who, he knew, had great Influence upon
Mr. K. to advise him either to Dimit, or give in to the Synod a paper
subscribed with his hand, whereby he obliged himself to give the Synod full
satisfaction; or that he should leave to them to do in the Process, as they
thought fit. There was a third branch; but it came not in so early, nor so
directly, as their two, viz. Or that he should have the favor of the C. of R.
to Mr. J. Sir. J sent an Express for Mr. K. and acquainted him with all that
passed between them. Mr. K. positively refused to refer himself to the whole
Synod; for he knew the temper of the most part. Yet he said he would refer
himself to a select number: if they will permit him to name 20; he will leave
to his adversaries to choose 9. 11, or 17 of these to determine matters: which
he thought as great a length, as in Reason they could desire he should go. Or,
he offered thus; as he had done frequently, before: Let him choose any two
Gentlemen he pleased; they other two; let these four take what Oversman or
Preses they please, he promised to stand to their Determination. As to the
other point, he told Sir J. he would not Dimit; for, said he, people will look
on that, as of I acknowledged I were guilty of the crimes, I am charged with.
Yet he added; If he saw any propability that there would be peace in the place,
Gospel-like, to have more success by his Dimision, he would very readily lay
down his Charge. As to the third particular, (which came in oblig^ely only) he
said it was a very unreasonable Demand; and a most malicious act, or rather a
continued tract and course of wickedness in Mr. J. and others, to carry as they
did toward him upon any disgust between the Countess and Mr J. After a long
discourse upon these and other Heads, Mr. K. put a great many Questions to Sir
John; such as, Whether, or not, the Synod or Presbytery would give him a
Testimonial? And what kind of one it would be? Mr. S. answered, Sir J. spoke
nothing of that to me. What will they do with the Process, continued Mr. K.
They will let it fall: there will never be more of it, answered Sir J. If I be
the man they call me, replied Mr. K. I think 'its a great fault in them to let
me pass so easily. They would feign, it seems, be quit of you, answered Sir J.
with a smile. Many Inferences might be made from this passage, which we for
Brevities sake omit. Yet we cannot get by this one; viz. that Mr. S. and some
other brethren were fully resolved to pass on unfavourable Sentence, and that
many days before they met in Synod. If this be not a Fore-stalling of the
Market, let the world judge.

19.
DUns, 28 july, 96. Mr. K. knew very well, if the Provincial Synod of Mers and
Tiviotdale, with the Correspondents from other places should pass a Sentence
against him, it would exceedingly puzzle the G. A. how to carry on the Affair.
On the one side, it would be a most unpleasant Task to condemn the Sentence of
such a Synod. On the other, it could not but be troublesome to justify the many
illegal and unjust acts, which that judicature and its Committees were guilty
of. And therefore he was concerned to use all Lawful means, and to spare no
pains, nor Expenses to prevent, if he could, a Sentence. He was not a little
straightened as to time; for he only took his resolution 2 or 3 days before the
Synod sat down. In he posts to Ear: from thence to Broxmouth: from that to
Kelso: in again to Edr: back to Kelso: next day to Duns; and back that same day
to Kelso. In all about 142 well met Scots miles; but certainly above 200
English, or rather 300 Italian. In this little journey he traveld day and
night. Going from Kelso about 8 a clock in the evening, he fell out of the road
in a moor some place forgainst Lauder, where he was forced to sit and walk up
and down with his horse in his hand, from eleven a clock till day light, in a
very dark and rainy night. But that, which far rather deserves to be here
recorded, is the exceeding great Discretion, or rather Condescension in some
Person of great Honor; and the excessive Rudness and Barbarity in others of a
far lower degree. Know then that Mr. K. got from that noble Lady, C. of R. (tho
at that very time excessively afflicted with the news of her son the Earls
dangerous sickness in Flanders) to My Lord Polwart (now Earl of March-mount)
Lord high Chancellor of Scotland, a Letter, craving his Lo. would be pleased to
write to the M at Duns in Mr K's. favors. When Mr. K. came to My Lord
Chancellor's Lodgings, tho his Lo. was at that time very busy writing letters,
it being a Post-night; yet one of his servants telling that Mr. K. in Kelso,
was waiting for a word of his Lo. Such was M. Lord Chancellors Discretion,
Humility, Condescension, or what else you please to call it in a Vertnes sense,
that immediately he was pleased to come to the room, where Mr K. was, and
carried in such a discreet and affable manner toward him, that no stranger
could have guessed their Circumstances. In short: his Lo. promised as soon as
he had dispatched some letters for London-Post, he should write an Answer to
the C. of R's. letter: which accordingly was done. As to the Contents of this
letter, it was as favorable for Mr. K. as any person of Integrity, or one in
My Lord Chancellors Circumstances could write. Mr. K. no sooner recives the
Letter, but home he flees to Kelso, and from thence to Duns; where he waited at
the Church door all forenoon) there being no Sermon; because the Minister, who
should have preached, was indisposed) sometimes requesting this Brother,
sometimes that (above 30 in all) to get him access, but to no purpose, not
imagining all this while, that they knew any thing of the letter from the
Chancellor.

02.
IN the afternoon he comes with the first to the Church door; but was not
suffered to enter, the Officer telling him he was prohibited to let any in
except Members. Many his for so we may call them (did this fellow commit, or
rather they, who had given him the Orders (for within a very short time Mr. K.
sam 40 or 50 enter, that were not Members, particularly Mic Fister one of his
Libellers. After he had spoke to several of the Members, pressing them most
ear^^sily to procure him Access, but all in vain; at last be began to suspect,
that they knew he had a letter from My Lord Chancellor to the M. in his
favors; and therefore he asked one, whom he might be free with, about the
thing; who told him, that they all knew he had a letter; and that that was the
Cause he was not suffered to enter. This Gentleman durst not take Mr. K. in
with him. By good providence Mr. S. coming out of the Church, Mr. K. craved to
speak with him a part: whereupon they stepped a little aside. Sir, said Mr. K.
I have been all this day waiting here, earnestly begging liberty to go into
your Church to speak, but one word to the M. I humbly entreat you, take me in
with you. We are now busy. answered Mr. S. You Will win in within little. I hear,
Sir, replied Mr. K. you are to rise within a little. I must therefore be plain
with you I have a letter from My Lord high Chancellor of Scotland, directed to
your M. I earnestly beg, I may be let in to deliver it for I am ordered to give
it in face of Synod. We are to rise this night, answered Mr. S. and sit again
within a month at Kelso: you may keep that letter, till we meet there. We know
it is about your business; and since we are to do nothing in it here, it is
altogether needless to deliver the letter, Excuse me, Sir, replied Mr. K. It
would be a most impertinent; yea a distracted act in me to receive a letter
from the Chancellor of Scotland. to the Moderator at Duns, and to keep it up,
till you meet at Kelso, especially considering that I am standing here at your
Church door with the letter in my hand. And besides, Sir, continued Mr. K. I
must tell you, that I do not certainly know what is in the letter: and suppose
it speak of my Affair; yet there may be some thing else in it. Notwithstanding
all Mr. K. could say to this purpose, he did not prevail. At last, as Mr. S.
was going away; Sir, said Mr. K. I must be yet plainer with you. If you will
not suffer me to enter the Church, IN will go for a public Notar, and protest
against your carriage toward me, here at your Kirk-door. Mr, S. slipped away
without giving any Answer, Immediately therefore, Mr. K. runs with all speed to
his old acquaintance, Mr Winram Sheriff-clerk, and gave him a short accunt of
the business. You must either, answered he, deliver the letter, or protest
aginst them at the Chuch door; and immediately he sent for a Notar. Mr. K.
fearing the Synod might rise before the Notar came, hasted back to the Church,
and rushed in with another man, the Officer (for he opposed what he could)
complained to the M. that he broke in against his will. To speak the truth, the
Brethrens carriage toward Mr. K. put him into such a Mood, that he hardly knew
well what he was doing. Much pains and travel he had been at to get this
letter; and it very near cost him his life in the moor abovementioned, where he
lodged all night; and now, when he had brought it to the Church door, if he
should not deliver it out of his hand, all the world might justly laugh at him.
Now know, that Mr. J. was M. but it fell so well out at this moment, when Mr.
K. entered the Church, that Dr. Hardy, was occasionally moderating, and just
closing the business then in hand, And therefore Mr. K. stepping forward to the
table, without any further Complement, said, M. I have here a letter directed
to you from My Lord Polwart, Lord high Chancellor of Scotland. Lo, there it is.
With this: M. said Mr. J. I think Mr. K's. rudeness ought to be taken notice
of; in that he comes into this judicature without being called. M. replied Mr.
K. If all Circumstances were duly considered, it will be found, that I am
rather rudely dealt with; than guilty of rudeness. And thus, having protested
that he delivered the letter, he left them.

Rem. This extravagant and wild carriage of the Ministers toward Mr. K. (to
mention none of a higher degree) may be matter of astonishment to all that hear
the same. What design they had, God and their Consciences best know. Mr. K.
has not such uncharitable thoughts of them, as Mr. Wilson and Mr. Glen had of
him and his Party, as is above related, Sect. 6. That was a Devilish suspicion
in them positively to aver, that he and his Party had a Satanical design by
asking the Question there mentioned, Satan's design certainly is to ruin both
Soul and Body. All Mr. K. says in this particular of the strange carriage of
the Ministers toward him at Duns, is, that it is a Mystery to him. He does not
understand it. Time perhaps will bring Dark things to Light. He daily sees more
and more into their private Actings.

21.
KElso, 26. Aug. 96. The late Synod at Duns appointed their next meeting to be
on the 25 of the Month, but the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council in the
Interim had ordered a Fast to be kept the said day; so that if Mr. ^. had not
by Letters and otherwise advertised his Brethren, hardly one would have come
this 25 day; and as it fell out only about 30 answered at calling the Roles;
whereas the Members of this Synod are near 160, Ministers and Ruling Elders
besides Correspondent. And of these 30, about the half could not be Judges in
Mr. K's Affair, being Parties and laid aside by the Synod at Jedburgh. Mr. J.
sitting Moderator, (Moderator! A bonny Moderator indeed in this Affair!)
pressed with all the Rhetoric he was Master off that these few Members should
proceed to discuss this Process. Many Arguments he used for that end; but all
were repelled by the Brethren. It Is needless here to repeat either his
Arguments or their Answers. It Is sufficient to tell you, that at least he so
far prevailed, that it was then ordained it should be the first thing, they
were to enter upon the following Synod, which was to sit within less, than two
Months*

. 22.
KElso, 20, 21 and 22 days of Oct. 1696. These are three very dismal and
unlucky days; but whether more to Mr. K. than to the other Party, time will
determine. This Meeting of the Synod, and that of the Presbytery with one
single Assistant (24 Sept. 95. of which Sect 8. etc. Part 3.) are the two grand
Judicatures; wherein anything of moment was acted: the one laid the Foundation;
the other Built the Superstructure of a most unjust Sentence. How sandy a
Foundation that is, we showed in its place; and hence it cannot but follow,
that what is built thereon, must be very unsound work. For the better clearing
of this so material a Point, we shall first speak a little of some of the
Members of this Synod, and next of their Actions. Of the Members, Before we
Fall on this Point, Mr. K. humbly begs liberty to use all Lawful means to
vindicate his own and Posterities good name. It Is an ancient saying, Proximus
sum egomet mihi; Charity begins at home. When his, and another Reputation fall
in competition, so that the one must Perish: no man in reason can blame him to
defend his own, though to the ruin of his Neighbors. 1. As to the Synod in
general, they pretend, that they may proceed even to a Sentence,
notwithstanding one of the Parties appeal from them. We shall not here enquire
what in Equity and Justice may be done in this matter; and whether or not, it
holds in all cases, only we say, that the Appellant in that case is not obliged
to regard the Sentence of the Judge. 2. As to the many Honorable and Worthy
Gentlemen, the Ruling Elders, Mr. K. here declares them altogether innocent,
and free in an Active Sense of having any hand in the following Sentence passed
against him; and earnestly prays God may forgive them for being guilty in a
Passive Sense; for there was not so much as one of them present at this Synod;
and yet some of them, even in this sense are excusable; for they knew not there
was to be a Synod, till after it was met, otherwise, said they, we had not
failed to come. And since the Synod meets not on a fixed day, Gentlemen ought
to be Advertised. 3. Though Mr. K. has very relevant Objections (as he Conceives)
against several of the Ministers, that sat his Judges, in this Synod; yet for
Brevities sake, he thinks fit here to pass them all except two, whom he cannot
get by in silence, the one being the Head, and chief person amongst them; he
that sat at Helm, and Ruled all things: the other the Foot, the meanest indeed
in Office; yet such an one, who, though not a Judge, has a great stroke, and
Powers in matters of this kind. And you know if there be a Vertigo, or Megrim
in the Head, and the Gout in the Foot, it is not possible, that person can walk
strait. This Simile is so pat and plain in it self, that it needs no
Explication. The Persons are Mr. S. Moderator, and Mr. Gaudy Clerk.

23.
EXceptions against Mr. Gaudy. Mr. K. humbly offers to your serious
consideration these following Reasons, why Mr. Gaudy ought not to Officiate as
Clerk in this Debate. You must in the first place lay down as a Certain
Position (which no man in reason; or of experience in such matters, will deny)
viz. That a Clerk (especially one of the same Qualifications, and Circumstances
with the Judges, and much more, if a Judge also) is in a Capacity to do much
good to the Party he favors; and no little hurt to that he has no kindness to.
And the more tedious and intricate the Plea is the greater good, or evil he can
do them. 1. Much depends upon the way and manner of wording and expressing
things; and often this is in the Clerks power. 2. The Clerk on the account of a
Dear Friend, or for some other Bias, dare sometimes venture to add, empair, or
change a word; which very often is a matter of no little importance. 3. He can
let the party he Favors have the use of Papers, and not the other. 4. When the
Parties are removed, and only the Clerk left with the Judges, he can reveal
what is done in secret, and inform the Party he favors, how this and the other
Scruple may be removed, which is a singular Advantage. Now you are to know,
that we found not our Assertion upon Topics, or probable Arguments. No, No. We
walk on far more sure ground, than only to allege that Mr. Gaudy might, or
could do the other Party this or that act of kindness We positively aver, that
he has really done them very many singular favors, and has refused to do the
like to Mr. K. Yea, has flatly denied him such acts of Justice and Equity, as a
Clerk is obliged to by Office. This you have again and again above told you, So
that he has been exceeding Partial in this affair. Yea, we dare say more, than
so; viz. That it is simply impossible he could shun to be such; because he is
one of the Party, and that a very considerable one; one that is very much
concerned in this Plea, both as to Credit and Interest. We need not here again
repeat, how he, and the rest of the Members of the Presbytery have spent and
consumed Mr. K's Revenues; viz. The Profits under debate, and passed an Act,
ordaining the same for another use, than for his behalf. So that in a word, if
you had run through the World to find out an unfit person for this Office, you
could not have fallen upon a fitter for your purpose; and one more for Mr. K's
hurt, than Mr. G. or any other of the Members of Kelso-Presbytery. For, 1. by
this means you have put the whole Process into the Custody of one of the
Parties; so that they may view, and re-view Papers at pleasure. Yea, they may
throw some of them by, or cast them into the Fire, and by their Oath (as has
been done) depone such and such things were in them ( Sect. 21. Part. 3.) And
yet Mr. K. cannot have so much as a look of such Papers, as the Supreme Law of
the Kingdom not only allows, but enjoins should be given him. 2. By this means
the one Party continues still with the Judges, when the other is removed; for
certainly a person of Mr. G's Qualifications and Circumstances, may be looked
on, as equivalent to all: he can inform the rest better than any of the Judges.
This, if considered, will be found to be a very great act of Injustice done to
Mr. K. and a Demonstration of Partiality in the Judges; especially since they
were told that he was a Party. 3. If it may be supposed (which few will deny
but they know it by experience, if ever they had to do with such People) that a
Clerk may Record amiss, by adding, empairing, or changing, a word for his Dear
Friend; may we not much more suppose, that he will do it for himself? We need
not suppose this, seeing we can infallibly prove that it is done oftener than
once. To conclude this Point. It may truly seem a Wonder of Wonders to see one
and the same person sit as Judge, adduc'd as a Witness, officiate as Clerk, and
(which is worst of all) be one of the Party. Now of these 4 Offices, Mr. G.
performed 3 in one Minute; he was a Party, a Witness, and a Judge; yea, the
Moderator of that Famous Judicature, which sat 24 Sept. 95. And yet Mr. Thomson
in Ednim did exceed Mr. G. that day; for he was a Party, a Judge, a Clerk, and
a Witness. Mr. Glen in Stitchel was little short of either; for he was the
whole Presbytery of Kelso, supplying the place of many Judges, and representing
as many Parties. Above all the rest, we must confess, that Mr. Couden in Duns
acted his Part so to the Life, that none in this World shall ever be able to go
beyond him; for he alone that day (as above-related) representing all the 12
Assistants, not only made most diligent search through all the Corners of this
Earth; but (as you heard) went down to the Regions below to see what could be
had there, that might make any ways against Mr. K. Nor was Mr. J. you may be
sure, wanting in his part, the fittest man on Earth to bring up the Rear, and
to push forward to Battle. He had also several Posts or Offices; for he was a
Judge, a Witness, and the Head of the Party: or in a more proper sense, he
might be called General Adjutant, or Muster-master, for well can he excite them
to their duties, and chastize such as transgress, at least with most bitter and
contumelious words. We read in some of the Ancient Writers, many strange
stories. Amongst other things, they tell us of many Monstrous Creatures:
Chimera, they say, had the Head and Breast of a Lion, the Belly of a Goat, and
Feet like serpents. Some Giants had 50 Heads, and 100 Hands. They talk of some
so mighty great, that with their Body and Arms they could cover Acres of Land.
What truth here is in these things, we shall not debate; nor what gave rise to
such stories and fables. All we shall say at present, is, that the
abovementioned Judicature seems no less Monstrous, than any of them; and as we
do not believe these stories to be real truths, neither will our Posterity
believe there was such a Judicature in the World as sat the 24 Sept. 95. at
Kelso.

24.
EXceptions against Mr. Semple. Mr. S. is a great Man in the South of Scotland;
a Leading Member in every Judicature, named always with the First. Hence some
call him The Bishop of Mers and Tiviotdale. So that you will say, it seems
dangerous to write any thing about a person of so high Esteem. Mr. K. is not
ignorant of this, but he finds and absolute necessity either to write (be the
hazard what it will) otherwise to leave a Stain, both on his own, and
Posterities Good-Name, which is dealer to him than his very Life; for he hopes,
that shall live, when he shall lie down in the dust. And he resolves to write
nothing but truth; things he himself is Ear and Eyewitness to, or what he has
received by good information. In short, know, that Mr, S. ought not to sit
Judge, far less Mod. in that Judicature, wherein this Plea is to be determined;
Because he is a Party; and that if all Circumstances were well Considered, the
chief and prime in the oposite side, there being none more byassd in point of
Honor and Credit, than he; and equal to any as to Interest, so that in effect
he is a Corrupt Judge. Mistake us not, we mean not a Judge corrupted by Gifts,
or Briber; but one exceedingly Prepossessed with such a Bias, that there is
little or no ground to think he will act Impartially in this Affair. Mr. S. we
say, is a Party by being a Member of the Presbytery of Kelso; for you must
know, when Mr K. came to that place (16 May 1692. the Presbytery of Jedburgh
and Kelso were one and the same; a Joint Presbytery, sitting sometimes at
Jedburgh, and sometimes in Kelso, generally by turns, and continued so a long
time thereafter. Hence, Mr. S. Mr. S. we say, especially being a leading
Member, opposed Mr. K. in his just right from his very Entry; particularly,
Jan. 93. of which Business you have a large Account, sect. 5. etc. part 1: Yea,
he with the rest of the members of that joint-Presbytery. did pass an Act, as
is once and again above related, appointing the Profits and Emoluments under
debate for another Use than Mr. K's Behalf; of which sect. 1.3. parag. 12. Now,
is not Mr. S. think you, very much concerned to defend his Honor and Credit in
all this Affair? Do you expect he now will act contrary to what then he did?
This were to cry Peccavi, and to crave Mr. K's pardon for the Injury he has
done him; and to declare to the World, That it was an unjust Act, whereby they
deprived Mr. K. of the Profits, and disposed of them for their own Ends. This
is such a mighty strong Bias, that it cannot but make him a partial Judge in
this Plea: a Party indeed he is, and that one of the first Degree? And shall a
man sit Judge in his own Cause? A second unanswerable Argument, why Mr. S.
ought not to sit Judge, far less Moderator in this Plea, is, Because he was
prepossessed with Prejudice. With Prejudice, we say, in its most native and
proper Signification: for he had prejudged the Cause, and passed Sentence
aforehand. He and others were firmly resolved what to do in the Affair, before
they were met in Synod: so that their meeting there, was only for the fashion.
This is a most dreadful Business; It Is the very height of Iniquity to condemn a
man unheard. By this means, though Mr. K. had spoken like an Angel in his own
Defense, it had been to no purpose; for nothing he could say, would have
availed in a Cause concluded many days before they met, as most evidently
appears from that Communing between Sir J. P. and Mr. S. (sect. 18.) You may
assure Mr. K. (said Mr. S. to Sir J.) that a very unfavourable Sentence will
pass against him, if he do not either dimitt, or give in a Paper to the Synod,
obliging himself to stand to what they shall determine in the matter. We walk
not here, you see, upon Conjectures or Presumptions, as some do, alleging, Mr.
S. ran always cross to Mr. K. on the Account of that Letter mentioned, sect. 8.
Paragr. 1. or, because the C. of R. took so ill with him, when he went
Ambassador for Peace, sect 1. part 3. occasioned (as is alleged) by Mr. K 's
Information to her L^. etc. These things might indeed add, and that
considerably, to the Bias: but we build our Assertion upon most legal and just
Grounds, such as no Person will deny, viz No man ought to be Judge in his own
Cause. This the Synod at Jedburgh found to be most rational and just: and
therefore they laid aside the whole Presbytery of Kelso, from judging in this
Affair, little then considering, that Mr. S. was one of the chief of them. And
as to the other Reason, viz. That no man ought to be condemned till he be
heard: or, no Sentence ought to be extrajudicia^; or passed in private by a few
before the Day appointed for the Judges to meet.

Will any man, think you, say ought against this? There remains yet another
thing, which we cannot well pass in Silence, it making exceeding much to our
present Purpose, being a further Demonstration of Mr. Semple's Unfitness to be
a Judge, far less a Moderator, in this Plea. In short, it is this: So great is
the Influence, which he has upon the Generality of his Brethren, and the Stroke
and Sway he bears in their Judicatures, that he can almost turn them, when and
whither he pleases. The younger Sort, or new Entrants, no sooner Begin to peep,
(if they run not his way) but immediately he takes them by the Nose, and sets
them into his own Road. Mr. Thompson in Ednim, some little time after he was
installed, at a Synod in Kelso, beginning to speak as he could; What* (said Mr.
S.) Vix Scholam ingressus es, and jam de Ludo loquetis. We could give you some
hundreds of Instances to prove this Point, were we not posting to a Close: Yet
we may hint at a famous one which fell out at the Synod, October. 97. about
planting the Church of Linton; for to give a full Account of this Affair would
be very tedious: and therefore we shall only touch two or three Particulars,
which make most to our purpose. Know then, that the whole Parish, (Heretors,
Elders and others, not so much as one single Person appearing to the contrary)
was for one Mr. Angely, a Person, they say, sufficiently qualified for the
Office. Mr. J. opposed him with Tooth and Nail, while the Matter was depending
before the Presbytery. After no i^^^tle Debate there, it came in before the
Synod, where Mr. J. and Mr. S. (the two Bishops, as they are called, of Mers
and Tiviotdale) wrought so powerfully, that they got Mr. Angely kept out of
Linton. But the thing here most worthy our Notice is, that Mr. S. came to this
Synod, according, it seems, to his use and wont, stuffed with Prejudice:
Prejudice, we mean, in the above mentioned Sense for he said to a Person of
honor, and others the day before the Synod met, that Mr Angely should not come
to Linton. Now, to conclude, tho you had made Enquiry through the world for an
unfit Person to be Mod. in this Plea, you could not have fallen upon one fitter
for your purpose, than Mr. S. whether you consider his Bias his Prejudice, or
his Power. Any of these three, singly taken, is of great moment, but jointly
considered, they are intolerable. A threefold rope, you know, is hard to break,

Pray, do not mistake us in this matter, as if we thought every man, that has
Influence on others, unfit to be a Judge, Preses, or Mod. among them. Yea, on
the contrary, we cannot, but acknowledge, that he is rather more fit for such
an Office, especially if that Qualification proceed from his Merits and
Virtues; such as his Piety, Knowledge, Learning, etc. All we here aver, is,
that this Qualification or Property in Mr. S. being joined with the
abovementioned Bias, and Prejudice, renders him the most unfit Person in the
world* (except perhaps Mr. J.) to be a Judge, farless Mod. in that judicature,
which is to determine in this Affair.

25.
THe Procedure of the Synod. The it be not a business of very great moment^ yet
it is not amiss, that you know the pains this Synod took to cause Mr. K to
appear before them. 1. He was cited by their Officer 3 days before they met,
and that after the same manner, it was always formerly done 2. The Synod having
met and sit the whole day without calling him, at night they considering more
narrowly his Summons with the Execution, find them Informal and therefore order
him to be cited De Nero, to appear the next day, which was done about 7 a clock
at night. This is a Demonstration that even according to the judgment of the
Synod, Mr. K. never got a Legal Citation before this last; for all were conform
one to another. 3. A Committee meeting in the Moderator's Chamber in Mr. J's
house, (the fittest place in the world for their design) and further
considering the said second Citation, found it also faulty, and therefore order
their Officer to summon him the third time, about ten at night. There is a very
considerable alteration in the last Summons; for by adding a word they
exceedingly empair the matter. In the first two they design Mr. K Schoolmaster
of Kelso; in the last Pretended Schoolmaster only, This Committee meeting in
Mr. J's. house, become quicker sighted, than the Synod sitting in the house of
God. They received, it seems a new light, by getting from him a Sip of
Pegasus's Well. Yet they recanted before the next morning; for when they were
come again to the house of God, they in another paper later, than any of the
three Summons, call him Present Schoolmaster; which when he heard read, he
could not contain himself from saying with a smile; M. you astonish me with
your Papers, sometimes calling me one thing, sometimes another. Yesternight at
seven a clock you designed me Schoolmaster of Kelso; about ten Pretended
Schoolmaster; and now Present Schoolmaster: you twirle me round, as if I were a
Whirligig. If any doubt of the truth of these things, Mr. K. can produce the 4
said Authentic Papers, demonstrating what is above related. We should by right
order have begun this Section by telling you, that when Mr. K. was called in
before this Synod, in the first place he protested, that his Apperance there
might not be prejudicial to his Appeal, next being told by Mr. S. Moderator,
that they had called him in to hear a Paper read in his Presence. I desire to
know M. answered Mr. K. whether that paper relates to the Process which now by
an Appeal is carried from this judicature to the next ensuing G. A. or be some
new business? If it relate to the former Process; I humbly beg your Pardon, if
I refuse to hear it. If it be a new Charge, I ought to have been cited for that
end. We are not obliged, replied the M. to tell you, whether it be a new
business, or an old. Nor do I think my self bound, M. answered Mr. K. to hear I
know not what: especially since I look not on you, as my judges. And with this
he left them, taking Instruments on what passed on both sides.

26.
AFter Mr. K. was gone, the said Paper, being an Answer to the Paper given in
to the Synod of jedburgh, 21 Apr. 96 ( Sect. 13) was read in Presence of a vast
number of people besides Members of Synod. There are two Papers ^^th one
consisting, they say, of 17 Pages in Folio, the other an Abridgment of this,
made up of about 40 Particulars. They are composed by Mr. J. but given in by
his Elders. A particular account Mr. K. cannot give you, having never Seen these
papers: but many that heard them read, have told him, that they are stuffed
with an Infinite number of the most reviling, malicious and hellish Expressions
Imaginable against Mr. K. and others. To mention no more, take these for a
Sample. They call Mr. K. The Devils Agent; Factor for Hell; The Countess of
Ro^cburgh, Ape and Pert, whom she seeks and maintains to Suck out her ^^on
hears blood, etc. And, which is worst of all, these most unchristian and
Devilish like Expressions are backed with a great many Citations out of holy
Scriptures. In a word; the Members of Synod were generally much displeased with
them and even these, who favored the thing, said, they behooved to be licked
over again. Mr. Orock, frequently abovementioned, abhorred them; for which Mr.
J. openly reviled him, calling him Mr. K's. Agent, etc. I never yet, replied
Mr. Orock received any Fees from Mr. K. for agenting his business etc. I
desire, added he, It may be taken notice of, that Mr. J. does this apbraid, and
revile me for freely speaking my mind to exo^e^ my Conscience.

Thus you see, how this worthy person, a most knowing and learned man; is
treated by Mr. J. for doing that, which he judged his duty. Is It any wonder, he
reviles Mr. K. when he spews out Venom a^ his own brother in the face of Synod,
assigning him to the most slavish Employ on Earth, yea, that is in Hell it
self? An Employ many degrees below that, which he gives to Mr. K. the one he
calls the Devils Agent and Factor, the other the Devils Agents Depute; a Drudge
of the Devils Drudge. We cannot well pass, what Mr. Johnson, Minister at
Esteton said to two or three of his Brethren at the Church door, as he came out
from hearing this Godly Sermon or Lecture of Mr. J. I would rather, quoth he,
have been sitting in my chamber, taking a pipe of T^bacco, than in the Church
hearing you discourse. And yet, it is much to be doubted, if ever Mr. Johnson.
read, or heard a Sermon better backed with Scripture, than they say that is.
Amongst many other acts of Injustice done Mr. K. in this present business, this
is one, that a great number of people heard those papers read, who had never
soon* Mr. K. Whereas in Equity and justice that, as well as these ought to have
been entirely read over, and not some Sentences only. After the said two papers
were read, and the Synod adjourned till the next day, several persons came to.
Mr. K. and gave as good account of what passed in Synod, relating to his
Affair, as their memories could bring away; especially concerning the two said
Calumnious Papers. Whereupon he thought himself exceedingly concerned to get
their Extract. And therefore the next day he called out Mr. Rams^y Minister in
Heymouth, and told him he desired to have Liberty to come in before the Synod.
You Will immediately be called in, answered Mr. Ramsey, to hear a Sentence, that
is passed against you. If I had not something else to do before you, replied
Mr. K. I would not come in at your Call; for ye are not now my judges. In he
goes, and in the first place protests that his Appearance before them was not
in obedience to their Call? and therefore ought not to militate against his
Appeal, a he craved an Extract of the whole Process, particularly of the
Depositions of witnesses; but more especially, and above all an Extract, or
Double of these two Hellish Papers he heard were read before them. When he
called them Hellish; J. T. one of the Libellers or Elders protested against the
said Word: whereupon Mr. K. said to the Clerk and him; See, ye forget not to
put into your Instruments, that I call these your Papers, not only Hellish, but
Devilish also; and worse, if I had a worse word; for they Call me The Devils
Agent, etc. The Synod flatly refusing to give any Extracts, particularly of the
two said reviling Papers, Mr. K. did further protest, that they might be kept
In Retentis, without having any thing added to, empair'd from or changed in
them, telling the Synod, especially their Clerk, that perhaps it might come to
pass, that some of them would be obliged to depone that these are the
Authentic, Individual Copies, which were read in face of this Synod. Next says
the M to Mr. K. We have called you in to hear the Sentence, which the Synod has
passed against you I am willing to hear it, answered Mr. K. with this Proviso,
that my hearing it at your desire be not perjudicial to my Appeal; and
thereupon protested. After the Sentence is read, Mr. K. is removed; and being
called in again, he protested as before. Then said the M. I would, ask you one
thing; but it is a matter of very small moment. If you will pass from your
Appeal; we will give you the Extracts. Is this the matter of small moment; M.
replied Mr. K. No, No. Upon no other terms will I pass from my Appeal; unless
you pass from your Sentence, and give me the Extracts of the Process, that so
we may go on Equally, and legally. What advantage can I have by the Extracts,
after the Cause is concluded. They will be of no more use to me, than Physic
to a dead man. These being refused, and Mr. K taking his leave of them, We have
now done with you, said the M. But I have not yet done with you, answered Mr.
K. and so left them.

27.
THe Sentence. Oct. 2^ 1696. The Synod this day taking into their (...)
Consideration the long ^^pending (...) ag^^st Mr. (...) at Kelso, and the
Report of several Committees o^ this Synod (...) that Affa^^ ^^gether with the
Libels exhibited (...) his Answers, Depositions of witnesses, and other Papers
Hin^ (...), relating tho^^ (...), that (...) had (...) legal Church-session o^
presbytery and has (...) and (...) without any trial or appro^ation of the
presbytery (...) Papers has vented several (...) Synod have been very
offensive, because of many (...) ^hey (...) ^udicatories as also that by the
Deposition^ of several (...) Authority, as a Schoolmaster; and has (...) his
sp^^^es, and Behavior before (...) Scholars to (...) the corrupting of the
(...); and that he (...) officiated (...) the work of the Gospel in the place*
In consideration of all which, the (...) to confirm their former Sentence (...)
Judge the (...) unfit to be a public Schoolmaster or Teacher of Youth* (...)
out of the Records of the Synod of (...) and (...), (...) Pro.

. 28.
REmarks upon the word. Tho the (...) you have (...) and the preceding (...)
Sentence; yo^ ^or fashions sake we shall further and th^se (...). The two
horrid and (...). There Is not so much as (...) of them. (...) It was firmly
determined and resolved (...) private; by as many loeading Per^^^s, (...)from
that commu^ing (...). Sect. ^^. (...) thing* but (...) Taking into their
furious (...) of witnesses* (...) But (...) ^itnesses* o^ their Depositions*
(...) Testimonials* etc. They (...)* A very strange (...)* They find* (...)
certainly ^^form'd. But, pray, how (...) they by this (...) ^nform'd (...) M^.
K. (...) Testimonials, etc. (...) a^ the man. The contrary Party (...) the
Synod (...) they (...) with (...)* Strange. The words of (...) ^o^^dation of
the Synod* ^^^^ledge: (...) foundation (...) Sup^^struc^ure must of necessity
correspond^* But that which you can (...) Mr. K. (...) the Synod* that the
account they had got from Mr. ^. and his Elders was both (...), and de^ective*
Sect. ^^* (...) Reference (...) yet neither they nor any other Judicatures did
so much as (...) Test^^onial^ (...) desire to see what kind of Testimonials he
had* It would seem they ^ear'd to see them, lest they should have been
satisfied therewith* But, (...) be supposed (...) had no Testimonial at all*
you know, (...) is the Custom of this and all other Nations to (...), to get
(...). No man will call it a fault o^ Crime ^or to (...) one. Only (...) imply^
guilt if you (...) Testimonial* when you seek it. If the Synod had been pleased
to desire him to get m^re Testimonials from places* where he livd* he could
have got horse loads of 'em, See what Dr. rule says* Sect 7. Answer to the 4
Article. Rem. 9 Part ^. Lastly, is it not strange that Mr. S. Moderator, and Mr.
G. Cler^ should now challenge Mr. ^. (...) of sufficient Testimonials, and
declare him unfit for his Office upon that head; whereas a few months before
this Plea began, the said Mr. G. made no^ the least scruple imaginable* without
asking for a Te^timonial* to admit him and his wife to the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper in his Church, and gave him out of his own (...) the Tokens, (...)
they call them. And Mr. S. who was Assisting there, gave out of his hand into
Mr. K's the Elements. R. 5* He entered withuot trial, etc* See Sect. ^^* Answer
to the ^ Article. The wa^ or manner of his Entry you have at large, First Part.
R. 6. He is of (...) and unsound Principles, etc. See Sect. 7. Answer to the 7.
Article with its R. Part 3. R. 7. His Papers given in to the Synod have been
very offensive etc. ^Tis an Offense taken, as we say, not given* Black ought to
be called Black. It Is a fault not to speak, and write conform to the Subject,
when we are called to it* R^ 8* ^y the Depositions of witnesses, it appears he
wants (...) See (...) be, that depon'd such a thing (...) and upon what ground?
One of the greatest Lawyers in Scotland, did wonder* that any Person could
venture to depone on this (...) and how ^ judge did sust^in it; for certainly,
said he* (...) Opinion (...) Troius, or Thinks it; and therefore s^^ars (...)
is so.

Mr. K. has taught youth (...) ^^ years* (...) any Parent, Friend or Relation
of (...) Scholars ((...) know) did so much (...) say* (...) had not sufficient
Authority* yet (...) are, who (...) at it; and the ^udges believe it. Perhaps
these Ju^^es understand the word Sufficient in a (...) and (...) viz. Such
Authority, (...) of that virtue and force, that it can restrain youth from all
(...), they (...) lawfully depone (...), that he has not Sufficient Authority*
Yea, nor that Master, wh^^ Mr. ^. so highly commends, as a religious^^
Instru^^^r of youth, and that (...) ^o God himself* (...) the public Prayers
of the Church (...) the Lords day* and in his Discourses from the Pulpit (...)
people* (...) shall ^ear in its place; and all thi^ to cry down Mr. K* and to
make him (...) in the eyes of the world* That Person, we say, whom Mr. ^. and
his Elders (...) up (...) Kelso, (...) sufficient Authority in ^his eminent*
^^^eptation of (...) being S^^day, in time of Divine worship* four of his
Scholars* (...) of the^^ sons of the Elders (...) of the Church, and got in at
a Window of Mr. K's. School (so^^ of (...) at least to make (...) at the door
to the (...)) and there not only played some at Cleckin* some otherwise; but
committed that most horrid Crime of Sacrilidge* (...) least, that which borders
on it, by taking away lead from the Windows, Mr. K. being then in Edr. fighting
with Mr. ^. before the (...) 9. He has discovered such unsavouriness and
obscenity in his speeches* (...) ^tis (...) like (...) the ^usiness about the
Keegrels, Gigrels* or Wagrels. ^f which we have said too too much already*
Sect. (...) Part ^. (...)* Yea, (...) ^lso the Sentence, ^uch ^nsavouriness and
obsenity in his Behavior before his Scholars* that etc. What the Synod means
here by (...) obscene Behavior Mr. K. (...)* having never been charged with
any particular fault, or Crime of this kind* Now how illegal, and how unjust a
thing it is thus to pass Sentence without condescending (...), (...) the world
Judge* Th^^, This p^r^i^^l^^ alone moved Mr. ^. (...)* If this one word had
been left out* he had sit quiet* and ^^tiently born the (...) that (...) done
him* Obscene Behavior before his Scholars* He (...) Mr. ^. and (...) the rest
of the Members of this Synod ^o make good this one single Point* and (...)
provokes them (...) (...) He ^fficiated as Session-clerk in the Episcopal
Meeting, etc. This is a base Calumny (...) he never (...) did it. No more to
it* than to the Presbyterian Congregation. R. 12* To the obstructing of the
work of the Gospel in the P^^ce etc* Here Is a most dreadful Calumny. But, if
matters were duly considered, it would be found, that not Mr. K's* (...) Mr. J.
and his Elders their Carriage to him and others does exceedingly mar^ and
obstruct the (...) of the Gospel* not only in Kelso, and the country about* but
through the whole Kingdom* yea, and in foreign parts also; so great is the
Offense they give every where. R. 1^. They confirm their former Sentence, viz
declaring Mr. K. unfit to be Session-clerk or Precentor. ( See Sect. 30. Part
3.) You have an Account of this Sentence in that Paper given in to the Synod at
^^^burgh, particularly, Parag. 8, Sect* 13. R. 14. And do further Judge the
said Mr. K. to be very unfit to be a public Schoolmaster* etc. A private one,
they think he may be; yea, even at Edr, where he had a private School beyond
any public one there, both as to Number and Quality. R. 15. Especially at
Kelso. Pray, what is the reason of this Restriction? Is ^t because Mr. K. has
done unjust things; or, because unjust things are done him? T he Conclusion. We
leave, as a Problem, to be determined by this, and future ages, whether Mr. J.
and his Elders, or Mr. K. be more unfit for their respective offices,
especially at Kelso.

The Fifth PART.
Mr Kirkwood's Plea with the Kirk-Session and Presbytery of Kelso.
An INTRODUCTION.
THere remain only two little Bottles, but both without Effusion of much Blood.
In the one you have a brief Account of some things that passed before the G. A.
and its Committees. In the other, what the Lords of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council did in this Affair. But before we enter upon either of
these two ^ights, we must give you a Touch of some Skirmishes which preceded
them.

1.
KNOW then; (as was abovementioned, Sect. 11* Part. 4. Answ. ^0 the 1. Article)
that Mr. J. and his Elders did erect and authorize another Latin School,
obtruding and imposing on the Place another Schoolmaster (one Mr. James
Douglas) and that without any Call, Consent, or Allowance from the ^. of R. and
others concerned, who discovered their just Displeasure against the
Encroachment on the Right and interest of the said ^. and others by imprisoning
and fining those who were accollary to it. And this Mr. J. and his Elders did
ten months before the abovementioned Sentence ( Sect. 27. part. 4.) was passed
against Mr. K. Hence did happen several Quarrels between Mr. K's Scholars and
those of the new Erection, and that on such Grounds as are usual among
Children. For Instance, Mr. K's Scholars being informed that the said Mr.
Douglas had frequently pronounced the Penult of Docebam, Docebo, etc, short,
did upbraid and insult over him and his Scholars for so gross an Escape. A
second ^nstance of another Nature* and which was like to draw D^^per, is, that
Mr. D's Scholars unjustly invaded the casual (...), which (...) to those of the
public School from Bridegrooms, who belong to other Parishes; and are married
in Kelso, who use to give to the Scholars a Foot ball, or Money to buy one*
(...) such occasion there happened ( December. 96.) a Scuffle, by throwing
Snow-balls at one another. A young Gentleman, Jo. Waughop, Son to Captain
Waughop the Lord of N^dd^^e's Brother, having a Snow-ball cast at him by one
of the opposite School, intended to retort that Injury, and to p^y him home in
his own Coin, but was hindered by To. Dick^^on, the Boy's Father, ^ (...)-^^ker
there, who laid violent Hands on him, and throwing him down in the dirty
Street, (...) disdainfully set his Foot on him; which did so incense the Youth,
being of a high (...) Courage, that he could not bridle his Indignation, being
thus affronted (...) the Fello^ (...) as soon as he got to his Feet, he drew
his Knife, and threatened to thrust it through the (...)-^aker's Cheeks. Mr.
Douglas, who was a Spectator and Witness to all* (...) to the young Gentleman's
Governor, and gave him a most partial and false account of what (...) his Pupil
pursued the other Boy with a drawn knife, whereas ^e conce^led the Injury ^e
had re^^^ved from the Boy's Father, who alone was threatened (and but (...))
with the knife upon the provocation of such outrageous usage: And upon this
Information, so (...) false as it was* the young Gentleman was whipped by his
Governor. Now know, that Mr. K. was altogether ignorant of this whole Passage
till 3 or 4 days thereafter; at which time the 5 Elders and the said Mr.
Douglas with a public Notar and some Witnesses, being all sent by Mr. ^. came
to the School (and that very unmannerly; for he knew not till he saw them in
the midst thereof) and gave him an Account of it, as defective and false as the
former* Mr. K. (...) all this unusual Solemnity, that they were not acted with
respect to (...) to ensnare him, and to bring him upon the (...) Lo^^* either
of ^^^ob^^ging the young Gentleman's Relations, if he should use him to
dishonourably* or else if he refused, (...) them matter of Acculation against
him, answered, That it was a matter of Grief and (...) that any such thing
should fall out, the same being contrary to (...) Laws and (...) School. But
when the Elders peremptorily required, that the said Youth should be ^^^^antly
whipped (...) their Presence, he plainly told them, That he be^^^ved to ^e (...)
^ore fully canvass'd, and be better informed what was done (...) would take his
own Way and (...) to correct the Scholars, according to (...) which the
Governors of Youth are obliged to: Adding, That ^e be^^^^ed never (...) thing
was demanded of a Master, (...) to punish his Scholar with such disgraceful
(...) the doing it at the Command and in the Presence of all the Kirk Elders, a
public (...) intruding opposite Schoolmaster and several Witnesses. Whereupon
the Elders (...) and took Instruments, and Mr. K. did the same. But if he had
then known, that Mr. Douglas had complained to the Youth's Governor* and
especially that he had been corrected by him, he had given them a farm more
^a^t Answer.

2.
MR. J. the Sunday following (3. Jan. 97) in his Sermon took occasion to
dissuade Parents to put their Children to Schoolmasters who negle^^ their Duty*
inveighing bitterly against such of 'em as allowed and encouraged their
Scholars in all sorts of Vice, and refused to correct them for the greatest
Enormities* the most solemn^y (...) to do it. Of this general Doctrine he made
particular Application in the Terms following* We had, said he, the other day,
in this place, a very sad Instance of this; a Boy guilty of such a high Crime,
as might have brought both him and others to a violent Death, and to this hour
is not corrected for it. The Design of this was so evident and palpable, that
few or none in the Church, but they knew that Mr. K. was the only Person
pointed at, on the Account of the late emergent above narrated. This so public
and solemn Affront, with many other former Injustices none by Mr. J. to Mr. K.
put him in a little Disorder, in so far that he apprehended it fit and just to
vindicate himself at the time, and in the place, when and where he was so
publicly defamed by a false representation, and exposed by such a Description
as was equivalent to the Naming him expressly; he did therefore say to Mr. J. in
the very Minute after he had spoken the said Words, (viz. and to this hour is
not corrected for it.) Sir, that Boy was corrected for that fault. Whereupon
Mr. J. turning his Face toward Mr. K. and directing his Discourse to him,
answered, You are the Person I mean; You are a Plague in this Place. Mr. K.
rising up again, replied, Either you or I, Sir. All which was so done, that no
Disturbance followed thereupon: only Mr. J. seemed a little damped with Mr. K's
Repartie, and became Pale like Death: at last Recovering himself, I think, said
he, since there is no Magistrate here to take Notice of such Disorder as this,
the Commandant of the Place should do it. Now know, that my Lord Carmichael's
Regiment of Draggons were then lying in Kelso, and their Major with several
other Officers were in the Church, yet none of them, though sitting hard by Mr.
K. did any manner of Way own the thing.

Another pretty Odd Passage.
3.
MR. J. having read from the Pulpit (27 December. 96) the Names of 7 Persons, who
were to be added to the number of his Elders, desired those that had ought to
object against any of them, to come to the Church upon a day appointed by him
for that End, and inform against them. Accordingly Mr. K. on the day prefixed,
went with a Notar and Witnesses, to give in his Objections in Writing; which
Mr. J. at first allowed him to read, but soon stopped him, requiting Mr. K. to
repeat, what he had to say upon the Matter; which as he was doing, Mr, J, again
interrupted him, telling him, that he was not to be believed, in respect he was
a Liar, and known to be a Liar: which Words being uttered by a Minister, within
the Church, and sitting in Judgment as Moderator, were so reproachful, that Mr.
K. could not pass taking Instruments thereon: which when he had done, he says
to Mr. J. Sir, if you were not in the Station you are, and in the Place where
you sit, I know what Answer I would give you for these most false and
contumelious Words you have uttered, but I forbear to speak more to you. And
with this, turning his face toward the Elders, he said, Gentlemen, I think I
need not fear to speak to you: pray, tell me, was Sir J. H. in his Closet, when
I struggled with the Lass in Blakader? To which none of them opened their
Mouth. By this, Mr. K. signified, that it was beyond all doubt, that these
Elders were guilty of a most dreadful Lie: and by an infallible Consequence Mr.
J. himself was not altogether free. By the way, know that it is not Mr. K.
alone, whom Mr. J. uses thus to reproach and revile from the Pulpit, and while
he sits in Judgment with his Elders. Many hundreds besides, meet with the like
Treatment from him. To pass all others, he called Dandy Mewros, (a Baker in
Kelso) a Man of good Account amongst his Neighbors, being cited, and apearing
before the Kirk-Session) a Knave, and a Liar: And when Dandy protested against
these reproachful Words, throwing down the Instrument-mony on the
Session-Table, they would not suffer their Clerk to receive it. It Is true, that
Jo. Laidly, one of the Elders rebuked Mr. J. their Head and Moderator, by
Consequence, calling him the Liar; Sir, (said Jo.) he is not a Knave, he is a
very honest man: It were tedious to give you an Account of all that passed; yet
there is one other little Title of Honor; which Mr. J. gave, not only to
Dandy, but to many thousands besides, that we cannot well pass in Silence: Mr.
J. asking where Dandy was on the Lord's Day; and he answering, that he was in
the Meeting House. You look, indeed, replied Mr. J. like one of that Hellish
Crew. With this Dandy runs out of the Church: Stay, Stay, cried the Elders,
till you get your Sentence, which they say was to be an Absolviture; for his
Crime was small, or rather no Crime at all: Take your Sentence, (answered
Dandy) and wipe your Arses with it; Fiend a Hair care I for you or your
Sentence either. In short, within a few Days Dandy was excommunicated (that is,
as Mr. J. words it, suspended from all Church-privileges, and Sealing
Ordinances) for giving the Members of Session insolent Language

To return again to our own Affair, Mr. K. was somewhat more provident, than
Dandy; for he had a public Notar by him, as was always his Custom before these
judicature; for he found himself frequently les'd by their Clerk, as is above
related. As to his Objections aganist the said new Elders, it would be tedious
here to give you a full Account of them: and therefore take this one, as a
Sample of the rest, Mr. K. offered to instruct, that one of them (naming the
Person) some few days before had this most malicious Expression, and that
openly in the high street; viz. That K. deserves to be hanged over these
Shambles, pointing with his hand to the Flesh-merc^^^^^t another time the same
Person said, It were alms to hang K. Now, whether such a Person (said Mr. K. to
Mr. J. and his Elders sitting in Judgment) who has again and again passed such
a cruel Sentence against one in my Circumstances, and that without Libel,
Charge, or Hearing, what I had to say for my self, be sit to be received into
your Number to sit, as Judge, consider ye. Notwithstanding this, or what else
Mr. K. could object, they were all admitted Elders without the least scruple;
yea, it seems the rather, because they had so little kindness to him.

4.
ON the last day of the year 96. Mr. K. had the said Conflict with Mr. J. and
his Elders in face of Session; and on the third of the new year that with Mr.
J, in in the Church before the whole Congregation: on the 4th they went both to
Edr. to debate the business there before the G. A. Mr. K. as pursuer gave in
his Complaint or Petition with the Reasons of Appeal to the Committee of Bills.
The Nature and Sum of which Complaint, you may easily collect from the
preceding Parts of this Plea. The Reasons of Appeal you have Sect. 16, Part 4.
After the said Complaint, and Reasons of Appeal were read, immediately was
produced a Paper called, Answers to the said Reasons, composed, they say, by
Mr. J. Which also being read, the M. asked Mr. K. what he had to say against
the said Paper. I did never see this Paper in my life, answered Mr. K. Yea, nor
did I hear of any such thing before this moment: and therefore, M. I humbly
crave, I may have it up, and time to See and answer. This being denied, Mr. K.
further urged, saying; M. They have had my Paper among their hands these 9 or
10 months; I crave theirs, but one single night; and I promise (God willng) to
answer it against to morrow at what time you please, M. continued he, it will
be thought very strange, if you deny me this request. When he saw, that nothing
could prevail; but that he behooved to answer Ex tempore. (or off hand;) without
so much as being permitted to look on the Paper, he told them In general, that
it was a most absurd false and lying Paper: that there were not many true
Sentences in it; which he offered to make good, if legal means were allowed
him. And, as it was, he said, he needed not travel into it to find out gross
falsehoods; for the very first 3 or 4 lines did furnish him sufficiently with
Them things; of which he gave them an Instance or two. It were endless to run
through Particulars: nor can Mr. K. promise faithfully to do it, unless he were
allowed the use of the said Paper with several others, which are most unjustly
kept from him. We shall only here, give you a touch of their great Achillean
Argument, whereby they thought to have proved the Appeal to be illegal, viz.
because made before Sentence. Mr. K. answered, that it was made indeed before
the Vltimate or Definitive Sentence; but not before any Sentence. As Mr. K. was
going to enlarge a little on this Head; one of the Members said; You Appealed,
before you was les'd, Les'd! M. replied Mr. K. with a kind of a smile. I was
mortally wounded, before I appealed, The Synod, I say, by their Sentence
deprived me of such legal and just means, that I cannot purge my self of the
alleged Crimes, with which I am charged, if the said Sentence be sustained:
yea, so unjust and injurious it is, that it strikes down right against an Act
of Parliament. At this one cries, Does it strike against an Act of a G. A.?
It Is enough, M. answered Mr. K. that I can prove, it clashes with an Act of
Parliament; and I hope you will not readily jump over that. And besides M.
continued Mr. K. I know no Act of any G. A. allowing or approving, farless
enjoining what the Synod did in this matter. some debate upon this, and and
other Heads, Mr. K. was removed: and being called in again, the M. told him,
his business was transmitted to the A. At which he was very glad, especially
considering, that in the A. there were many knowing and learned men; men, that
understood the Laws and Customs of the Nation, and consequently true and sound
Reason, whereon these Laws and Customs are founded; which the generality of
Ministers do not; yea, cannot understand.

5.
IN to the Assembly it goes. Many were for falling immediately upon it: but
some of the brethren held up a great Bag, or Arm-full of Papers, telling, that
many days would not discuss it. One Gentleman, a Person of Honor (Mr. K's.
Informer said. ^e thought it was My Lord Justice-Clerk) told them that he had
n^ acquaintance of Mr. K. but he was certainly informed, if they wo^'d ^e at
the Patience to hear him, he could give a true account of the whole Affair by
word of mouth. The^e were some that did back this worthy Person; but the
generality of the Ministers opposed it. They had no will, it seems the matter
should be so publicly discus'd. In short, Mr. K. being called in is told that
his business was remitted back to the Committee of Hills for further ripening;
at which he was very sorry, knowing certainly that it would never come to be
debated before the G. A. it being to ^ise within 2 or 3 days.

6.
BAck it goes, where it was. Mr. K. being called in before the said Committee,
and speaking his mind somewhat freely, one of the brethren (Mr. K. could never
learn, who it was, tho he made narrow enquiry, the Person sitting in a dark
corner in candle light) says in a a very magisterial manner, What! M. should a
Panel be suffered to speak at this rate? A Panel! replied Mr. K. with a
smile. I know no Panel here, sure I^m none. Nor can you be Judges of a Panel.
He is not a Panel indeed, said one, for he is Pursuer. In some se^s^ he may be
called a Panel, said a fourth, or a fifth; for there spoke so many together at
this time: that Mr. K's Memory was not able to bring away neither all that was
spoken, nor who they were, that spoke. The M. desiring this Person, who said
that in some sense Mr. K. might be called a Pannell, to sit down, and leave of
that Subject, suspecting as we have just ground to allege, that he would mire
himself in it; for he was beginning to hesitate with his Suo quodam modo (in
some sense). Mr. K, who was very attentive to hear upon what ground this
brother thought he might go under the name of a Panel had no will to leave
that Subject so abruptly, and smelling a little what the said Brother was
aiming at, spoke to this purpose: M. said he, I must take the liberty to tell
you, that I am not now charged for these gorss and horrid Crimes, that were
laid to my door the former year; viz. Force and Adultery. No; No: blessed be
God, these are out of Doors. So that, tho you could be Judges of a Panel, as
you can not; yet there is no Crime of that Nature laid to my Charge.

In the next place they challenge him for the many Reflections in his Papers
against the Church-judicatures. He denied they were Reflections; but true
Relations of Matters of Fact. He behooved, he said, to speak and write conform
to the Subject. If he did otherwise, he would exceed, or come short of Truth;
and so transgerss the true bounds of Justice and Equity. Yea, he told them,
that some of these judicatures had furnished him Matter Infinitely surpassing
the most superlative Expressions the Wit of man can devise. Matter, he said, as
far beyond his words, as Eternity exceeds Time, Pray M. added he, Think not,
that I use Tropes, and Figures, or Hyperbolical Expressions* No; No I assure
you, Rhetoric has no place here. The Subject, I am on, is as deep, as Hell,
and as broad as Eternity. At this two or three of the brethren cry out.
Moderator, Mod. Let him subscribe, what he says. In a word there was almost
nothing h^ar'd in the Committee; but Let him subscribe, Let him subscribe.
Pray. M. answered Mr. K. let me come to a Period, and I shall subscribe what I
say. An so after he expatiated a little upon these Interrogatures which Mr.
Couden and others put to James Broun (Sect. 24. Part 3) viz Could you wish to
see Mr. K 's. Soul in Hell etc. Now M. said Mr, K is not this Subject as deep,
as Hell; and as broad as Eternity? Come; Come: I Am ready to subscribe, what I
have said. Now know, that not one Member offered to open his mouth, after Mr.
K. had spoken a pretty while; so far were they from bidding him subscribe, what
he had said. At last he was desired to remove; and being called in again, the
M. told him his business was to return back without any more debate to the A.
Whether more ripened, or blasted with Egyptian darkness, let the world Judge.
By the way know, that the day following Mr. Couden seeing Mr. K. in the street,
came up to him, and said, Mr. K. you did wrong me exceedingly yesternight
before the Committee. Sir, answered Mr. K. You must excuse me to use all lawful
and just meant for my own vindication in this matter. I have not wronged you in
a proper and legal sense: but you and some of your brethren have hugely wronged
your selves by running a longs with Mr. J. and his Elders in the pursuit of a
most malicious and wicked Plea against me and my family. Both your and my
Reputation lie now at stake. God and Nature oblige me to do all that is lawful
in defense of mine, tho to the ruin of yours* especially since you and your
brethren did on the said 24 of Sept. all that say in your power, and that after
a most wicked and illegal manner utterly to ruin me and my posterity.

To this Mr. Couden made no reply; only said, As soon as he came to Kelso, he
wou^d make Jo. Broun and his son to Answer, for what they had spoken of him.
You will ^o me a singular favor answered Mr. K. to bring that business to
further light: and so they parted. In the second place know, that Mr. Couden
come 3 or 4 times to Kelso, and yet never in the least moved in the said
Affair; not spoke one word good or evil to the said J. Brown, or his Son. At
last Mr. K. casually meeting with him, as he was passing by his door from Mr.
J's house, challenged him for not being so good as his promise Mr. J* (answered
he) will not suffer me to move in the matter. You have been too much and too
long led by Mr. J. replied Mr. K. And this was all that p^ss'd. Lastly know,
That some time after this, Mr. Couden wrote a Letter to the said J Brown,
signifying that there had fallen out some mistake about examining his Son, when
adduc'd as a witness against Mr. K. and therefore he desired he would write to
him about the matter. This, no doubt, was Mr. J 's Cont^ivanc^* for the Letter
came from him with his Servant; and besides, he sent o^^^ and again, pressing
for an Answer; but never got any. We now return to tell you, That the business
went in again to the A. but out of time; for it was not moved th^re till they
were just arising; and therefore it was referred to the Commission, which was
to s^^ within a day or two. After some pretty warm Debates before that
Judicature, most of them inclining, as Mr. K. found, to declare the Appeal Void
and Null. At last it was moved by some, that two or three should sit on it that
night, and consider the Reasons, especially those of greatest weight, and make
report next day. The Person, that turned the Chase, at least, who had the chief
hand in it, was one Mr. Cambel abovementioned, Sect. 2. Part 4 Their Report
was, That they found many very strong and weighty Reasons, which, if they were
made good, seemed to be sufficient Cause for an Appeal, and therefore they
thought fit that the whole Process should be given to be reviewed by some
Persons, that they might see what ground there was for such Reasons; and that
Matters should be delayed till the first Tuesday of March then next. And thus
Mr. K was sent home till the said day.

7.
AFTER M. K. was gone home to Kelso, M. J. stayed some days or rather weeks at
Edr, and was present at the review of Paper^; many whereof, and that the most
material M. K. never saw, nor so much as heard read; which is a palpable
Evidence, and a Demonstration of Partiality in the Judges, who did not admit M.
K.. Had it been on no other account, than to see that all papers making for
him, as well as for the other party, were produced, it was absolutely necessary
that he should have been present as well as M. J. or any of the adverse party.
And it is as certain, as that the S^n ever shined, that they had not all papers
making for M. K. This he can ^nfallibly instruct, even (Argumento ad hominem)
by their own Confession. Besides many other Papers he can produce above 30
Instruments, which his Judges never saw, all making very much for him. This,
This one thing will be found a very great Act of Injustice done him.

Know also that M. J. sent for his own Schoolmaster, viz. the abovementioned
Mr. D -- s to prepare Papers for the said Meeting. He was with M. J. 8 days.
These two you need not doubt, would not fail to give the Judges an Impartial
enough account of matters. Yes forsooth.

Another end of M. J's staying at Edr was to raise Council Letters jointly
against Mr. J. Wikie Minister, and Preacher in the Meeting House at Kelso, and
M. K of which Business you shall hear in its place, after we have discussed
what concerns the Commission.

8
MR. K. returning again to Edr precisely at the time appointed, presented
himself before the Commission the said first Tuesday of March, earnestly
begging (as he was always wont to do before all the Judicatures) they would be
pleased to dispatch him with the first on the account of his Charge, that could
very ill suffer his absence. This Argument having no weight nor influence upon
his Judges, in the Afternoon he gave in a Petition, showing that he was to
appear on the 9 day of the said Month before the Lords of Privy Council at Mr.
J's instance: And therefore he humbly craved 2 days to wait on his Advocates in
order to prepare things for the said appearance. This also was positively
refused, which vexed him very much, especially considering that his Advocate,
Commissary Dalrymple was to go to the Country (about 15 Miles distant) with his
Family on the 5th day of the said Month And thus Mr. K. was necessitated
constantly to attend the meetings of the Commission all Tuesday, Wednesday, and
Thursday till Twelve a Clock without doing any thing in his Affair, walking
constantly to and fro before their door, being always called in, when they sat
down, and ordered to attend, and when they adjourned he was again appointed not
to fail punctually to wait on at their next meeting; and this both before and
after Noon* All this was done, one would think, on purpose to hinder his being
sufficiently prepared to appear before the Lords of Privy Council. And indeed,
if he had not been more than ordinary careful in the matter, it had been so
with him: for getting the Answers to his Libel from his Advocates after Ten at
Night on Saturday he sat by the Fireside in his Quarters Sunday Night, till he
heard Twelve strike, and immediately he run with all speed to the Printing
House, wherewith exceeding great difficulty he got these fellows (the Printers)
to rise out of bed, and to fall to work, not without, you may be sure, many
fair promises to fill their Noddles with some of Bacchus's Liquor: for you must
know, that he behooved to distribute his Answers that same day amongst the Lords
of Council. There Is one thing here, which we cannot but take notice of, viz. Mr.
K's Affair alone was left to be discussed at the very nick of time, when there
was a Race or Horse-course at Leith, the fittest season imaginable to get
things done by a few Ministers in absence of Gentlemen; for in all this process
Mr. K. found the generality of Ministers opposite to him; and truly it is no
great wonder, for in some sense they are all Parties: But as to the Gentlemen
he found them all mighty discreet, except one, who did him much hurt both in
public and private; God forgive him: Mr. K. the more readily pardons him
because he has no acquaintance of him, having never in his life, that he knows,
spoken to him.

9.
WE now come to give you some particular account of what was done by the
Commission in this Affair, wherein we shall be very brief, and only touch two
or three particulars. And truly a full and exact account we cannot give, being
denied the use of such Papers, as should furnish us therewith. Mr. K. being
called in, first were read his Reasons of Appeal; next, the above mentioned
Paper, called, Answers to the said Reasons, of which Sect. 4. This Paper he
craved up, and a day to see and answer; which being refused, he earnestly
begged, he might have it to consider, till to morrow morning, telling them,
that his adverse Party had his Papers 11 Months; and he thought it very
reasonable he should have theirs a few hours. And besides, he promised to
answer it either in writing, or by word, as they pleased. This most just
desire, as he humbly conceives, being flatly denied, he was forced to answer
off hand, and without being suffered to look on the said Paper; so that he
never saw one letter of it: And if his memory fail him not, he thinks it
differed not a little from what it was, when read before the Committee of Bills
Jan. preceding. In general he said, That it was a most false and calumnous
Paper; and offered to make it good, if legal means were allowed. As to
particulars, it would be very tedious to give you a full account, nor will Mr.
K. undertake to do it, unless the said Paper be delivered to him. If he had had
it the 2d or 3d days he walked fretting up and down the high Church to no
purpose, you might have got a better account of it, and the Judges more
satisfaction, as to his part. Yet, that you may not be altogether disappointed
in this matter, we shall give you one instance as a Sample of the rest, the
truth whereof in every Punctilio (as far as his memory could take home to his
Chamber) he leaves to be determined by all that were present.

Know therefore, that Mr. K. speaking about the Witnesses, and the manner of
their being examined, etc. said to the Moderator, that the ^ellers had made a
fashion of giving him a List of One and thirty Witnesses, but only designed two
of them; so that he could not know who nor what they were, that should depone
against him. But M. ( continued Mr. K.) that which I complain of at present,
is, that they summoned and examined Persons, as Witnesses, whose names were
never given up to me: Nor did I hear of them, till after they had depon'd This
Mr. J. flatly denied, saying, It was a gross falsehood. Mr. K. as boldly
asserted it to be a truth. The M. desired him to instance any one person. J.
Turnbul in Y^no^^, answered Mr. K. That man, replied Mr. J. did not depone. I
believe, added Ja Thomson, one of Mr. J 's Elders (a man, you see, that does
not stand to give his Faith, if Mr. J. pass his word) he was never summoned. I
offer, M. answered Mr. K. under the peril of losing the Plea, to prove that he
was both summoned and examined. With this Nicol Spence their Clerk (more, it is
like, out of Curiosity than Duty, casting his eyes ^^^on the Depositions of
Witnesses, and finding the said Jo. Turnbus name there, cried out (as 'twere in
a surprise, not unlike an unexperi^^^^ Hunter when he sees a Hare in her seat)
Here he is! which made the Brethren look one to another, especially to Mr. J.
and his Elder. Whether this was a lie in Mr. J. and his beloved Friend Ja. T --
n. or a falsehood only let God and them reckon. All we say here, is, that Mr. K.
failed not to crave that this Passage should be recorded; but whether it be
done, or not, the Records can best declare. If they follow the example of the
Provincial Synod of Mers and Tiviotdale, and its Committees, Mr. K. can
infallibly instruct that it is not done.

We again return where we were yesterday, but resolve not to stay long in the
place. Know therefore, that immediately after this short but pretty brisk
Skirmish, about the said John Turnbul, Mr. Kirtin, one of the Ministers of Edr,
laid his Leg over the seat and left them; though Mr. K. (we must confess)
somewhat unmannerly not only pressed him to stay, but even too rudely took hold
on his Cloak, yet could not prevail. What moved him to go away, Mr. K. will not
be so positive as to determine; yet he has some ground to believe, that that
Reverend Brother was not well pleased with the Procedure of the Church against
him. And that which helps to confirm Mr. K's opinion in this matter, was Mr.
Kirtin's carriage about the word Keegrels, (only two or three minutes before
this Debate about Turnbul came in hand; of which business see Sect. 18. Part 3.
A very little while after Mr. Kirtin was gone, the Committee came to Sentence,
which in short was, That Mr. K. Appealed without having just ground So that his
Appeal fell, or became void and null. He asked the M. what they did as to the
Sentence of the Synod? We will not meddle with that, answered he. After this he
made a short discourse, whereby he rebuked Mr. K. pretty tartly for his
Reflections (as he called them) in his papers against the Judicatures of the
Church, and told him, though they would not censure him for the same, yet it was
like, others would do it; meaning, no question, the Lords of Privy Council:
Whom else, pray, could he think on? Mr. K. having patiently heard all that the
M. had to say, gave this Answer: M. whether these words and expressions in my
Papers, which you are pleased to call Reflections against the Judicatures of
the Church, or their Acts, and Carriage toward me, which I allege to be most
unjust and illegal, be more censurable, we must now leave to the World to
judge. And thus they parted.

By the way here know, that this day while Mr. K. was walking to and fro in the
high Church, one of the Ministers of Edr coming out from the Commission, says
to him: Mr. K. Mr. K. (wagging his finger, and shaking his head) You was a
malicious act in you to contradict Mr. J. in the Pulpit. Malicious! Sir,
replied Mr. K. Malicious indeed: If Malice can consist in the tip of ones
tongue; for my words had no deeper root, being uttered in the very minute with
those of Mr. J. But Sir, continued Mr. K. give me leave to tell you, that Mr. J
's words to me, well deserve that name, for they were premeditated, and studied
with the rest of his Sermon; Malice was indeed at the root of bis words.

The CONCLUSION as to the Church part.
NOthing can be more certain, than that the Proviucial Synod of Mers and
Tiviotdale (to say nothing of its inferior Judicatures) did pass two Sentences
against Mr. K. without hearing what he had to say for himself. The former,
Sect. 30. Part 3. they did without so much as once calling for him: as we have
often above related. And as to the latter, Sect. ^7. Part 4. 1st. He was not
obliged to answer their call, in regard his Process was lying under Appeal. 2d.
Suppose he had appeared, it would have been to no purpose, for nothing he could
say would have availed, the business being determined and fully concluded
before they met in Synod, as is above demonstrated Sect. 24. Part 4. and can
further be proved, if need were. So that the Sentence passed against him
without hearing what he had to say for himself; his Judges all alongs many of
them either being Parties, or possessed with Prejudice, in the sense mentioned
in the said Section.

And whether this Commission, at least the plurality carried partially, or not;
or whether they did things with an eye to what they expected within 5 days from
the Lords of Privy Council in the said Affair, God and their Consciences best
know. That which gives ground for thi^ Suspicion, is, that Mr. K's Adversaries,
yea, almost every body, not only expected, but were confident that he would be
quite ruined by their Lo. And the M. of the Commission hinted at no less, as is
above remarked. Yea, it was loudly talked, that some were already putting in
for the gift of his Escheat. For know, that Mr J's Libel expressly bears, that
all his movables (poor Man he has no fixed thing) were to be Escheat.

A^ Account, what was done before the Lords of Privy Council.
. 10.
HArdly ever, we may say, in the World has any private Business cost more
trouble more labor and toil, than this has done; and certainly never any thing
has bee^ (...) with more diligence, greater eagerness, and anxiety of mind on
both sides. Only Mr. K. can say this, for his own vindication in this matter,
that he has fought all alongs in defense of his own and Posterities Reputation;
which God and Nature oblige him to preserve as far as (...) Whereas his
Adversaries have been no less active to make him and his Infamous for ever, a
thing most odious in the sight of God and good Men. Besides many other most
convincing Arguments, showing how fain they would have a hit of him, one is,
their making use of have a hundred Witnesses in a Legal manner, not to name
many thousands by way of Inquisition, or C^andestinly. Mr. J caus^d cit^ before
the Council, about 50 Persons, which thing made a terrible noise, not only in
E^r, but through the whole Kingdom, th^se Persons walking up and (...) the
streets of that City in flocks two whole Weeks together, having nothing else to
do, but Eat, Drink, ^leep, tell and hear News, and give every body, they
happened to converse with, an Account w^y they were come to Town; some of whose
Wives and Children were little better than starving at Him for want of Bread:
Which thing made a terrible Outcry through the whole Country against Mr. J.
And farther he caused draw up two Libels, one in Writ, the other in Print, under
the name of A^ Information, both containing the same things; so that when Mr.
K's Advocates had given Answers to that in writ, before the other in print became
public, they being again consulted, found no need to add one word to what they
had done. Only the Business of Mr. K's speaking in time of Divine Service
making a great Noise, and being almost the sole subject of Discourse every
where, in regard it was neither fully nor fairly represented by Mr. J. in his
Libels. Mr. K. was advised to publish, in a Paper by it self, a true Relation
of matters of Fact, with the Reasons that gave occasion of his speaking. A
touch of this you have Sect. 1, 2, and 3. These two Libels of Mr. J's, we must
confess, were contrived with as much Art, or rather Craft and Subtilty, as the
Wit of Man is Master of; Mr. Wilkie (abovementioned) and Mr. K's, alleged
Crimes running all along hand in hand; their Combining, as it is said, together
to do so and so, made things look more unfavourably, Mr. Wilkie being a
Non-juror; so that Mr. Wilkie's part of the Libel did much prejudice to Mr. K.
and Mr. Ks. to Mr. Wilkie both being comprehended in one Libel. As to Mr.
Wilkie's part, we shall say nothing; only know, that he not appearing was
denounced.

But as to the Crimes charged on Mr. K. in the said Libels, he positively
avers, that they are nothing but gross Falsehoods, base and unworthy Calumnies,
yea, certainly, (many of them at least) most horrid and dreadful Lies; things
which Mr. J. cannot but know to be otherwise than he represents them. We need
not travel far to find out Instances of the Truth of what we here assert. In
the very Frontispiece of the printed Libel you have a Legion of Falsehoods and
Lies, all knit together in a bundle in these and some other following words,
viz. Mr. W. Jaque having, upon a Call from the Heretors, Elders, and
Parishoners of Kelso, been transported from Biggar, and admitted to be Minister
of Kelso, Mr. J. Kirkwood, who had by his imprudence and miscarriage, so far
incurred the hatred of the Inhabitants of Lithgo, that he was forced to desert
the place, and did for some time officiate as Schoolmaster of Kelso; within a
few days after Mr Jaques Admission, did rudely accost and threaten him, if he
were not admitted to be Precentor and Session-Clerk, he would alienate the
affections of the Heretors and People from him, and make a rupture and breach
between him and his Parishoners. And accordingly did combine with the said Mr.
J. Wi^kie an outed Minister; and they two together did set up a Meeting House
within the Parish and Mr. Kirkwood did always officiate as Clerk, etc. Now in
all this, and much more to this purpose, there is not so much as one single word
true; (excepting the business of his Elders, and some others there calling him,
of which at large in the beginning of the 2d Part.) and Mr. J. cannot be
ignorant it is so, for most part. It Is a wonder that a Minister of the Gospel
should thus maliciously revile his Neighbo^r. It Is altogether needless to give
you particular Answers to these things here asserted, it being incumbent on Mr.
J. to prove the same, which Mr. K. is as sure as that he lives, he will never
be able to perform. There are indeed in these Libels some things that are true;
(yet no faults) but these Truths are so intermingled with Falsehoods and Lies,
that the whole ought to pass under the name of malicious Calumnies: all which,
except the grand ^oint, viz. M. K's. speaking to Mr. J. in time of Divine
Service, we shall at present for brvities sake forbear to answer.

An Answer to that Point relating to Mr. Ks. speaking in time of Divine Service.
11
MR K. is very far from justifying either his own, or any other persons
interrupting the Worship of God. He never did the like before, and ho^es, by
God's assistance not to fall into the like hereafter. Yet he expects it will
not be i^l taken, that he say something for his own defense; so that he cannot
altogether free himself of a fault in this matter, he may do something to
lessen it: and besides, he cannot but thereby load Mr. J. with several very
heinous Crimes. You have heard ( Sect. 1.) the occasion of Mr. K's speaking;
and ( Sect. 2) the express words which both Mr. ^. and he uttered.

That which Mr. K. is charged with, is his transgressi^g the 27 Act 11 Par. K.
J. 6. whereby it is Statuted, That whatsoever Persons shall happen to disturb the
Order of the Kirk, in time of Divine Service, or make any Tumult, or raise any
Fray, either in Kirk or Kirk-yard, whereby the People convened may be
disordered, troubled, or dispersed, they are to be punished, and their movable
Goods to be Escheat for their offense. To which it was answered, That the said
Act of Parliament did no ways conce^n Mr. Ks. case, because that Act is in
relation to those that disturb the Kirk in time of Divine Service, so as to
make any Tumult, or raise any Fray, whereby the People co^dveen'd shall happen
to be disordered, or dispersed; which naturally imports, that there should have
been some violence used, which is not so much as pretended in this case there
being no kind of tumult, nor the least distubance made in the Church; yea, not
so much as one Person seemed to move out of his seat, or open his mouth for the
matter; tho Mr. J. desired the said Commandant to do some thing that way: so
that, if there had been any disturbance made in the Church by the Commandants
order, Mr. J. and not Mr. K. would have accasion'd it.

Hence, you clearly see, that Mr. K. has not transgres'd the said Act, nor any
other Act or Law, that we know; so that, if any thing he did be not against the
Law, it is no Transgression. But as to Mr. J's. part of this business, it is far
otherwise; for, if you duly consider the matter with all its ^ircumstances, you
will find him guilty of several most horrid and dreadful Crimes. ^. He told the
people from the Chair of Verity Gross falsehoods, or rather malicious Lies; for
so they may be called since he did not use due and ordinary means to come to
the knowledge of things. 2. What he spoke on the head, we may say, without
transgressing the limits of Christian Charity, was on design to calumniate Mr.
K. and break his School; which is a most horrid Iniquity, especially in a
Minister of the Gospel, and that at such a time, and in such a place, where
nothing ought to be said, but Truth, and what may tend to the Good of the
hearer.

We shall in the third place conclude this Point by telling you, that what Mr.
J. said in Pulpit, is down right against the Act of the G. A. at Perth, 4
March, 1569: by which it is provivided, That it shall not be Lawful to the
Pastors to name any man's name particularly in Pulpit, o^: so meikle to discribe
them, as may be Equivalent to naming except upon the Notoriety of the Crime:
While Notoriety man only be defined, if the guilty Persons be and fugitive for
the time, or filled with a size or excommunicate for the same. These are the
invidual words in an Authentic Manuscript of Mr. Calderwood, Fol. 55. Sect. 6,
Artic. 3. You have this also confirmed in Petries C. Hist. p. 539. These were
both strong defenders of Peresbyterian Government: and therefore see one of the
other side of the House; viz. B. Spotswood, lib. 6. page 441; where, and in
some preceding pages you have this business discussed at Large with the
occasion of this G. A. for it was an Extraordinary one, as Petrie calls it; and
to this day held to be a Lawful Assembly. Since therefore Mr. J. in his Sermon
contrary to an express Act of so famous a G. A. did Calumniate and revile Mr.
K. by telling the People^ down right falsehoods; no man in reason can think it a
Crime in him to vindicate himself at the Time, and in the Place, When, and
Where he was so publicly defamed by one, that had done him many hundreds of
most gross and palpable injuries before. A fitter time on many accounts Mr. K.
could not have taken to clear himself of that false accusation; especially
considering, how things are fallen out since, by the good providence of God

12.
WE now come to the last Scene of this Plea, wherein we hope one way, or other
to satisfy your longing desire, by giving you a particular account, what the
Lords of Privy Council did therein. Mr. K. as was told you, being summoned to
appear on the 9th. of March, waited on with some hundreds at his Back, at
least, at no great distance; but nothing was done in his Affair that day, nor 2
or 3 Council days thereafter, their Lo. having before them a Business of great
Moment concerning Sir Thomas Kennedy, Sir William Binny, and Baily Bran. At
last on the 18 day, Mr. J. and he were called in. Both Parties with their
Advocates (Sir Patrick Home and Sir David Thores for Mr. K.) being set in the
ordinary place of pleading The Lord Advocate sitting in a Chair near, where Mr.
K. was standing, began with these words; Omnibu^s placeto: bona res quies. Next
was read the Libel: then Mr. K 's. Answers; which two Papers are too large here
to be set down. After the, parties were removed, till the Lords considered the
Relevancy of the Libel. About half an hour after the L^ird of Daiack is sent
out to enquire at Mr. K. if he had the Sentence of the Synod by him? which by
Providence he had in his Letter-case. It being carried in and read in face of
Council, some of the Lords stormed exceedingly; when they heard, that the Synod
Judged Mr K, very unfit to be a public Schoolmaster, or Teacher of Youth,
especially in Kelso. What? said their Lo. He is most fit to teach any School in
Britain. The Lord Philiphaugh, speaking to that Point of Mr. K's. contradicting
Mr. J. in the Pulpit, said, When he sat Sheriff, and the Business of Blood and
Blood-wite came in before him, he often found the Blood-wite far more gui^^
than the Blood; thereby signifying, that Mr. J. was far more guilty than Mr. K.

The Earl of Anando^e speaking of Mr. J. had these or the equivalent
Expressions: My Lord Chancellor, said the Earl. There be few in Scotland, but
they know what sort of a Man Mr. J. is; what flames of Contention he raised in
Ireland: And when he left that Kingdom, he could not have a Testimonial from
those that had been his own hearers. He no sooner came to Scotland, and was
settled Minister in Biggar, but he set that little place and Country about in
Fire. From thence he went to Kelso, where there are many People of good Note,
he was not well entered to that place, when he put them all by the Ears. In a
word; my Lord Chancellor, how can it be expected that Mr. J. who could not live
in peace with the Earl of Crawford, the meekest Man in Scotland, should live at
peace with Mr. K. The Earl of Leven also (to mention no more) spoke to this
purpose, viz. That a Man of so turbulent a spirit as Mr. J. ought not be
suffered to live in such a place as Kelso. To the Testimonies of these most
Noble and Worthy Persons, suffer us here by the way to add that Character,
which his Brethren in Ireland gave him to those in Scotland, about the time of
settling the present Church Government, being written to, in order to send a
List of the Names of such Persons among them, as they knew were sufficiently
well qualified for the Office of the Ministry; which accordingly was done; but
they particularly named three, of whom Mr. J. was chief, That were Men of such
fiery and hot Spirits, that it was dangerous to admit them into their Society
This Mr. K. had from 2 or 3 of the prime Men of this present Church, and that
not privately, but before several famous Witnesses. We now return to tell you,
that within less than half an hour, Daick comes out again, and delivers back to
Mr. K the Sentence of the Synod; and besides whispers into his Ear, All was
well; only Mr. J. and he were to get a Rebuke in private before a Committee of
2 or 3 Lords. In short, the Lords declared both Mr. Js. Libel and the Sentence
of the Synod to be void and null, as if they had never been; and appointed 4 of
their number, viz. The Earl of Leven, the Lords Advocate, Philiphaugh and
Provest of Edr. or any two of them to meet next day, and give both Mr. J. and
Mr. K. a Reprimand. Mr. K. failed not to wait on the Committee, and got his
Rebuke; and promised never again to speak in time of Divine Service, even tho
Mr. J. should call him the Devil himself, or worse, if worse could be imagined.
But Mr. J. repenting, it seems, of nothing that he had done, slipped home; and
again, as you shall hear within a little, did, openly from the Pulpit on the
Lord's Day, most maliciously Calumniate and Revile not only Mr. K. but also the
Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and the Noble Earl of
Rexburgh; and that by telling not only to (...) People what evil they had done
in the present Affair, but complaining of it to God himself in the public
Prayers of the Church. And thus ended tha^ most famous Plea, which Mr. K. had
with Mr. J. or rather with him and his five Elders; or, if you please, with the
Kirk-Session and Presbytery of Kelso; or rather with these two Judicatures, and
the Provincial Synod of Mers and Tiviotdale: or more truly with the whole Kirk
of Scotland. Which Fight began 16 May, 1692. and continued to the 18. of March,
1697. We speak at to the Ecclesiastical part only; for most of the Civil yet
remains.

13.
WE told you Sect. 1. that Mr. J. forsooth with his 5 Elders, without the
concurrence or tolerance of one single Heretor; or any Judicature whatsoever
erected another Grammar School in Kelso. The E. of R. and other Heretors,
finding that it was a manifest Encroachment upon their Right, caused to summon
the above mentioned Mr. J. Douglas, Teacher of the said School before the Lords
of Privy Council. He appearing that same day with Mr. K. (18. of March, 97.)
was appointed by their Lo. to attend the day following with Mr. J. and Mr. K
the meeting of the said Committee of the 4 Lords to receive his Rebuke also;
and to de^st to Teac^ any more in Kelso. But he taking his flight got home with
Mr. J. boasting, forsooth, that their Lo. would allow him to keep a School at
Kelso, without the Earl's approbation. For which his singularly insolent
Carriage (as their Lo. term it) both to the Lords of the Committee, and to the
E. the Lords of Privy Council passed an Act (13, Apr. 97.) against the said Mr.
D^wglas, whereby they inhibit him to keep any School at Kelso without the
consent of the said E. and the remanent Heretors of the Parish. By the way
know, that the said Act expressly bears, that it is the sole Right and Interest
of all the Heretors within the several Parishes of the Kingdom to Call,
Authorize and Allow of Schoolmasters within these Parishes. Know also, that
this Determination of the Lords of Privy Council is downright contrary to Mr.
J's Doctrine in that abovementioned Paper called, an Aswer to the Paper given
in by Mr. K. to the Synod at Jedburgh; for there Mr. J. positively (they say)
affirms that the Patronages of Schools are taken away by the same Act of
Parliament with the Patonages of Churches. The Lords of Council, who should
understand the Acts of Parliament some better, one would think, than Mr. J.
have, you see, taught contrary Doctrine. But, pray Mr. J. let us suppose what
you write to be true; (which yet is most false) Show us by what Law the the
Minister and his Elders have power to erect, Schools, or to place
Schoolmasters? You know, by that Act Heretors and Elders, with a due
concurrence of others in the Parish, have power to call Ministers, the seve^al
Presbyteries being appointed to see that things be done orderly and legally.
There is nothing in that Act, nor in any other; that we know, giving you power
to settle a Schoolmaster in the Parish. In a word: Whatever be your Doctrine
in that wicked Paper, it is certain your practice in this matter, is without Law
and Reason.

14.
DUE Intimation of the said Act of Council being made go the said Mr Dowgl^s on
the 22 of Apr: and he thereupon obliged immediately to resist from teaching,
Mr. J. you may be sure, on the Lords day following (25. of Apr. 97.) was not
wanting in his duty to intimate the same to the people also from the Pulpit;
yea, to God himself; for in the public P^ayers after Sermon forenoon, he had
this individual Expression; viz. O Lord, avert the heavy, judgments, that are
hanging over this place on the account of withdrawing the means of a Religious
Education of the Youth here. And in the afternoon of the same day, bapti^ing
two Children, he said; It Is a sad and lamentable thing, that there is a
necessity laid upon the Parents of this place to suffer their Children, to
wander up and down the streets for want of the means of a Religious Education.
We need not d^scant much upon these words, they being so exceeding plain, that
he, who runs may read. But in a word, it seems somewhat mysterious, that Mr. J.
should positively assert from the Pulpit, that the heavy judgments of God are
hanging over Kelso on the account of withdrawing the means of a Religious
Education of You^h there; for granting there were Iniquity committed in the
matter, (as there is not) that is not done by the Town of Kelso; but by the
Lords of Privy Council. They by their Act turned out the said supposed
Religious Instructor of Youth, and kept in the Irreligious one. And openly to
declare from a Pulpit, that God's heavy Judgments are ready to fall upon a
people for a Sin committed by others, seems very bold and unsound Doctrine in
Mr. J. unless it be revealed to him by God in a dream, or some other
extra^rdinary way, as had the Prophets of old. And if so, he ought with them (2 Samuel 12.1. etc. and 24 11. etc. to have gone to these great Persons, that he
says committed this Iniquity, and rebuked them; and not run home to Kelso, to
tell the people there, that the heavy wrath and fury of the Almighty was just a
coming on them; because the Lords of Privy Council had turned out of his Offi^e
that worthy Person, whom he had set up to instruct their children.

FINIS.
Page 3 l. 12, for Courses, r. Countess, p. 136, l. 18, r. parit. p. 19, l. 34.
les'd. p. 25. l. 27 r. preamble. p. 26, l. 3. r. procedure, p 29, l. 43. r,
carry, p. 7. 45, r. any thing p. 2^. l. 26, r. clauses, p. ^9, l. 7. r. John's
con, p. ^9, 12, r. depones, p. 90. l. 2, r. any wise. p. 90, l. 6. r. to some,
p. 92. l. 21, r all in, p. 97, l. 4. (...) the. p. 100, l. 16, r. Erwin. p.
101, l. 26. r. on all, p. 106, l. 5. l. 42, p. 107, l. 1. r. Notour, p. 117. l.
46 r. Dunsa^, p. 120, l, 53, r. in se, p. 1^6. l. ^, r. the Gospel, l. 3^, r.
my, p. 199, l. 36, r. bribes, p. 134. l. 3, r. Trous.


