An Exhortation to a Personal and National Repentance.

A SERMON Preached at St James Church, Westminster. Feb. 5. 1688/9.

By Tho. Knaggs, M. A. and Chaplain to the Right Honorable Ford Earl of
Tankerville.

Printed at the Request of several Persons of Quality.

LONDON, Printed for John Barnes at the Crown in the Pall Mall, and Sold by A.
Baldwin in Warwick Lane. M DC XCIX.

St. MARK vi. 12. And they went out and preached that men should repent.
REpentance is a Doctrine which God preached by the Mouth of all his Prophets.
Noah to the old World, Lot to Sodom, Moses to Egypt, Prophets in their several
Generations to Israel and Judah, John the Baptist to prepare the way for
Christ, with a Sermon of that Subject, and Christ himself and all his Apostles
preached, that men should reform and amend their Lives. The subject they were
enjoined to preach on, was not of curious and nice matters, but of such only as
were profitable for the good of souls. They went out and preached that men
should repent. That we at this time especially may be stirred up to so great and
necessary a duty, I will

1. Show, how joyful and well pleasing it is to God, that men should come to
Repentance.

2ly, It Is acceptable to the Blessed Angels.

3ly, It Is grateful to the Penitent himself.

4ly, Offer to your consideration what great danger and unreasonableness there
is in impenitency, whether in particular Persons or in a public Nation.

5ly, Show the great advantage, profit, and benefit which redound to both of
these, by a timely and early Repentance.

Lastly, Shut up all, with an exhortation to that necessary Duty.

I begin with the first of these, how joyful and well pleasing it is to God
that Men should come to Repentance. And

1. Repentance is highly pleasing to God, because it destroys sin, which of all
things is most hateful to him. Sin makes a Separation between God and Man, puts
a Division between the Creator and his Creature, blots out Gods Image, defaceth
the beauty of the Creation, kindles a war between Heaven and Earth, grieves the
Holy Spirit of God, and strengthens the Kingdom of the Prince of Darkness. Now
when the wicked man turns from his wickedness, and does that which is lawful
and right, when the sinner cease to do evil, and learneth to do well, leading
the Remainder of his life in all godliness and honesty, sin in this penitent is
then destroyed, and his Conversion becomes highly pleasing to God. For hereby
God is glorified, a Soul saved, and the Grand Adversary of Mankind the Devil,
baffled and confounded.

2ly, Repentance is well pleasing to God, because it turns away his anger, and
makes way for mercy, in which, of all other things, he most delights. This is
over all his works. This rejoices against judgment, and in that Proclamation
which he told M os, He would make all his goodness to pass before him, Exodus
34.6, 7.
we find him thus delivering himself, the Lord, the Lord God merciful and
gracious. This is the greatest Jewel in his Crown, and therefore when a
sinner-comes to Repentance it is pleasing to God, and gives an occasion of Joy
to him, in that his anger is turned away, and mercy is to take place, which of
all his attributes he most delights in.

3ly, Repentance is well pleasing to God, because it fills Heaven with happy
Souls, and increases the number of just men made perfect. All such as die
truly Penitent are blessed and happy; their Souls at the leaving of their
bodies become as the Angels in Heaven, and are fellow partakers of those
pleasures which are at Gods right hand for evermore.

4ly, Repentance is well pleasing to the whole blessed and glorious Trinity.
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, do all rejoice when men
break off their sins by Repentance. And

1. Repentance is pleasing to God the Father. The Prodigal Son being moved with
a true and serious Repentance, returned home after a Life spent in luxury and
profuseness. He arose and came to his Father, and said, Father I have sinned
against Heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son. And
presently the Father saw him, had compassion on him, and ran, and fell on his
Neck and kissed him, the badge of love and reconciliation. For tho the Sons
condition was poor and miserable, his Crimes many, his Offenses, of a deep die,
and his Reception into his Father's favor unlikely, yet so prevalent and well
pleasing was his Repentance, that even that brought him into his Fathers favor
again, and he that scarce hoped to be admitted as a Servant, is once more owned
as a dear Son, Luke 15.22, 23, 24. The Father said to his Servants, bring forth
the best robe and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his
feet, and bring hither the fatted calf and kill it, and let us eat and be
merry, for this my son was dead and is alive again: He was lost and is found.

2ly, Repentance has the same effect in God the Son. It Is a great satisfaction
to him to see so good effect of his passion, that his blood was not shed in
vain, that he was born, lived, and dy^d to a good purpose, and all that he did
and suffered for such and such Souls turn to a good account. The Repentance of
every sinner is answering of Christ's prayers, the satisfaction of his desires,
and the reward of his sufferings. And therefore Repentance is pleasing to God
the Son, inasmmch as that precious blood which he shed on the Cross, was not
shed in vain.

3ly, Repentance is well pleasing to God the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost in
Scripture is sometimes called Spirit, and all those operations whereby we
please God, are termed fruits of the earth, Gal. 5.22. Now Repentance embraces
all the good motions and inspirations of that Holy Spirit, by which means the
instruments of sin are changed into his sanctified Members, and his Holy
Temples. By repentance a penitent sinner is made the Temple of God, in that the
Spirit of God dwells in him holy unto God, an habitation of God through the
Spirit. He is joined to the Lord, one Spirit with him, a new Creature in
Christ, and conformed to him. He lives in the Spirit and walks in the Spirit.
Thus the Spirit of God finding itself cherished and kindly used, and all its
good motions and inspirations gratefully received, it is matter of joy and
pleasure to him. Thus Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are all hugely pleased when
men repent and amend their lives. Who would not therefore forsake his sins,
renounce a wicked life, and steadfastly propose to become a new man, to occasion
delight and pleasure in the ever blessed Trinity. If there was no other
Argument to stir us up to the duty of repentance, this, one would think, should
move us to it. And therefore let us take care to behave our selves after such a
manner, that we commit nothing that shall be displeasing to him, but always be
doing that which shall be well pleasing in his sight. The best of us may blush
to think how often we have done that which has occasioned grief in the Court of
Heaven. What odious scents arise thither daily from bloody murders, beastly
uncleanness, and cruel oppressions, which, like the blood of Abel, cry aloud
to Heaven for vengeance? Even sins that grieve the Holy Spirit of God, and
cause a sadness in the blessed Trinity. For so sure as Repentance pleases God
and causes joy in Heaven, so certain it is that sin continued in, and not
repented of, gives occasion of grief and sadness to him.

2ly, Repentance is well pleasing to the Blessed Angels. Luke 15.10.
There is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that
repents. Those tears which run down the cheeks of a true penitent, are the
Angels heavenly banquet. There shall be more joy in heaven over one sinner that
repents, than over ninety nine just persons that need no repentance. But tho
repentance be well pleasing to the Blessed Angels, tho they are ministering
spirits for our good, rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, do many good
offices for the godly on earth, and be a communion between them, yet we are not
to think that they interpose their Merits for us, and therefore we are to
perform Religious Worship to them. This is a fond conceit of the Papists, the
invention of man's brain, and wants warrant from the word of God. See thou do it
not, Rev. 22.9.
are express words in Holy Scripture.

3ly, Repentance is matter of joy to the penitent himself. O what joy and
tranquillity of conscience has that man, whose eyes are opened, and in whose
heart by Gods Grace a change is wrought. And no wonder that he is so pleased
with himself; for being sensible that he is withdrawn from sin, and brought
back again to God, that he who once was a servant of sin, and running headlong
to perdition, is now a child of God, and making Provision for his immortal
soul; these thoughts speak comfortable things to him, and leaves upon his soul
a a sweet taste, a pleasant relish. St. Austin, after his conversion, when he
had repented and began a new life, made this sad complaint, I have loved thee
too late, O God, O thou beautiful Being, I have (...) too late. He repented he
had not served God sooner, that his conversion was so long delayed, and that he
was so long a beginning to be acquainted with God. How sweet and delightful, O
Lord, was it made to me presently to want those pleasures of the world, which
before I doted upon? Thou, O Lord, did cast them out of my heart, and did
thy self enter in their place, which I find now to be more sweet than all
pleasures and sweetness it self. Lib. 9. Cons. chapter 1.

Thus having shown how joyful and well pleasing it is to Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, that men should repent, how acceptable to the blessed Angels, and how
grateful to the Penitent himself, I come

4thly, To offer to your consideration what great Danger and Unreasonableness
there is in impenitency, whether in particular persons, or in a public Nation.
And

1. As to particular persons. John the Baptist in his first Sermon exhorted his
Auditors to bring forth fruits meet for Repentance. And except ye repent ye
shall likewise perish, was the Doctrine Christ preached to his Disciples. Now
the longer men delay their Repentance, the more they are hardened in their
corruptions, and confirmed in their sins, and consequently more indisposed
every day for that great and necessary work. The longer men live in sin, the
more strongly they are inclined to continue in it. Sin being once rooted in the
Soul, the labor will be great in plucking it out. The young man in his Youth
and Strength is apt to say that it is not yet time to busy himself about
Reformation and amendment of life, and that it will be soon enough to repent of
his sins when he comes to be old, and then, and not before, he will become
penitent and serious. But how know thou, O young man, that thou shall live
till old Age? Death is a tribute we all owe to Nature, and Experience teaches
us, that the young man is as suddenly taken away as the gray head. The
strongest man can call no time his own but the present. He cannot prolong his
days as he pleases. All his futurity is in the hands of God, and how he will
dispose of him, whether for life or death, he cannot tell. And yet, alas! how
securely do such men live? How eagerly do they run through all the stages of
their youth in a rebellious obstinate course, and commit sin as if they were
not flesh and blood, subject to a dying stroke. Certainly nothing has made
more ample Harvest for the Devil than the deserring of Repentance upon such a
vain consideration as this. For how often have many men lain down in their
strength at night, and that night has closed their Eyes, and sent their Souls
into another World, to answer for what they have done in this?

But suppose God, out of his unconceivable Mercy, does not cut off a sinner in
the strength of his years; suppose he lets him alone to live as he lists, to
walk in the ways of his heart, and in the sight of his eyes, and therefore is
resolved to sin on till old age overtakes him, yet I have three Arguments to
lay down before him, which, if rightly considered, would make him think, and
bring him to a right understanding of himself.

First, Repentance requires the strength and vigor of our minds, and therefore
it is a sad design to lay all the sins of our youth upon feeble old age. Our
bodies are then decayed, our limbs feeble, our understandings shattered, all
the parts distempered, and our infirmities so many, that we are altogether
incapable of every thing but dying. In the midst of so many Distempers as old
age brings along with it, 'twill be a difficult matter to go through with
Repentance. For then pains are apt in an high measure to seize upon us, which
will so disturb our minds, and deprive us of the use of Reason, that we cannot
pray to God with that fervency, or spread our fins before him with that hearty
sorrow that is requisite to procure an absolute pardon. Old Age is an unfit
time to have the great work of Repentance to do; and therefore my second
Argument, to show the Danger and Unreasonableness of putting it off till that
time, is this.

Secondly, The little hopes they can have that God should be pleased with those
men who never drew nigh to him by Repentance, till they themselves were drawing
near to the grave. Mankind must needs think the Almighty a tame Being, an easy
God, if they persuade themselves that every sin is as soon expiated as
confessed. Let men have a care how they flatter themselves with such vain hopes
as these. God, that searches the heart, who knows all things, and understands
the greatness of our crimes, expects that our sorrow for their commission should
be greater than the delight and pleasure we took in them. If a bare
Acknowledgment and Confession of sin were enough to put it away, Judas might
have as good a plea for himself as any Saint in Heaven, and might justly be
placed in the Catalogue of Penitents. It Is very unreasonable to believe that
God should be pleased with that man's Repentance, who never forsakes his sins,
till he had no more time left him to sin in. There can be little of godly
sorrow in such a Repentance, and as little hopes that it will be acceptable to
God. I know there are two passages in Holy Scripture much read and remembered,
and to which some men fly, as a refuge for a Deathbed Repentance. The first is
that of the Laborers that came into the Vineyard at the Eleventh hour, Mat. 20.
and yet received Equal Wages with those that had born the heat and burden of
the day. But alas! this Example is misused and misunderstood, for these
Laborers came in as soon as they were called; and the reason why they stood so
long idle was, because no man had hired them. Had work been offered them
sooner, they wu'd not have refused it They came in as soon as the Lord of the
Vineyard commanded them, and therefore were not faulty. Besides, that Parable
of our Savior's, relating to the Laborers, is rather a representation of a
Heathen man, that never heard of Christ till a little before his Death, whose
late Conversion shall not render him unworthy of a full Reward. But this is a
quite different case from Christians, who made a Covenant with Christ in
Baptism, and entered into vows and promises to serve him, to keep his holy will
and commandments, and walk in the same all the days of their life. Who,
notwithstanding that Covenant, neglect to perform it all their life long, and
do then only repent when they have no time left to repent in. He that came in
at the Eleventh hour wronght one hour, but he who comes not in till the
twelfth, the time of working then is past, and no reward in justice is to be
expected where no service is done.

The other instance which some men lay hold of to show the validity of a Death
bed Repentance, St Luke 23
is that of the good Thief, who was saved even at the last hour, and was in
Paradise the same Day with Christ. This is brought as a binding Argument by
such who put off their Repentance till the last hour. The Case is plainly thus:
Christ was then at the point of Death, and therefore to manifest his power and
glory, and to convince the World of his Godhead, when even the Apostles
themselves either doubted, or did not believe it, did upon the Thiefs
confessing it, and saying, Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom,
make this Answer, Verily I say unto thee, to day thou shall be with me in
Paradise. This was a particular Act of Christ, and the whole of it miraculous,
and ought not to be made a general rule; nor do we find in all the Bible the
like promise made to any man. Because Christ received the Thief into favor at
the last hour, upon such a wonderful Repentance and Faith as his was, therefore
we may hope for the same, is a Dangerous Conclusion, and whoever does it
endangers the loss of his Soul. It is not a bare sorrow for sin that brings us
to Heaven, but a walking in newness of life, which inclines God to pass by our
former misdoings. The Thief upon the Cross had this purpose, which surely he
would have put in execution, if Death had not prevented him Tho he was accepted
because he adored Christ when he saw him dying, there is no reason for other
men to presume for the like favor at the last hour, who have despised him now
he is reigning in Heaven. If men will presume to live profanely, because they
think it is possible they may dye as happily as that Thief did, then he may
murder more souls by his Repentance, than ever he did bodies in all the
Robberies that ever he committed. Seeing then there is great hazard and danger
in late Repentance, it is our wisest way to make it an early business, and so
to live, that when we come to die, our Souls may be received into Heaven, that
where Christ is, there they may be also.

Thirdly, The danger and unreasonableness of impenitency will appear in this.
Some there are, when sickness and pain seize them, then they resolve against
their sins, and purpose to be holy and good men, if God will be so merciful as
to restore them to their former health, and set them upon their Legs again.
Purpose and Resolution are indeed very necessary toward Repentance, but are
most lame and imperfect, and signify nothing without performance and
consummation. He that resolves against his sins when he is sick, and after God
has restored him to health, sins as much as before, is a vain man, but no true
penitent. To resolve to repent, and not to repent, is to break our resolution
and faith, to mock God, and to play at fast and loose with the Almighty. To see
a man in his sickness smiting on his breast, and complaining of the wickedness
of his heart, and seeming so sorry for it, that one who sees or hears him wu'd
think his heart is broke within him, and yet as soon as he is well again to take
no care to lead the residue of his life either in the fear, or to the glory of
God. Such a mock Devotion, such a pang of Piety will be so far from appeasing
the Almighty, or disposing the man for pardon, that it even justifies the
sentence of Condemnation out of his own mouth. The promises we make to God of
Amendment of life are due debt. The promise one man makes to another may be
made good either one time or other, either in his life time by himself, or
after his Death by one that he shall appoint: But if we make a promise to God
of Amendment and Reformation, we ought to do it ourselves. This is a concern
that cannot be left to the care of an Executor to perform for us when we are
dead and gone. He who says I do repent, but turns to his sins again, repents of
his Repentance, and makes his latter end worse than his beginning. For a man to
be truly penitent he must lament his sins, in lamenting he must punish them, in
punishing he must hate them; and that this severity may not be counterfeit, it
must last as long as he lives. A forsaking our sins with a perseverance in all
that is good must be the certain proof of the truth of our Repentance. From the
danger there is in impenitency as to particular persons, let us pass to that of
a public Nation.

Jerusalem wu'd not know her day. Christ gave the Jewish Nation many years time
for Repentance, yet such a strange and incorrigible a people they were, that
neither mercies nor judgments cu'd work upon them, to amend and alter their
course of living. The very Prophets that called upon them to repent, they
killed and stoned. Nay, so obstinate a people they were that tho God sent his
Son to preach Repentance to them, and warned them from continuing in their
wickedness, yet they still added iniquity to iniquity, and at last put to death
the Lord of Life. Not long after God destroyed them for their sins, and laid
the Axe of his Judgments at the root of their Tree, and hewed them down from
ever being a Nation more. Thus the Jewish Nation fell by impenitency, and it is
too much to be feared that ours is much in the same posture now as theirs was,
when God came upon them with a total destruction.

The Jews were a divided people, and had several factions both in Church and
State. Profaneness on the one hand, and Hypocrisy on the other, did act and
command in a furious manner among them. In this state was the Jewish Nation,
when God sent down his Judgments upon them. And now let us cast an Eye home.
Are not we as divided a people as the Jews were? Are not we as factious as
they? Are not we as factious as they? And do not Vice, Profaneness and
Hypocrisy, reign as much among us, as that they did among the Jews? Your
preachers have cried aloud, and told you the danger of living in your sins, but
you have not hearkened unto them. God sent the Pestilence, but we repented not.
He kindled a fire, which burnt our great City, and turned it into Ashes, but we
feared not his Judgments. We have been embroiled in several Wars, but none of
them have bettered, changed, or reformed us. And therefore what can any man
imagine should follow such despised signs as God has sent to warn us from our
sins but wrath and indignation from Heaven? Without a miraculous mercy, what
can we look for, but that God should utterly destroy us, throw us away in his
anger, and trouble himself no more with us. And therefore to prevent the
Judgments of God, which may justly fall upon us for our sins, whether in
particular persons, or in a public Nation, I come

Fifthly, To show the great advantage, profit, and benefit that redound to both
by Reformation and Amendment.

Repentance, of all things in the world, makes the greatest change. It changes
profligate and vicious persons into sober and virtuous. It changes the
licentious into strict and regular livers. It changes the whole man from sin
to grace, and from wicked habits to pious and godly customs. Nay, so great is
the Efficacy of Repentance, and so much does it redound to the profit and
advantage of every penitent, that God himself is pleased, by descending to our
weak understandings, to say that he changes also upon man's Repentance. This
moves him to alter his Decrees, to revoke his Sentence, to cancel his bills of
Accusation, and to put a stop to Divine Vengeance. A particular person by
Repentance may remove a particular Judgment from himself. Ahab's humbling
himself turned away the anger of God, and made the Divine Vengeance walk as
softly as he did, 1 Kings 21.27. This is the only thing that is wanting both in
private and public, and wu'd set both at rights. Has God a controversy with
a Nation, Repentance will tie up his hands from striking? At what instant I
shall speak concerning a Nation and concerning a Kingdom, Jer. 18.7, 8.
to pluck up and to pull down, and to destroy it. If that Nation against whom I
have pronounced turn from their Evil, I will repent* of the Evil that I thought
to do unto them. So likewise God dealt with Niniveh, Jon. 3.
for though he had resolved to destroy that great City, yet they repenting in
Sackcloath and Ashes, stopped the proceedings of God Justice against them, and by
their amendment prevented that punishment he designed to have brought upon
them. And it is the Prophet Hosea's exhortation to the people whom God had
visited with several judgments, Come, and let us return unto the Lord, Hos. 6.1.
for he has spoiled us, and he will heal us, he has wounded us, and he will
bind us up again. What Is to be done then to prolong Gods Mercy, and keep off
his Judgments? Even this, that all of us from the highest to the lowest wn'd
amend our lives and become new men. For then, and not till then, must we expect
Gods blessing upon us. It Is a common complaint the times are bad, and it is a
great wonder they are not worse, for unless men mend, the times will not. It Is
bad men which make bad times. The times are just as men are, for they grow good
or bad as men do. What an Age of Virtue should we see, if men of dignity and
honor, birth and fortune, wu'd be as good as they are great. Men of lower rank
wu'd be ashamed and afraid to sin, if men of high Titles and long Pedigree wu'd
give good Examples, and offer themselves to the World for Patterns of life and
conversation. He that is in Honor, and understands not, is like the beasts
that perish, Psalm. 49.20. The Temple of Honor and the Temple of Virtue were so
placed at Rome, that no man cu'd enter the Temple of Honor, unless he passed
through the Temple of Virtue; which was a signification to the Romans that the
way to Honor was only by virtue. But alas! High and Low, Rich and Poor, have
sinned against God, and he has reason enough to be angry with all Orders and
Degrees of men. Those fearful Oaths, those grievous Blasphemies, and other
Debaucheries with which our Nation is defiled, I now tell you with an afflicted
Soul, that these sins cry aloud to Heaven for Vengeance. When men begin to
resemble Sodom in her sins, what must we look for but Sodom's punishment. God
rained down fire and brimstone from Heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrha. An
Unnatural Judgment for fire to descend downward, but we read before of their
Unnatural Sin, they burned inwardly with the fire of an Unnatural Lust. If the
same sins be committed now which procured those dismal Judgments, we are then
liable to the same, and if Repentance step not in, may expect the like
punishment. Uncleanness was one of the sins of Sodom, and I would to God I cu'd
say it was not one of the sins of England too. We are too like Sodom in her
sins, I pray God keep us from Sodom's punishment. For the Sin of Uncleanness
three and twenty thousand of Israel were cut off in one day, 1 Cor. 10.8. For
this sin David was plagued with the violation of his Wives, the murder of his
Children, and the Rebellion of his Subjects. This sin has pulled down many
flourishing Kingdoms, destroyed the Bodies, disgraced the Names, and overthrown
the Estates of many men. I wu'd to God I cu'd persuade that sort of offenders
thoroughly to judge themselves here, that they may prevent the dreadful Judgment
of God hereafter God will judge all men. All sinners as well as they must come
to judgment, but the sin of Uncleanness, as St. Paul, Heb. 13.4. seems to
intimate, he will more particularly judge, and be a sure avenger of all such
wickedness. If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. 1 Cor.
3.17. We are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, to violate which, is to cast the
Holy Ghost out of them, and to make our Bodies which are Christ's Members, the
Members of an Harlot. 1 Cor. 6. Heaven is a place of Purity, wherein no impure
thing can enter, and therefore they who go out of this world with the sin of
uncleanness about them unrepented of, will be fit Company only for Satan and
his Angels, where their flames of Lust shall meet with flames of Fire.

To conclude. Repent, and the whole Court of Heaven will be glad and rejoice at
your Conversion. God the Father with Arms of Mercy will meet the ^eturning
Prodigal and receive him with kisses. God the Son that died for him, will at
his death welcome him into Everlasting Habitations. God the Holy Chost shall
present him wiping off his Tears. The Holy, Blessed, and Glorious Trinity, in
the presence of Saints and Angels with loud acclamations, will receive him, and
bid him welcome, with a Well done thou good and faithful Servant. Almighty
everlasting God, who hate nothing that thou have made, and do forgive the
sins of all them that are penitent, create and make in us new and contrite
hearts, that we worthily lamenting our sins, and acknowledging our
wretchedness, may obtain of the God of all Mercy, perfect remssion and
forgiveness through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be all Honor and Glory.

Amen.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
* The Stage Acquitted. Being a full answer to Mr Collier, and the other
Enemies of the Drama. With a vindication of King Charles the Martyr, and the
Clergy of the Church of England, from the abuses of a Scurrilous Book, called,
The Stage Condemned. To which is added, the Character of the Animadverter, and
the Animadversions on Mr Congreve's Answer to Mr Collier. Printfor John Barnes
at the Crown in the Pall Mall, and sold by M Gilliflower in Westminster Hall,
D. Brown near Temple Bar, and R. Parker at the Royal Exchange. ^ The Writing
Masters Assistance: a new Copy Book, written and adorned with variety of
Command of Hands. By Robert More, Writing Master, at the Golden Pen in Castle
Street, near the Meuse, Charing Cross. Sold by the Author, and John Barnes at
the Crown in the Pall Mall.
ADVERTISEEENT.
THE Large Greek Testament in Folio, with Variae Lectiones, is now near
finished at the Theater in Oxon: To which is added the Greek Scholia, Collected
from all the Fathers; together with the Names and Pages of the Authors, set at
their respective Quotations; compared with the Authors themselves, by the
Learned Mr. Grabe. This Work was perused and recommended by Bishop Pearson, and
Bishop Fell, in their Lifetime; and also by many eminent Divines now living.
It is adorned with twenty Copper Plates, Engraved by the best Hands, from them
designed by Order of the French King.

Dyonis^^s Halioarnasse us, put out by Dr. Hudson, Keeper of the Bodletan
Library. The Chronology by the Learned Mr. Dodwel. With great Improvements from
the Vatican, and other Mss. With Additions never extant in any other Edition. A
great Part of this Work is likewise printed.

Those who think fit to encourage these Works, are desired to send their
Subscriptions, (being only 5 s. to each) to the Undertaker Tho. Bennet, at the
Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard, before the 18th of December next; because
a Catalogue will be added to them, of the Encouragers for Printing Greek Books
in England.

Printed for Tho. Bennet.
Thirty Six Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions, by R. South, D. D.
In Three Volumes. The Certainty and Necessity of the Christian Revelation. By
F. Gastrell, D. D. Preacher to the Honorable Society of Lincoln's- Inn, 80.
Psyche, or Love's Mystery. In 24 Canto's. By the late Reverend Dr. Beaumont,
Regius Professor of Divinity, and Master of St. Peter's College, Cambridge.
Printed at the University-Press. Irenaei Opera, Fol. Greek and Latin. Put out
by the Reverend Mr. Grabe. Printed at Oxon. The Exposition of the second
Article of our Religion, given by the Lord Bishop of Sarum; Examined. A
Vindication of the 23d Article of the Church of England, from a late Exposition
ascribed to the Lord Bishop of Sarum. An Account of the Court of Portugal,
under the Reign of the present King. 80.
Mr KNAGGS SERMON Preached at St James Church, Westminster, Feb. 5. 1688/9.


