THE MARROW OF TRUE JUSTIFICATION OR, JUSTIFICATION without WORKS.

Containing the Substance of Two Sermons lately preached on Romans 4. 5. And by
the Importunity of some gracious Christians, now published with some Additions.

WHEREIN The Nature of Justification, is opened, as it has been formerly
asserted by all sound Protestants; and the present prevailing Errors against
the said Doctrine, detected.

By BENJAMIN KEACH, Pastor of a Church of Christ, Meeting at Horsly-Down,
Southwark.

I will raise unto David a righteous Branch: and this is the Name whereby he
shall be called, Jehovah, our Righteousness, Jer. 23. 5, 6. Justificatio est
Doctrina stantis and cadentis Ecclesiae, says Luther.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultrey, 1692.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
To all who desire to be found in the Righteousness of Christ, and count their
own but as Dung in comparison thereof; particularly to the Congregation,
Meeting at Horsly-Down, the Hearers of these Sermons, Grace, Mercy, and Peace
be multiplied.
Brethren,
AS I was put upon preaching on this great Subject; so I am satisfied it was at
a very seasonable Hour, this Doctrine being greatly struck at by too many
Persons, though of different Sentiments in many Points of Religion. And as it
was well accepted by you, who heard these Sermons (and the others that
followed) when preached; and having been prevailed with to publish these to the
World, so I hope some may receive Advantage hereby: Though for the meanness of
the Author, and weakness of the Work, they may not meet with that Entertainment
from some as the Subject deserves; yet for your sakes whose Souls are committed
to my Charge, and for whom I must give Account to the great Shepherd of the
Sheep at the last Day, I readily consented to this Publication; as also that
all may see that we are in this, and in all other great Fundamentals of
Religion, established in the same Faith with our Brethren, and all Sound and
Orthodox Christians in the World: And cannot but look upon our selves greatly
concerned, to see how Men by Craft and Subtilty endeavor, through Satan's
Temptations (though I hope some do it not wittingly) strive to subvert the
Gospel of Christ, and corrupt the Minds of weak Christians. An Error in a
Fundamental Point, is dangerous and destructive; but should we mistake some Men
we have to do with, we should be glad: The Lord help you to stand fast in the
Truth, as it is in Jesus (in which through Grace you are well established:) Our
Days are perilous; Satan seems to be let loose upon us, and is in great Rage,
his Time being but short. Brethren, it is a hard Case that any of those who
maintain the Old Doctrine of Justification, should be branded with the black
Name of Antinomians. As for my part, if Dr. Crisp be not misrepresented by his
Opposers, I am not of his Opinion in several respects; but I had rather err on
their side, who strive to exalt wholly the Free Grace of God, than on theirs,
who seek to darken it and magnify the Power of the Creature, though we fear
the Design is to wound the Truth and us, through that good Man's sides, who, I
doubt not is gone to Heaven: O when shall we see that Truth, Peace, and Union
longed for!

My Brethren, the Doctrine we preach does not open a Door to the least
Licentiousness (as 'iis unjustly said to do by some, who are either wilfully or
ignorantly blind.) No, God forbid. Nothing can promote Holiness, and
Gospel-Sanctification like unto it, only it teaches us to act from high,
sublime, and right Evangelical Principles: It shows the only way to attain to
Gospel-Purity, flows from our Union with Christ; and that no Man can arrive to
any degree of true Holiness, or expect to meet with any Success therein,
without a Principle of Spiritual Life, or saving Faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ. The Nature of Men must first be changed, and that Enmity that is in
their Hearts against God, be removed, before they can be holy: The Tree must
first be made good, or the Fruits will be evil. The Image of God must be formed
in our Souls, which puts the Creature into an actual bent and propensity of his
Heart to the Practice of Holiness. If a Man hates not Sin, be not out of Love
with Sin, How should he be in love with God and Holiness? Now because we say
Sanctification is not necessary, as antecedent to Justification, but is the
Fruit or Product of Union with Christ; though we deny not but the Habits of
Holiness are infused at that same Instant that Faith is wrought in the Soul,
Must we be looked upon as Promoters of a Licentious Doctrine? Must we make our
own Performances, or Obedience a Condition of Justification, or be laid under
Infamy and Reproach? It Is by Faith only, that we come to have actual Enjoyment
and Possession of Christ himself, and of Remission of Sin; and not only so, but
of eternal Life; and so of Holiness also, and no other ways. The good Lord help
you to a right Understanding of these things, and make you all a holy People,
to the Praise of his Glory, and Honor of your Sacred Profession.

The Holy Apostle having asserted Justification by the Righteousness of God,
which is by Faith in Jesus Christ, desired to know him and the Power of his
Resurrection, etc. which he did not to be justified thereby, but as a Fruit
flowing therefrom, or as a further Evidence thereof: The first he had attained;
but there was a higher degree of Sanctification in hts Eye, which he pressed
after, as then not having attained: Whose Example let us follow.

I shall say no more: You own a Rule of Gospel-Holiness; Let me exhort you to
labor after sincere Obedience: And pray forget me not in your Prayers, that
God would graciously help me through all my Troubles and Temptations, and
preserve me and you to his Heavenly Kingdom; who am your Servant for Jesus's
sake, and so shall abide till Death.

Benjamin Keach.

THE MARROW OF JUSTIFICATION. OR, The Doctrine of Justification opened, in
diverse Sermons, at Horsly-down.
Romans IV. 5. But to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies
the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for righteousness.
THIS Text is given me (as I told you the last Lord's Day) by an unknown Hand,
and though it may seem to interfere with my design and intention, in speaking
to another Scripture, on a different subject; yet I readily embrace this
Motion, and Answer the Desire of those Christian Friends, who so earnestly
request and entreat me to speak to the Doctrine of Justification, and that for
these Reasons following.

1. Because the Doctrine of Justification is one of the greatest and most
weighty subjects I can insist upon; it being by all Christians acknowledged to
be a Fundamental of Religion and Salvation. Hence this Article is justly
styled, by worthy Writers, Articulus stantis, vel cadentis Religionis: The very
^illar of the Christian Religion. Other Subjects a Minister may Preach upon,
and that unto the Profit and Advantage of the People; but this he must Preach,
this he cannot omit, if he would truly Preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

2. Because I fear many Good Christians may not be so clearly and fully
instructed into this Doctrine as they ought, or it might be wished they were,
though they may be rightly built upon the true Foundation, or upon that
precious Cornerstone God has laid in Sion; yet are but Babes in Christ, and
therefore need farther Instruction, for their establishment in this, and other
Essentials of the true Christian Religion.

3. Because the present Times are perilous, and many Grand Errors in and
about this great Fundamental Point too much abound and prevail, (as many have
with grief observed of late,) and that too in and about this City, which caused
a worthy Minister lately to say, that it greatly concerned Pastors of the
Churches, etc. to strive to establish their People in this Blessed Truth, since
there are some who with all their Might endeavor to sow the Seeds of Error
and Heresy almost every where, and many are sadly corrupted thereby already.

4. Because if a Person err herein, or be corrupt and of an unsound Faith, in
the case of Justification, he is in a dangerous condition, though he may seem
to be otherwise a Good Christian and of a Holy Life; for it is evident that
there are damnable Principles, as well as damnable Practices, according to that
of the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. And as our Savior said to the Jews,
Unless ye believe that I am he, ye shall die in your Sins, Joh. 8. 24. So must
I say, Unless ye have a true and right Faith in him, ye must die in your Sins;
for it is not enough to believe Christ is the true Savior; but we must have
also a right Faith in that Object; unbelief and a mis-belief are alike
destructive and pernicious: Was it not an Error about Justification that
caused the Jews to miscarry eternally, viz. They being ignorant of God's
Righteousness, went about to establish their own Righteousness, etc. Romans 10. 3.

5. Because this Doctrine tends so much to the Honor of God, and the
magnifying of his infinite Wisdom, and his Free Grace, and Mercy in Jesus
Christ, and also to the abasement of the Creature: Was it not the Exaltation of
the Glory of God in all his Attributes and Blessed Perfections, which was the
result of that Glorious Counsel, held above between the Father and the Son,
before the World began, in the bringing in and establishment of the Covenant of
Grace? What did God, as I may say, design or aim at therein^ more than his own
Glory, and to abase sinful Man? And if so, how does it behove us to see to our
utmost to open the Channel, that this Sovereign Grace may run freely, and not
be obstructed by the Mud or cursed Notions and Errors of Men's dark Minds, who
seek to Eclipse the Doctrine of God's Free Grace?

6. Because from this Doctrine does proceed all the Hope we have of Eternal
Life: Destroy this Foundation, and what can the righteous do? I may say of
Justification through the imputation of Christ's righteousness, as David speaks
of the Covenant of Grace, This is all our Salvation and our Hope, etc. 2 Samuel
23. 5. If we come not to Heaven this way, I know no other; for other Foundation
can no Man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11.

7. Because it is a Doctrine that affords so much sweet and Divine Comfort to
our Souls, when rightly understood and apprehended; and I am persuaded it is
through the want of Light, and clear knowledge of this Doctrine, so many Doubts
and Fears attend many Good Christians: For (as I have told some of you lately)
diverse weak Saints are ready to judge of their Justification according to the
degree and measure of their Sanctification; and can hardly be brought to
believe, such vile Creatures as they are, who find such evil and deceitful
Hearts, and so many great Evils and Infirmities in their Lives, can be
Justified in the fight of God; (not that I ever denied that Sanctification and
Holiness, is a Mark or Evidence of a Justified Person;) though I deny
Justification to be a gradual Act, as Sanctification in us is; or that a Person
is not perfectly Justified until he is perfectly Sanctified, or actually
delivered in him self from the pollution and defilement of all Sin; for then it
would follow, No Believer is actually Justified in this Life: But that which I
intend, and hint at, is this, That if some weak Christians can but arrive to
Holy and Spiritual Frames in Duty, and get power over their Corruptions, then
they think they have good grounds to believe and hope they may be Justified; as
if it were ^nherent Grace and Holiness that Justifies them in God's sight.

So much, briefly, as to the Grounds and Reasons which induced me to Answer the
Call I had to insist upon this Text and Subject.

Secondly, To proceed the more orderly, I shall give you the scope and
coherence of the Text it self, for the better understanding the design and main
drift of the Holy Ghost therein.

And as to this we need go no further back than to the 9 verse of the 3 Chap.
where the Apostle proves, that all Men, both Jews and Gentiles, are under Sin:
What then are we better than they? no, in no wise; for we have before proved,
^oth Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under Sin, verse 9. This he confirms
by the Scriptures of the Old Testament; particularly, by that of David, There
is none righteous no not one, verse 10. All Men, naturally, as considered under
the Fall, are ungodly and vile in the sight of God; and although the Jews
thought themselves in a better condition than the Gentiles were, and boasted of
their Knowledge and Sanctity; the Apostle declares, they were notwithstanding
abominable Sinners, and in no better State, but deceived themselves; and that
he might make this farther manifest, he proceeds more particularly to discover
their wretched Pollution and Filthiness: There is none that understands,
verse 11.

1. He shows that all the Faculties of the Soul are corrupted, viz. their Minds
and Understandings are blind and darkened, being ignorant of God, or without the
knowledge of his pure and spotless Nature, Justice, and Holiness: There is none
that seeks after God.

2. By this he shows also the Poison and Venom that was got into the Will; for
as they have lost God, so they will not seek after him, like that of our
Savior, Ye will not come to me that ye might have Life, Joh. 5. 40. Now till a
Man comes to see his own wretched and woeful condition, and understands the
Nature of God, and the Nature and Tenure of the Holy Law of God, he cannot
discern that absolute necessity there is of a perfect and complete
righteousness to Justify him in God's sight.

3. And that their Will and Affections are also depraved, and in like manner
corrupted, he proceeds farther to cite what David in the same Psalm says, viz.
They are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become unprofitable,
there i^ none that does good, no not one, verse 12.

Now least any one Zealot should fancy himself in a good condition, and
excluded from this black Indictment, and so in a Justified State, by his own
righteousness, he confirms again his former Universal Charge, All are gone out
of the way, they are altogether become unprofitable; and therefore not one of
them can be Justified.

And as the Faculties of their Souls are corrupt, so the Apostle proceeds to
show the infection had seized on the Members of their Bodies; therefore he
says, Their Throat is an open Sepulcher, with their Tongue they have used
Deceit the Poison of Aspes is under their Lips, verse 13. Whose Mouth is full
of cursing an^ bitterness, verse. 14. Their Feet are swift to shed Blood, verse
15. Both Tongues Lips, Throat, and Feet, are polluted and abominable, being
Instruments o^ unrighteousness.

In verse 19. he seems to Answer, by way of anticipation, an Objection which
the Jews might bring against what he had said, as if they should say, What you
speak does not concern us, but the profane Gentiles; we have the Law and that
relieves us, and thereby we may be Justified; to which he Reasons thus, to cut
off all their Hopes, viz. Now we know that whatsoever the Law says, it says
unto them that are under the Law, that every Mouth may be stopped, and all the
World become guilty before God.

By the Law is not only meant the Law as it was given to Israel in the Two
Tables of Stone, but as the substance of the same Law was written in the Hearts
of all Mankind; the Apostle means the Law of the First Covenant which was broke
by our First Parents, by the breach of which all the World became guilty before
God originally; and also by their actual Breach thereof for that neither Jews
nor Gentiles lived without Sin: but contrariwise were guilty of the Breach of
that Law, under which they lived: But although all the World were under the Law
of the First Covenant, and had the same Law as to the substance of it, as a
rule of Life; yet the Jews had the upper hand of the res^ of the World, by
their having the Oracles of God committed to them, by which means they had
greater advantages to come to the knowledge of Sin, and also by means of diverse
Figures and Prophecies to the knowledge of the Messiah.

But what of all this? the Apostle shows them that the Law on which they
rested, was so far from relieving them, that it served chiefly to convince them
of their horrid guilt, and bound the Sentence upon them, so that they and all
the World were subject to the Just Judgment of God, and under his Wrath and
Curse.

2. And therefore he infers, that by the Law (either as it was written in the
Two Tables, or in the Heart, which the Gentiles had as well as the Jews) no Man
could be justified so, ver. 20. Therefore by the deeds of the Law shall no
flesh be justified in his sight; for by the Law is the knowledge of Sin.

3. But lest upon this, the lost World should be left under utter Despair, the
Apostle proceeds to show us there is a way found out in the infinite Wisdom of
God, and according to his unspeakable Grace and Goodness, to deliver us from
Sin and Guilt; and so to justify us before God; and therefore he adds, but now
the Righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, being witnessed by the
Law and the Prophets, v. 21. Even the Righteousness of God, which is by faith
of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all that believe; for there is no
difference, v. 22. For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God,
being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ, v. 23, 24.

No wonder there is no difference, when both Jews and Gentiles lie under the
guilt of Adam's Transgression, it being imputed to them, he being the common
Head and Representative of the whole race of Mankind, Romans 5. 12. And since
also all of them partake of the same original Corruption or depraved Nature,
inherent in them, from whence proceed all those actual Transgressions, by which
means it appears that all come short of that glorious Image of God, in which
they were at first created; and also of the eternal Glory above: Yet to the
praise of God's Grace, the lost World is not left in a hopeless Condition, God
having sent his Son to satisfy the Law and Divine Justice, or to be a
propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the
remission of Sins that are past, through the forbearance of God, v. 25.

4. In the 27th Verse, he adds, a God-honouring, and a self-confounding
Inference from what he had said; Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By
what Law? Of Works? Nay, but by the Law of Faith.

5. And hence he draws another conclusion, viz. ver. 28. Therefore we conclude,
That a man is justified by faith without the works of the Law; and in the 4th
Chapter he proceeds to prove his main Argument; i. e. That a Sinner is
justified by Faith without Works, by the Example of Abraham* for if Abraham
were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God, chap. 4.
2.

6. This is the Apostle's Argument: if Abraham was justified by Works, he had
somewhat whereby he might boast and glory; but Abraham had nothing whereof to
boast or glory; and therefore he was not justified by Works.

But to put it further out of doubt, he affirms what the Scripture says; viz.
That Abraham believed God, and it was counted, to him for Righteousness, v. 3.

7. In the next place, he proceeds to prove this blessed Doctrine from the
nature of Works and Grace, they being quite opposite, and contrary the one to
the other. Now to him that works, is the reward not reckoned of grace but of
debt, v. 4. If therefore it was granted, a Man could perform the condition of
perfect Obedience; yet he could not he justified.

1. Because all, (as he had showed before,) have sinned.

2. Because there is no Reward as a due debt from God, because we can do no
more than our Duty, we being the Lords, and all our Abilities and Services can
never make a reparation for the wrong we have done against the Law, and the
Holiness, and Justice of God.

And thus I come to my Text, ver. 5. But to him that works not, but believes
on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for Righteousness.

To him that works not; That is, works not, thinking thereby to be
justified and saved. Though he may work; i. e. lead a holy and righteous Life;
yet he does it not to merit thereby; nay, though he be wicked, and an ungodly
person, and so works not, or has no Moral Righteousness at all; yet if he
believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted or imputed
for righteousness: Not as a simple Act, or as it is a quality or habit, or in
us, as the Papists teach; ipsa fides, says Bellarmine, censetur esse Justitia,
Faith it self is counted to be a Justice, and it self is imputed unto
Righteousness: No, nor in respect of the effects or fruits of it; for so it is
part of our Sanctification.

But as it is a hand to take hold of, or receive, or apply Christ and his
Righteousness.

Manus accipientis, says Dr. Downham, the hand of the Receiver is the Grace of
justifying Faith: It Is not Faith, but the Object and Righteousness Faith
apprehends or takes hold of, that justifies the ungodly.

1. The Apostle does not intend by these Words, That if a Man has the Works
here meant, he cannot be justified, unless he throws them away, and become
openly wicked and profane; and so sin that Grace may abound: No, as the
Apostle says, God forbid, Romans 6. 1. But his meaning is, that the absence or
want of good Works, or moral Righteousness, cannot hinder a Man's
Justification, if he believes in Jesus Christ, though he be never so wicked and
ungodly.

That justifies the ungodly. Every Man is ungodly before he is acquitted and
justified, having till that very instant a great Mountain of guilt and filth
lying upon him.

Justify; it is Verbum fore^se, a judicial Word, used in Courts of Judgment, or
a Law-Term, which usually is opposed to Condemnation. And it signifies to
absolve, to acquit from guilt, and accepting a Man as righteous, or to
pronounce him just and righteous, or give sentence for him, Deuteronomy. 25. 1., Prove.
17. 15. not the making a person inherently righteous; but to count or impute
Righteousness to one, that is in himself a Sinner, or as my Text, ungodly.

Obj. But may be you will say, what ungodly ones does God justify: if it be an
impenitent, ungodly one, how can you reconcile this Text with that of Solomon;
He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they are
both abomination to the Lord? Prove. 17. 15.

1. Answ. I answer; it is not meant of justifying of any ungodly Act of a wicked
Person; for God can as soon cease to be, as so to justify the ungodly.

2. Nor Secondly, he means not justifying the person in his committing of any
sinful deed; for that is as opposite to God's holy Nature, and all one with the
former.

3. Nor in the Negative, are they such ungodly ones that are righteous in their
own Eyes, like as many of the Jews and Pharisees were, and Paul also before his
Conversion, Phil. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7. when a Persecutor.

For although such who are Righteous in their own sight, are the worst of
Sinners in the sight of God; yet they are such whom God, while they retain that
conceit of themselves, will never justify: Christ did not come to call the
righteous, but sinners to Repentance. There is, says Solomon, a Generation
pure in their own eyes; yet are they not cleansed from their filthiness, Prove.
30. 11. Our Savior compares this sort of Men to painted Sepulchers, who appear
beautiful without, but are within full of dead Men's bones, and of all
uncleanness, Matthew. 23. 27.

What pollution is more loathsome than the filth of a rotten and stinking
Sepulcher? The proud Pha^isee cries out, God, I thank thee I am not as other Men
are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican: I fast twice
(...) the week, I give Tithes of all that I possess, Luke 18. 13. These Men
boast of their good Works, Prayers, and Alms-deeds; but never saw their horrid
^ride, hardness of their Hearts, Unbelief, and cursed Hypocrisy: They make
^lean the outside of the cup and platter; but are abominable inwardly in his
eye ^ho beholds their hearts. These Men are wicked and ungodly, notwithstan^ing
they look upon themselves to be Righteous; and yet are not therefore ^he
ungodly whom God will justify. It Is said, the Publican who cried, Lord ^e
merciful to me a Sinner, went away rather justified than the proud Pharisee.

4. And in the fourth place, neither are they such wicked and ungodly ^nes, who
though openly prosane and wretched Creatures, such that love, and ^ive in Sin;
yet glory presumptuously of Christ's Death, and say, through ^im they hope to
be saved: They believe in Christ; and therefore do not ^oubt of their
Salvation; Faith is one thing, and Presumption is another. I ^m afraid,
Brethren, that this conceit and delusion of the Devil sends daily many
thousands to Hell; because God has abounded in his Grace, they abound (...)
Sin and Wickedness, and presumptuously trust to lying Words: These un^odly ones
are not the persons which God does justify; but rather positively ^ondemns in
his Word, and will condemn for ever, unless they believe, truly ^elieve in
Jesus Christ.

5. Therefore in the Fifth place, they are such ungodly ones in the
Affirma^^ve, who do see themselves to be ungodly and vile; they are such, whom
God brings to see their Sickness, to feel themselves wounded, who find
themselves lost and undone; nay, though some of them may like Paul be
blameless, (...) respect of the outward Acts of Sin; yet by the coming of the
Commandment ^ith powerful Convictions, sin revives and they die, Romans 7. They
see the pol^tion of their Hearts, and the pravity of their Nature, and behold
themselves ^e worst of Men.

Though some others may be indeed guilty of gross Acts of Sin, or notorious
Transgressors, even just until that very instant that they hear the Gospel
preached, and have done no Acts of Righteousness; yet if they believe on Jesus
Christ, or throw themselves by an Act of saving Faith on the Blood and Merits
of Christ, they are immediately justified; for let Men have moral
Righteousness, or no moral Righteousness, they are all ungodly in God's sight,
till they believe; and at that very instant they do believe, they are accounted
righteous through the Imputation of Christ's perfect Righteousness: For as a
Man's own Righteousness cannot further his Justification, or conduce or add
thereto; so his Sin and Ungodliness cannot hinder or obstruct his
Justification* if he truly believe on him who justifies the Ungodly.

My Brethren, do not mistake; a Man seeing himself wounded does not heal him,
though it may, and does put him upon seeking out for healing; so a Man seeing
himself a Sinner, does not render him Righteous. Nothing renders a Man
righteous to Justification in God's sight, but the Imputation of the perfect
Personal Righteousness of Christ, received only by the Faith of the Operation
of God. When I was a Lad, I was greatly taken with a Book, called The flowing
of Christ's Blood freely to Sinners, as Sinners. O, my Brethren, that is the
Case, that is the Doctrine which the Apostle preaches; you must come to Christ,
believe on Christ, as Sinners, as Ungodly ones, and not as Righteous, not as
Saints, and Holy persons, The whole need not a Physician, but they that are
sick. The Thief on the Cross, as a Sinner, cried out, Lord remember me, etc.
and the Jailer as a Sinner, cried out, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? So
much, as to the Explanation of the Terms of the Text; in which you have three
parts:

1. A Negative Proposition, But to him that works not.

2. An Affirmative Proposition, But believes on him that justifies the ungodly.

3. The Conclusion from hence, His faith is counted ( or imputed) for
Righteousness.

The Observations I shall take notice of from the Words, shall be but two.

1 Doct. That all Works done by the Creature, are quite excluded in point of
Justification of a Sinner in the sight of God.

2. Doct. That Justification is wholly of the free Grace of God, through the
Imputation of the perfect Righteousness of Jesus Christ by Faith.

I purpose to begin with the first of these Points of Doctrine, and then come
to speak to the second.

1. But before I proceed, I shall show you diverse false and erroneous
Principles* which Men have sucked in, in and about the great Doctrine of
Justification.

2. I shall then prove the Point, viz. That all Works done by the Creature are
quite excluded in point of Justification of a Sinner in God's sight.

1. I shall begin with the Papists, who hold that Men are Justified by inherent
Righteousness, by Good Works, and not by Faith only, affirming Good Works to be
meritorious, or that Men thereby deserve Eternal Life; nay, that a Man may
perfectly fulfill the Law of God, though he cannot live without Sin: But to mend
the matter, Bellarmine's Argument is, That Venial Sins, of which he denies not,
that all are guilty; yet they do not hinder a Man from ^eeping the Law
perfectly: The foolishness of which distinction is easily ^iscerned; for if
they be Sins which he calls Venial, then they are the Transgression of the Law,
and he that transgresses the Law does not keep it perfectly, but contrariwise
breaks it, and so is accursed, cast, and condemned by (...): But they affirm,
that a Man may not only, by his Good Works, merit for himself; but also may do
more than is commanded, or may do Works of ^upererogation, or do more than his
Duty.

2. The second sort I shall mention are the Socinians, who deny the Deity of
the Son of God; and from hence deny also the Satisfaction of Christ, because
the latter depends upon the former: It was from the dignity and excellency of
Christ's Person, he being God as well as Man, that his Sacrifice ^ad such
infinite value and worth in it, that by one single payment (as I may (...) say)
he made such a full compensation to the Law and Justice of God: But ^^ey erring
in those two grand Points of Christian Religion, run into the ^hird, and deny
the imputation of Christ's Personal righteousness to us in ^ustification. And
indeed it seems to me that this sort of Men assert that Justification of the
Sinner, is nothing more than God's pardoning him freely by ^is Mercy, and that
only as a simple act of his own Mercy and Grace, without ^espect had to the
Satisfaction made for our Sins by Jesus Christ, by which act of God's pardoning
Grace they affirm the guilt of Sin that binds the Sinner ^ver to punishment is
taken off, and so he is acquitted and delivered from Eternal Wrath; but could
this be admitted which they affirm, why should God ^end his beloved Son into
the World to be a Sacrifice for Sin? For could not God, without that Glorious
Fruit of his infinite Goodness, have pardoned and acquitted us, and never have
suffered his Son to have underwent such pain and ^orrow for us, which indeed he
did?

3. Another sort there be, which are those called Arminians, of which ^here are
many of late Times.

I find one of them does affirm, That though the Works of the Law are excluded
from justifying the Sinner in the sight of God; yet Gospel Works are not: So
that they ^nclude Love to God, Acts of Mercy, and other Gospel Duties, and
Obedience in ^oint of Justification, as well as Faith, or join Good Works done
under the Gospel and Faith together; and this plainly appears by what Mr.
William Allen has wrote in his Book, called, A Glass of Justification. See p.
18. These are his Words, viz. It is no where, neither in Words nor Sense, said,
but he that ^oveth not, but believes on him that Justifies (...) Ungodly, his
Faith, is counted to him for righteousness. Sure this Man forgot that Love to
God was one great thing the Law commanded: Were not the Israelites, or the
People of the Jews, under the Law, to do all they did in Love to God? Thou
shall Love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and
with all thy strength, etc. He proceeds to blame our Protestant Writers, in
asserting Justification by Faith alone, without Works. Brethren, although we do
not oppose Faith to Love; as if Faith, that is of the right Kind, can be
without Love to God; yet we say, it is Faith and not Works; not love, nor Deeds
of Mercy, nor any other Gospel Duties, or Obedience, that is counted to us for
righteousness. And why to Faith only? Because that Grace only carries us out of
our selves to another for righteousness, i. e. to Jesus Christ.

4. The same sort affirm Faith does Justify the Sinner (as far as I can
gather) as it is the act of the Creature, God accepting of that internal act of
the Soul, according to his good pleasure, to Justification; not having respect
so to the Object of Faith, as that the matter thereof is Christ, perfect
righteousness, and the form or formal Cause of it, the Imputation thereof, to
such who believe in Jesus; but that it has pleased God to appoint or ordain
Faith, in respect of it self, to that end and purpose; namely, to Justify the
Sinner.

Of this sort are the Dutch Arminians, in pursuance of their main Doctrine of
Free Will; they exalt Man's Works, and therefore affirm, that he is Justified,
not by Christ's righteousness, but by his own Faith; God having required of
him, instead of full Obedience to the Law of Works, that now he should believe
on his Son; and that for so doing he should be Justified and saved, as he
should have been before for perfect Obedience: So that with this sort (as one
observes) Faith is that righteousness for which we are Justified before God.
Moreover, they tell us, that Faith is a belief of the Truth of the Gospel, so
as to live according to it; thus it includes, and not excludes Works; and
that Faith and Works, or Obedience to the Gospel, is our righteousness for
which we are Justified and saved. At the same time you must remember that they
do not own Faith to be the Gift of God, or a Grace of the Holy Spirit; but that
which the Creature has power, when the Gospel is Preached, to act by common
assistance, and influences, he has power to do, and perform, as any other
Duties of Religion, as to Pray, hear the Word, etc. And thus they make the
whole stress of Man's Salvation (after all that Christ has done) to depend
upon the depraved and corrupt Will of the Creature; and faith; such a condition
of Justification and Eternal Life, as may or may not be performed, which, if
true, it might so fall out, that not one Soul might be saved, notwithstanding
the precious price, paid by Jesus Christ to redeem them; for by the same purity
of Reason one Man may resist the offers of Grace, and not believe in Christ, or
exert that power every Man may as well do (...) too. See Mr. Troughton's Luther
us Redivivus, p. 2.

5. Some also there be, who affirm, that Justification consists in our being
perfectly and inherently Holy, by the Spirit, Light, or Christ within; and that
no ^an can be Justified, unless he be in himself perfect without Sin. These
Men, for all their late pretenses, in talking of Christ's righteousness; yet
(...) evident those who assert this Doctrine say, God does not accept any,
where there is any failing, or do not fulfill the Law, and Answer every demand
of Justice, Edw. Buroughs Works, 14 Queries, p. 33. And another of their chief
Teachers says; That Justification by the righteousness of another, or which
Christ fulfilled for us, in his own Person, wholly without us; we boldly affirm
(says he) to be a Doctrine of Devils, and an Arm of the Sea of Corruption,
which does now Deluge the World, Pen' s Apol. p. 148. And again he says, It is
a great Abomination to say God should condemn and punish his innocent Son, that
he having satisfied for our Sins we may be justified by the imputation of his
perfect righteousness, Pen' s Sandy Foundation, p. 25. And then afterward
speaking of that Text, Romans 2. 13. Not the Hearers of the Law are Just before
God, but the Doers of it shall be Justified. From whence, says he, how
unanswerably may I observe, that unless we become Doers of that Law which
Christ came not to destroy, but as our Example to fulfill, we cannot be
Justified before God? Nor let any fancy that Christ has fulfilled it for
them, as to exclude their Obedience from being requisite to their Acceptance,
but only as their Pattern, Pen' s Sandy Foundation, p. 26. No marvel they
Preach up a sinless Perfection to be attainable in this Life, or that Men may
live and not Sin at all, since without an actual Obedience in our own Persons
to the Law in every part and branch of it, no Man can be Justified in the sight
of God. We say there is no Man can be Justified, but by a complete and perfect
righteousness, either inherent in us, or imputed to us; but it is evident, by
what I have already showed, no Man has such a righteousness in himself; there
being none that does good, and sins not; if we say we have no Sin, we
deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us, 1 John 1. 8. Paul cried out,
When he would do Good, Sin was present with him, Romans 7. Besides, if a Man
could live and Sin not, yet he could not thereby be Justified, because all have
sinned, and broke God's Law, who shall therefore satisfy for, and pay off the
old score.

6. Another sort there be, that hold, that some things must be done by the
Creature, not only to prepare for, but to procure Justification, not believing
they can have this Wine and Milk, without Money and without price, Isa. 55. 1,
2. or something of their own.

They think they must make themselves clean, and then come to Christ to be
washed, and Justified.

7. There are others of late, as well as formerly, who by too many are looked
upon to be true Preachers of the Gospel, and Orthodox Men, who are strangely
tainted with that poisonous Notion, which brings in sincere Ob^dience unto the
Gospel, as joining it with Faith in point of Justification. Thus I find they
express themselves, viz. That Faith and Obedience are Conditions of the Gospel,
or of the Covenant of Grace, as perfect Obedience was of the Covenant of Works;
and that Christ has purchased by his Death, that this new Covenant should be
made with us, viz. That if we would believe and obey the Gospel, we should be
pardoned and saved, etc. Therefore that for which we are Justified and saved,
is our Faith and Obedience; and so far as I can gather, the Faith they speak of
does not respect the taking hold of Christ's Righteousness, etc. but the Belief
of the acceptance of our Person's Holiness, and sincere Obedience to the
Gospel, through Christ, to our Justification; Christ having taken away, by his
Death, the rigor of the Law of the First Covenant, which required perfect
Righteousness in point of Justification, and has made the terms of our
Justification easier, viz. instead of perfect Obedience, God will now accept of
imperfect Obedience, if sincere, and acquit us from Condemnation, and receive
us to Eternal Life.

Now such, who have always been looked upon as sound in this great Fundamental
Point of Justification, believe and teach, Christ came not to destroy the Law,
but to fulfill it, and in our Nature, and stead as our Head Representative and
Surety, to do and perform the terms thereof; I mean the Law of Works, which we
had broken, and by his Death made a full compensation to the Justice of God for
our breach of it, whose Actual and Passive Obedience, or Righteousness, is
imputed to all who believe in him.

We say Obedience supposes a Man Justified; but these Men say, that Obedience
concurs with Faith to Justify, or is part of our Righteousness to
Justification: We affirm, as a Worthy Divine Observes, that Faith alone
perfectly Justifies, by trusting in the Righteousness of Christ; so that there
is no Condemnation to them who are in Jesus Christ, Romans 8. 1. or truly believe
in him; but they teach that Faith and Obedience Justify only, as the
Conditions of the Gospel, i. e. as thereby we doing what the Gospel requires of
us; and so we are Justified, or accepted, so far as our Faith and Obedience go,
and no farther; and when they are perfect at Judgment, we shall be perfectly
Justified; so that they render our Justification to be as imperfect as our
inherent Personal Holiness or Sanctification is imperfect; or to give it in the
Words of a Learned Writer, they intimate, while we are imperfect our
Justification is imperfect also; and if our Faith and Obedience be interrupted
or utterly lost, Justification is interrupted and utterly lost likewise; nor is
it any wonder our Justification should be looked upon by them to be imperfect,
while any Imperfections remain in us, if the perfect Righteousness of Christ,
be not the matter of our Justification, or that which does Justify us in God's
sight; and on the other Hand it is impossible, if we are Justified and accepted
as just Persons, and graciously acquitted by the Righteousness of Christ, there
should be the least stain, imperfection, or spot, in our Justification; but
that Christ must needs say of such, in respect of Justification, as he does of
his Spouse, Thou art all fair, my Love, and there is no spot in thee, Cant. 4.
7. And how should it be otherwise, since therewas no spot nor blemish found in
him.

Mr. Baxter, in his Fourth Proposition, in his Preface to D. Tully, says, that
this Condition ( viz. the Covenant of Grace, by which we have right to the
benefits of it) is our Faith [mark it] or Christianity, as it is meant by
Christ in the Baptismal Covenant, viz. to give up our selves in Covenant,
believing in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, renouncing the contraries;
and that though this consent to the Christian Covenant (called Faith alone) be
the full Condition of our first Right to the Benefit of that Covenant (of which
Justification is one,) yet obediential Performances, and Conquest of
Temptations, and Perseverance, are secondary parts of the Condition of our
Right, as continued and consummated; he says for Faith to be imputed to us for
righteousness, Romans 4. 22, 23, 24. Is plainly meant, that God, who under the
Law of Innocence required perfect Obedience of us to Justification and
Glorification, upon the Satisfaction and Merits of Christ, has freely given a
full Pardon and Right to Life to all true Believers; so that now by the
Covenant of Grace, nothing is required of us to our Justification, but Faith,
all the rest being done by Christ; and so Faith in God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, is reputed truly to be the condition on our part, on which Christ
and Life by that Baptismal Covenant is made ours.

Observe, here is not a Word concerning Christ's Righteousness, or Faith in him
for Righteousness. And hence worthy Mr. Troughton citing this passage of Mr.
Baxter says, By this Author, it is not Christ's Righteousness apprehended by
Faith, justifies us; but Faith it self, as including Obedience, i. e. the
belief and practice of the Christian Religion is our Righteousness, by, and for
which we are justified and accepted, Luth. Red. p. 8.

Moreover, it is worth noting to observe how Mr. Baxter seems to lay the whole
stress of our first Justification to what is promised in our Baptismal
Covenant, wherein we profess Faith in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; sure
he might with much ease have foreseen that such who entered into that Baptismal
Covenant in the Primitive, Apostolical Days, were such who before they were
admitted thereto, were required to believe: And if true Subjects were all
justified before they signed that Covenant, the Jailor who cried out, Sirs,
what must I do to be saved, was by St. Paul required to believe on the Lord
Jesus, with a Promise upon his so doing of being saved: Though I deny not, but
that Faith in God the Father, and in the Holy Ghost, is injoined as well as
Faith in the Son; yet it is Christ who is the immediate Object of our Faith, and
that too as he was crucified for us, and bore our Sins, or was made sin for us,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. And it is by him that we
come to God, and believe in God, and are justified and accepted of God, other
foundation (of these things) can no man lay. But Mr. Baxter speaks nothing of
this, but of a Faith in general in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; which
Faith he says is reputed truly to be the Condition on our part on which Christ
and Life by that Baptismal Covenant is made ours, till I met with this passage
of Mr. Baxter's.

I did not so well understand what Mr. Daniel Williams means by those
Assertions of his in his late Book, called The Vanity of Youth, p. 130. 131.
who answers these Questions following, viz.

What does the Covenant bind thee to? (meaning the Baptismal Covenant).

Answ. To be the Lords in a sincere Care to know, love, believe, obey, worship,
and serve him all my days, and to depend on God through Christ for all
Happiness, Ezekiel. 16. 8. Romans 12. 1. Romans 6. 4.

Quest. What if a Child through the love of Sin, or vanity of Mind, will not
agree to this Covenant when he is capable?

Answ. He then rejects Christ our Savior, and renounceth the Blessings of
the Gospel.

Quest. Is it a great Sin to refuses agree to the Covenant to which thy
Baptism engaged thee?

Answ. It Is the damning Sin, and the heart of all Sin.

I suppose Mr. Williams, and Mr. Baxter were of the same Faith and Judgment. If
you will know what the Terms and Condition of the Covenant of Grace are, which
must be performed by us that we may be justified, both these Men tell you,
(though the latter more fully) it is to make good this Baptismal Covenant, viz.
sincerely to love, believe, obey, worship, and serve the Lord; so that Faith
alone as it receives Christ, or helps us to fly to Christ, and rely on Christ,
is not the alone way or condition (if it may be so termed) on our part in order
to actual Interest in Jesus Christ, and Justification; but also the whole of
Gospel-Obedience and Holiness, they make to he as absolute Conditions in order
thereunto, as Faith. Sirs, we deny not but that Obedience and Personal Holiness
is necessary to Salvation, or in order to a meetness for an actual Possession
of Heaven: But we must exclude all inherent Holiness or Works of Obedience done
by us, in point of Justification, Pray mind my Text, But to him that works
not, but believes.

But if it be not as I affirm concerning these Men, how can Mr. Williams call
the nonperformance of the Baptismal Covenant, the damning Sin, and heart of
all Sin.

Observe the very same damning Evil, which the Holy Ghost charges on the Sin of
Unbelief. In the New Testament, Mark 16. 16. John 3. 36. he charges on the
nonperformance of his true Condition of Justification, and Eternal Life; i.e.
this Baptismal Covenant: All Sin (I grant) is damning in its own Nature, every
Sin being a breach of God's Law, exposes to God's Wrath and Curse: But the not
agreeing to, or nonperformance of this Covenant (he making this the Condition
of the Covenant of Grace) he calls, by way of Eminency, the damning Sin, and
heart of all Sin. If this Man preaches Christ, or the glorious Gospel, I am
much mistaken.

Besides, our Baptismal Covenant is not a sign of that Faith and Holiness we
should afterward obtain; but it is an outward sign of that inward Grace we have
(or ought to have when baptized) i.e. it is a sign that we are dead to Sin, to
the World, to the Law, and to our own Righteousness: How shall we (says the
Apostle) who are dead to Sin, live any longer therein, Romans 6. 4. Know ye not,
that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his
death, v. 3. Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into Death; that like
as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we should
walk in newness of Life.

These Persons who were baptized, being true Believers, were in a justified
State; and though it is true, they by their Baptismal Covenant promised to walk
in newness of Life; yet the neglect of this is no more called the damning Sin;
nor is the performance of it that Righteousness they desire to be found in to
Justification. But it is evident, these Men place Obedience and Personal
Holiness in the place of Faith, and the nonperformance of that inherent
Holiness and Obedience in the room of Unbelief; though we grant without
Holiness no Man shall ever see the Lord; yet it is not for that, or thereby we
are justified, and shall be saved, but by the Personal Righteousness of Jesus
Christ.

But to proceed as a further Confirmation, that these Men deny that the
Righteousness of Christ, as it is apprehended or received by Faith, is that
alone through which we are justified, I might here cite another Author, Mr.
Truman Grand Prop^iation, p. 30. 86. who paraphrasing on those Words, Romans 3.
26. That he might be just, and the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus. He
says, That he that is of the Faith of Jesus, or of the Christian Faith, (...).
And concerning the Effects of the Death of Christ, or his Satisfaction, he
says, It was only this, that the Obstacle being removed ( viz. offended
Justice) God might be at liberty to act in the pardon of Sinners, in what way
and upon what Terms he pleased. The immediate Effect is, that God might be
just, though he should pardon Sinners, that he might pardon Silva Justitia,
not, that he must pardon, come what will of it, or be unjust. And further, to
exclude Christ's Righteousness from being the Matter of our Justification;
(says Mr. Troughton) he says, that in our Redemption, we 1. are not properly
to be looked upon as Debtors, nor God properly as a Creditor, but as a Governor
and Legislator, we as Subjects; and that Christ acted not the part of a Surety
(though he be once figuratively so called) but of a Mediator expiating Guilt,
and making reparation to Justic^ some other way than by the Execution of the
Law; yea, endeavoring that the legal threat might not be executed by making
amends, for the non-execution of it. 2. The Sufferings of Christ were not
properly an Execution of the Law (though they may figuratively be so called)
but a Satisfaction to Justice. And further, that it is contrary to Scripture
and Reason, to hold that Christ's fulfilling of, and Obedience to the Law is
accounted (...), as if Believers had fulfilled and obeyed the Law in his doing
it.

1. And thus these Men go about to shake, if they could, nay, overthrow the
great Article of our Faith, and glorious Doctrine of Justification, as it has
been generally received by all Orthodox Christians in every Age of the Church
clearly denying that which Christ did and suffered, he did and suffered as a
common Person, as a Head, Surety and Representative for all the Elect; but that
he did all merely as a Mediator, viz. as one endeavoring to compose the
difference betwixt God and Sinners.

2. Not that he fulfilled the Law of Works for us in our stead; but that he
fulfilled the peculiar Law of a Mediator.

3. That Christ by undergoing the Curse of the Law delivered Mankind from the
Curse* thereof; and by his active Obedience unto the Precepts of it, purchased
Life for them, which the Law promised with other super-abounding additional
Blessings; but rather give Man a new and a milder Law of Grace or Terms of
Life, according as the Father and the Son should, or did agree.

And only gave to God a valuable Consideration or Recompense, that he might
justly wave and not execute the Law of Works; but give Man a new and milder Law
of Grace, or Terms of Life; which clearly tends in a great measure to destroy,
or make void the Law, instead of making it honorable, by Christ's perfect
Conformity to it, in our Nature and Stead; nor can the Righteousness of the Law
be said to be fulfilled in us (if what these Men say be true) that is in our
Nature, or as some read it for us; and indeed if Christ's Obedience and
Suffering in our room and stead, has not delivered us, who believe from the
Curse of the Law. Doubtless, we are all under the said Curse still, and so must
remain for ever.

Nor can I see why Christ should take our Nature upon him, were he not
substituted in our stead, as our Surety to do and suffer.

Besides, how can our Sins be said to be laid upon him, or imputed to him, and
his Righteousness imputed to us, were he not put in our stead to do and suffer
for us.

If that Righteousness which satisfied the Law of Works, does not justify us,
I know not how we can be justified.

Nor can I see how the Honor of God in his infinite Justice and Holiness, and
the Sanction of the Law, is repaired by this Doctrine. But more of this
hereafter.

4. These Men do not say that the Righteousness of Christ, whereby he fulfilled
the Law, is imputed to us, who believe, to justify us in God's sight; though for
that Righteousness-sake, God grants us pardon of Sin, and hope of Eternal Life.

But rather (so far as I can gather) that Christ's Righteousness or Obedience
is not imputed to us, for which we should be justified and accepted, as being
an Obedience due to the Law of the first Covenant; but to his own peculiar Law
of a Mediator: But yet so, that Christ's Obedience did merit or purchase; i.e.
that God should appoint Men new and easier Terms of Life, instead of perfect
Obedience, and Death for the failure of that Obedience.

Thus having given you several dangerous, and corrupt Notions of Men about the
great Point of Justification, I shall proceed to give you in the last place the
true Description, Notion, and Definition of it, according as it has been, and
is asserted generally by all sound Christians and faithful Men.

Eighthly, This is that which we say; i.e. That Justification is an absolute
Act of God's most sovereign Grace, whereby he imputes the complete and perfect
Righteousness of Jesus Christ to a believing Sinner, though ungodly in himself,
absolving him from all his Sins, and accepting him as righteous in Christ.

We affirm that Justification is the Acceptance of a Sinner with God as
righteous, through the Righteousness of Jesus Christ imputed to him; not that
Justification is nothing more but the pardon of Sin, or the not, or
non-exacting the Punishment of Sin, due for the breach of the Law of Works, and
the acceptance of a Man, so far as he performs the New Condition of sincere
Obedience.

But we affirm that believing Sinners are made Partakers of Christ's
Righteousness, and the benefits of it; and that by Faith alone, as that by
which we wholly fly to him for Righteousness, and trusting in the promise of
Life for his Sake and Merits.

Not that Faith, as one observes, in the whole Latitude, is believing and
obeying the Gospel, by which we are made Partakers of the benefit of Christ in
his Obedience to his own Law; and, in that he having purchased this Grant or
Law, i.e. that they which obey him should be justified and saved, and not that
Christ's Obedience shall or does save them.

We believe, and teach that by Christ's Righteousness imputed, he that believes
is perfectly justified, and is freed from the Curse of the Law, and accepted,
and accounted righteous in the sight of God, and hereby has a certain Title to
Eternal Life.

Not that our Justification or Right to Life depends wholly upon our
Obedience, as the Condition to which it is promised, and we only put into a
condition or state of Life imperfect, and subject to change as Obedience it
self is: And so that we are not perfectly justified till our Obedience be
perfected, which is the Doctrine some Persons of late preach; for as sure as
God justifies us, so sure will he save and glorify us, Romans 8. 30.

Thus having made our way clear, and removed some Stumbling Blocks, I shall now
proceed to show, that all Works done by the Creature are utterly excluded in
point of Justification in the sight of God, which must be my business the next
day, the time being gone. I shall therefore conclude with a word or two of
Application.

1. The First shall be a use of Caution to both Saints and Sinners, to take
heed who you hear; it greatly concerns you; for the Times are perilous, the
Devil is endeavoring to strike at the Root, even at the Foundation it self,
beware lest you are deceived and carried away with those poisonous and
abominable Doctrines that are fomented at this present time in and about this
City. We ought to keep clean from all Errors; but especially such as are
Capital ones. I am afraid many good Christians are not sensible of the sad
danger they are in. I cannot see but that the Doctrine some Men strive to
promote, is but little better than Popery in a new Dress. Nay one of the worst
branches of it too, shall any who pretend to be true Preachers of the Gospel,
go about to mix their own Works or their sincere Obedience with Christ's
Righteousness; nay, to put their Obedience in the room and place of Christ's
Obedience, as that in which they trust and desire to be found?

2. Let me exhort you all to stand fast in that precious Faith you have
received; particularly about this great Doctrine of Justification, give your
selves to Prayer, and to the due and careful study of God's Word. And beware
lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own
stedfas^ness, 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18. But grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him be Glory both now and for evermore. Amen.

JUSTIFICATION without WORKS.
Romans IV. 5. But to him that works not, etc.
I have already opened this Text of Scripture, and gave you an account of the
Scope and Coherence thereof at large; and then observed two Points of Doctrine
therefrom.

First, That all Works done by the Creature are quite excluded, in Point of
Justification of a Sinner in the sight of God.

THE last Day, I showed you diverse erroneous Principles held by some Men about
the Doctrine of Justification. I shall trouble you with no Repetition of what
we have said; but proceed to what was then propounded to be further done; which
is to give you the Scripture Proofs and Arguments to confirm the Truth of the
first Point of Doctrine; viz. That all Works done by the Creature are quite
excluded, etc.

1. My first Argument shall be taken from the very Letter and express Testimony
of the Holy Scripture, Romans 3. 27. Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By
what Law? Of Works? Nay, but by the Law of Faith. This Text almost in so many
Words confirms this Proposition; if all boasting is excluded, all Works are
excluded: But more of this hereafter. See Romans 4. 2. If Abraham were justified
by Works, he had whereof to glory, but not before God. If he had been justified
by Works, he had whereof he might glory; but he had nothing to glory in before
God.

Therefore he was not justified by Works, v. 6. Even as David describes the
Blessedness of the Man unto whom God imputes Righteousness without Works. He
brings in David to confirm this great Gospel Truth Psalm. 32. 1. And the David
does not use the very same Words, as here expressed by the Apostle; yet they
are Words of the same Purport, the sense and meaning of David is the same.

I wonder at the boldness of some Men, who affirm the Word Imputation of
Righteousness is no where to be found in the Scripture. Does not the Apostle
plainly and positively assert that God imputes Righteousness to^ Man, and that
too without Works. See Ga^. 2. 16. Knowing a Man is not justified by the Works
of the Law, but by the Faith of Christ.

Knowing; That is, being sure and certain of this, this is a Doctrine (as if he
should say) we are well grounded in, and confident of, That a Man is not
justified by the Works of the Law; Works do not justify or declare us
righteous in the light of God: So Ephesians. 2. 8; 9. By Grace ye are saved through
Faith, and that not of your selves; it is the gift of God; not of Works, lest
any Man should boast. Here it is again in the Affirmative, it is by Grace; and
also laid down in the Negative, not of Works, and the Reason subjoined.

To these Proofs of Holy Scripture, I might mention That in Phil. 3. 8, 9. Yea
doubtness, and I account all things but loss for the Excellency of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ, and be found in him,
not having my own Righteousness which is of the Law, ^ne that (...) is through
the Faith of Christ the Righteousness which is of God by Faith.

What was it Paul accounted but Dung, and gave up for Loss? Why, he tells you
it was whatsoever he accounted once for gain, or did esteem of, and rested
upon; viz. all his own Righteousness, while he was a Phar^see, and all his
other external and legal Privileges, which in times past he gloried in; but now
they were nothing to him: He saw no Worth or Excellency in them; but wholly
threw himself on Christ, and on his Righteousness for Justification. I count
now at this very time all the Righteousness I have (he speaks in the present
Tense) but as dung, that is, in comparison of that Righteousness, which does
and must justify him in God's sight, in which he would be found now, and at
Death and Judgment. Compare this Text with that in Tit. 3. 5. Not by works of
righteousness that we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us.

Obj. But perhaps some will object, that the Apostle in all these places only
excludes the works of the Law.

Answ. It Is evident he excludes all Works done by the Creature, either before
Grace, or after Grace, as well Works of Obedience to the Gospel as to the Law.
Pray observe, not by works of righteousness that we have done. We that are
Saints, we who profess the Gospel; nay, such Works, which God has prepared or
ordained that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2. 9, 10. Good Works done by Saints
and godly Persons cannot justify them in God's sight. Were not the Galatians
Christians and Professors of the Gospel, who held without Faith in Christ, no
doubt, that they could not be justified? But yet were so far fallen from the
true Faith, as to look to be justified also by the Law, or by their Obedience
to it; or by an inherent* Righteousness, which the Apostle (...) opposed. Works
are indifferently mentioned, as being excluded? He that is said to be justified
by faith, is said not to work* but to have a Righteousness imputed; therefore
all works are excluded in this respect*

2. If all Works were not excluded; then there would still be the same cause or
reason to glory, or to boast; be they either Legal or Gospel work^: but since
all boasting is excluded, all Works are excluded: It signifies nothing what
Works they are, if the reason of their Exclusion be but considered; which is to
take away all manner of boasting, and to abase the Creature, and wholly to
magnify God, and exalt Free Grace.

3. Moreover the like Debt would be due to us; For to him that works, is the
reward not reckoned of grace but of debt. What though some of my Works does not
make God a Debtor to me? Yet if any Works in this case are not excluded, God
would still become a Debtor to me, which is inconsistent with the Doctrine of
Free Grace.

4. If Works going before Justification, are excluded from being any cause
thereof; then much more those Works that follow Justification; for Causes (as
one well observes) do not use to follow after, but go before their Effects, at
least in order of Nature.

5. If Works justify, they must of necessity be good Works; but Works done
before Faith, or without Faith, are not good Works; for whatsoever is not done
of Faith is Sin, and are dead Works. Neither can the Fruit be good, as our
Savior says, while the Tree is bad, Every evil Tree brings forth evil
fruit; But every Man before he is justified is like an evil Tree, and therefore
can bring forth no good Fruit, no good Works; wherefore all Works, it is
evident, before Faith and Justification, are utterly excluded.

6. Furthermore, the Apostle speaks of all Men, whether converted or
unconverted, that it is not of Works, or Works done by them, or either of them,
that they are justified, or saved, but by grace; we are justified by grace, and
not by Works; all Works are opposed (by the Apostle) to Grace, therefore all
Works are excluded. From hence take this Argument.

That Doctrine that gives the Holy Scripture the Lie, is false and to be
rejected.

But the Doctrine that mixes any Works of Righteousness done by the Creature
with Faith or the Free Grace of God, in point of Justification, gives the
Scripture the Lie; therefore that Doctrine is false, and to be rejected.

2 Arg. That all Works done by the Creature, are utterly excluded in point of
Justification, appears from the different Nature of Works, and Grace; it is
positively said, we are justified by Grace.

Now Grace and Works (let Works be of what sort they will) are directly
contrary the one to the other. See Romans 11. 6. And if it be of Grace, then it
is not of Works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace; but if it be of Works, then
it is no more of Grace, otherwise work is no more work. There is no mixing
Works and Free Grace together, but one of these does and will destroy the
Nature of the other; and as it holds true in Election, so in Justification: If
Justification was partly of Grace, and partly by Works done by the Creature, or
from foreseen Holiness and sincere Obedience done by us; then Grace is no more
Grace, or Works no more Works: For whatsoever proceeds of Grace (as our
Annotators observe) that comes freely, and is not of Debt, But whatsoever
comes by Works, that comes by Debt; but now Debt and Free Grace, or that
which is free and absolutely by Grace, and that which is by Desert, are quite
contrary things; therefore to say Men are called and justified, partly by
Grace, and partly by Works done by the Creature, this were to put such things
together as cannot agree; for it is to make Merit no Merit, Debt no Debt, Work
no Work, Grace no Grace; and so to affirm and deny one and the same thing. From
hence take this Argument:

That which is of the Free Grace of God, is not by any Works done by the
Creature. But Justification is of the Free Grace of God; therefore not by any
Works done by the Creature. That being justified by his Grace we should be made
Heirs according to the hope of Eternal Life, Tit. 3. 5. From hence rises all
the hopes we have of Salvation; it is by, or according to the Free Grace of God,
through the Merits of Jesus Christ alone.

3 Arg. My third Argument, to prove all Works done by the Creature are excluded
in Justification, is this, viz. Faith is the way prescribed in the Gospel in
order to Justification; not Love, not Charity, not Works of Mercy, but Faith:
Now why is Faith rather than any Grace mentioned as the way to be justified; is
it not from the Nature of this Grace? In respect of the Object it flies unto,
or takes hold of, Faith contrary to any other Grace of the Spirit, carries the
Soul out of himself to Christ, like as those who were stung with the fiery
Serpents in the Wilderness, were healed by looking up to the Brazen Serpent: So
by fixing our Eye upon Christ, looking by Faith upon Christ, we come to be
healed and justified. Moreover, pray wherein does the Terms of the Gospel
differ from the Terms of the Law, Do this and live; or, The Man that does these
things shall live in them, Gal. 3. 12. Lev. 18. 5. These are the Terms of the
Law. Thus runs the Tenor of the Law.

But the Terms of the Gospel are quite different; Believe on the Lord Jesus,
and thou shall be saved, Acts 16. 31. This was the Doctrine Paul preached to
the poor trembling Jailor, which agrees with what the same Apostle says, Romans
10. 9. If thou shall confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe
in thine heart God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. This
Confession, and this Faith, has more in it it is true than some believe; it is
not a verbal Confession only, or a bare believing Christ was raised from the
dead; It Is a believing with all the heart, Acts 8. 37. or to throw our selves
wholly on Christ by the Faith of the Operation of God, Col. 2. 12, 13. in full
confidence and assurance that he was raised from the Dead, as our Head, Surety,
and Representative, for our Justification, by the Power or Virtue of which
Faith, we also rise with him from a Death in Sin to walk in newness of Life.
From hence I argue thus:

That Doctrine which confounds the Terms of the Law and Gospel together in
point of Justification, is a false and corrupt Doctrine: But the Doctrine that
mixeth sincere Obedience, or Works of any kind done by us, with Faith in point
of Justification, confound the Terms of the Law and Gospel together in point of
Justification; therefore that Doctrine is false and a corrupt Doctrine.

Obj. May be our Opposers will object, that the Terms of the Law consist in
perfect Obedience, and that the Terms of the Gospel consist in Faith and
sincere Obedience; and therefore they do not confound the Law and Gospel
together, etc.

Answ. 1. The difference betwixt the Law and the Gospel (as all our true
Protestant Divines teach) does not at all consist in this; i. e. that the one
requires perfect Obedience, and the other only sincere Obedience; but in this,
that the one requires doing, Do this and live; but the other, no doing but
believing for Life and Salvation: their Terms differ not only in degree, but in
their whole Nature.

2. The Apostle, it is evident, opposes the believing required in the Gospel to
all manner of doing or working for Life, as the Condition proper to the Law,
The Law is not of Faith, but the Man that does them shall live in them. Faith
in Jesus Christ the Mediator, is not commanded by the Law by which the Soul
shall live, the Law says nothing of this; this is not of the Law: And the
Gospel speaks nothing of doing or working for Life, neither of perfect^or (...)
Obedience, but the direct contrary, He that works not, but believes on him
that justifies the Ungodly, his Faith; not his Obedience to the Gospel, but
his Faith is counted for Righteousness.

If therefore we seek Justification by any manner of Doing or Works, though
upon never so easy and mild a Condition of Obedience, we do thereby bring
ourselves under the Terms of the Law; which is a complete Declaration of the
only. Terms whereby God will judge all, and condemn all who are not brought to
see the Insufficiency that is in it, through the Flesh, Romans 8. 3. no justify
the Soul, and from that sight and sense disown all their Works of Obedience,
and accept of Christ his Righteousness and perfect Obedience to the Law, to
justify them in the sight of God; for let our Obedience be never I so sincere,
if it be not perfect, we are still Debtors to the Law, and are a coursed by it,
unless we believe in Jesus Christ; so that all who seek for Justification or
Eternal Life knowingly, or ignorantly by any Works done by then^less or more,
whether commanded by the Law or Gospel, confound the Terms of the Law and
Gospel together.

And to this, let me add one thing more, i. e. it cannot be rationally doubted,
but that the Jews and Judaizing Christians in the Apostles Days, against whom
he contended, did profess any hope to be justified by a complete or perfect
Obedience to the Law according to the rigor of it; but no doubt thought if
they did sincerely do what they could to love God, and keep his Commandments,
they should be accepted and justified in his sight: For the Jewish Religion
taught them that professed it (as one observes) to acknowledge themselves
Sinners, which appears by their Anniversary Humiliation at the day of
Atonement, and several other Rites of the Law; nor have we any reason to
conclude but some of them yielded also sincere Obedience (I speak of Moral
Sincerity) to the Law; this being so, I see not why their sincere Obedience
might not justify them as far forth, as any sincere Obedience to the Gospel or
milder Law can a Christian now. Brethren, this new Doctrine is but a piece of
Old Judaism^ These Men do but stumble at the Old Stumbling-stone, which was the
seeking to be justified by a man's own Righteousness, in a sincere or upright
Obedience to that Law or Rule of Life God gave them; and so thereby not
submitting themselves to the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith in Jesus
Christ, without the Law or any Obedience of ours.

Moreover, pray consider that Paul who told the Galatians they were fallen from
Grace, did not disown Jesus Christ; they were still Professors of the Gospel,
though they thought Obedience to the Law a necessary Condition in order to
Justification also. Nor was the Observation of the Moral Law a damning Sin: No,
no, the Gospel obliges to it; but it was their seeking Justification thereby,
and not by Faith only, or in that respect mixing Works with Faith.

4. All Works done by the Creature are excluded in point of Justification of a
Sinner in the sight of God, because we are justified by a perfect
Righteousness: If no Man is in himself perfectly righteous, then no Man can be
justified by any Works done by him. But the Apostle proves, that the Justice of
God requires a perfect or sinless Righteousness in point of Justification; and
also proves that all have sinned, nor is there one that does good, and sins
not: No Person has a perfect Righteousness of his own. Alas, Sirs, the Law of
God is but as a Transcript or written Impression of that Holiness, and Purity
that is in his own Nature, and serves to show us what a Righteousness we must
be found in, if we are ever justified in his sight. Nor can it be once supposed
by any Man, unless blinded, that God will ever loose or relax the Sanction of
his Holy Law, or abate a jot or tittle of that Righteousness his Holy Nature
and Law requires in point of out being justified in his sight, it must be all
fulfilled by us in our own Persons, or by our Surety for us, and imputed to us.

The Law did not only proceed from God, doubtless, as an Act of his Sovereign
Will and Prerogative, but as an Act proceeding from his infinite Justice and
Holiness. Can any be so left, as once to conclude God sent his Son to destroy
the Law, or to diminish, or take away the least part or tittle of that
Obedience he therein injoins, which so well agrees with the Perfections of his
own pure Nature; it is strange to me any should conceive God should give way to
relax or abrogate the Law of perfect Obedience; nay, send his Son to do it (and
in its room bring in a Law for imperfect Obedience to justify us) as if he
repented he ever gave it.

For by this means, says a learned Author, God should lose much Honor in
making this second Covenant, and granting such easy Terms; for there is no
comparison betwixt perfect Obedience required by the Law, and due to God as our
Creator, and that imperfect Obedience, which is accepted by the Gospel, neither
in Quantity, Quality nor Duration: Here it is possible a Man may be converted
at the last hour and saved, though he have lived in Rebellion against God many
years; What little Honor or Service has God from such a Man? yea, from the
best Men, who confess their righteousness to be as filthy rags, in comparison
of a sinless Nature and perfect Life, in respect of all Duties, Time, and
Place, without mixture of any sinful Imperfections, What should be the reason
of this alteration? If there had been a Law given, which could have given Life,
verily righteousness should have been by the Law, Gal. 3. 21.

Could not Man keep the Law of Works then? it seems the first Law was too
strict. This reflecteth upon the Wisdom and Justice of God: It must be granted
that perfect Man could observe a perfect Law, had God pleased to give him Grace
and Assistance sufficient to his State and Necessity; and so there was no need
the Law should be altered, and the Obedience, the Condition of it, changed from
perfect to imperfect: For if perfect Man could not keep the Law of perfect
Obedience, with sufficient Grace. How should sinful Man perform the Law of
sincere Obedience, having no more than sufficient Grace to assist him? Did not
God foreknow that Man would break the Law of Works, and so was necessitated to
make a New and more easy Law? Or, did not God both foreknow and permit the
Fall of Man? Or, could he not have hindered it? Why then should he give way to
the abrogating the Command of perfect Obedience, to bring in that of imperfect?
Surely (as Augustine says) God is so Just that he can allow no Evil, and so
Good that he can permit no Evil, except it be with design to bring greater Good
out of it. If God permitted the First Covenant to be broken, that thereby he
might abase Man and magnify his own Grace, and his Son, in bestowing Heaven
freely on him, and in bringing him thither by the continued Power of pardoning
and sanctifying Grace; hereby indeed God does (...) advance his own Glory, by
the change of the Covenants.

But that the Condition of perfect Obedience, being broke by Man's Sin; the Law
therefore should be dis-annulled, and a new way of treating with Man set up,
wherein still Man should be something, and his Works bring about his own
Salvation, and God be contented with few and very imperfect Acts of Obedience;
this certainly is a prejudice to his Honor; nor does this make it up, i.e.
That our Obedience is accepted for Christ's sake; for Christ only made way for
removing the Old Covenant, (say you) and the granting a New; but he did not
obey in our stead; nor does add any Worth to our Obedience; unless you will say
that we are Justified by our own sincere Obedience, the righteousness of Christ
making up the defects of it; and so our own righteousness will be a coordinate
cause of our Justification with the righteousness of Christ; we say.

When the Apostle says, By the Works of the Law no Flesh shall be Justified,
he does not mean only the Law, as in the Hands of Moses; but also as it is
anew given forth by Jesus Christ; for we are still under Obedience to the
Moral Law, the substance of which is to Love God and our Neighbor as our
selves: By the Law is meant that Rule of Life God has given, whether as
written in the Heart, or given by Moses, or as given anew by Christ as Rule of
Life to us; Lusts is a breach of Christ's Law, or as the Law given by Christ,
as well as it was given by Moses, no Man, because a Sinner, can be Justified by
his own Works, Righteousness, or Obedience; but all Men are Sinners, whether
Professors or Profane, Romans 3. 23. (As I said before) he that is justified,
must be just or without Sin, or have such a Righteousness imputed to him, God
will in no wise clear the guilty, Exodus 34. 7. God is just as well as gracious,
Romans 3. 26. he cannot suffer any wrong to be done to his Holy Law. Consider the
Purity of his Nature and Rectitude of his Will: His Justice must be satisfied,
his Law fulfilled by us, or by our Surety for us, and will not abate a tittle
of that Righteousness it does require; yet such is also his Goodness, that what
we could not do in keeping perfectly the Law, he sent his Son in our Nature, as
our Surety and Representative, to do it for us, Romans 8. 3. That the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, that is in our Head, who by
Faith is ours; and thus by Faith we do not make void the Law, but establish it.
Is the Law rendered useless, or of none effect by Faith? Are we justified
without regard had to the just Commands thereby required, or without a
Compensation made for the breach thereof? Is it made void? No, God forbid,
(says the Apostle) we establish the Law, in as much as by Faith we get or
attain to a perfect Righteousness; even such a Righteousness as the Law
requires, by being Interested in the complete and perfect Righteousness, and
Obedience of Christ to the Moral Law, in whom every Type and Shadow of the
Ceremonial Law, and in whom each Promise, and Prophecy is fulfilled also: To
close this, take this Argument, If we are justified by a complete and perfect
Righteousness; then an imperfect though a sincere Righteousness, does not
justify us, but we are justified by a complete and perfect Righteousness. Ergo,

Remember, Sinners, you are guilty, and must be justified in a way of
Righteousness, as well as pardoned in a way of Sovereign Mercy, that God might
be just, and the Justifier of them that believe in Jesus, Romans 3. 26. We can
only be justified, says learned Leigh, by that Righteousness which is
universal and complete. Leigh's Body of Divinity, p. 529. Our Obedience, though
sincere, is not universal nor complete; therefore our sincere Obedience or
Righteousness justifies us not in God's sight.

5. All Works done by the Creature are excluded in point of Justification of
the Sinner before God, appears, because Gospel-Justification is a great
Mystery, and the preaching of it counted Foolishness to the wise Men of this
World: to preach Christ and his Righteousness, as that which justifies us they
cannot understand; Natural Light and Reason comprehends it not. What, must we
be justified by the Obedience and Righteousness of another? This to the learned
Greeks was a strange Doctrine.

But to say a Man is justified by sincere Obedience, i. e. by believing the
Truth of God's Word, and living a godly Life, suits well with Man's natural
Wisdom and Reason: But the Doctrine of Faith, though it be not against humane
Reason; yet it is above it, and wholly depends upon divine or supernatural
Revelation, through this Man is preached unto you remission of Sins, and by him
all that believe are justified from all things, by which they could not be
justified by the Law of Moses, Acts 13. 38, 39. For as by one Man's
Disobedience many were made Sinners; so by the Obedience of one shall many be
made righteous, Rom* 5. 19. How dare any say our Works or sincere Obedience is
our Righteousness, since the Apostle positively asserts, We are made righteous
by the Obedience of Jesus Christ? If it be by his Obedience, it is not by our
own: For as Adam's Sin was imputed to his Seed to Condemnation; so is the
Obedience or Righteousness of Christ imputed to all those who believe in him to
Justification.

Now the worst of Men that have any sense of Religion, are prone to conclude
the only way to obtain God's Favor, and to be justified in his sight, is to
make the practice of Holiness and upright Walking a Condition; nay, the only
way thereunto, and that Happiness is to be by that means obtained. Hence it is,
when they meet with any awakening Convictions or Terror of Conscience, they
presently begin to think they must amend their Lives, and perform Religious
Duties: Nay, this way the Heathens were brought to their best Devotion (as a
learned Writer observes) Mankind being made and born under a Covenant of Works,
are naturally led to work for Life, or to do something to procure God's
Acceptance, and escape his Displeasure. The very Light of natural Reason
informs us, that it is just with God to require us to perform Duties of sincere
Obedience, or Duties of natural or instituted Religion; and if we fall in doing
what our Consciences tells us we ought to do, we presently through self-love
and blind hope, persuade our selves God being gracious will pardon us wherein
we come short, through Christ, who died for Sinners.

And thus we may perceive that the Persuasion of Salvation and Justification by
the Condition of sincere Obedience, has its Original from our corrupt, natural
Reason, and is part of the Wisdom of the World; but it is none of the Wisdom of
God in a Mystery, yea that hidden Wisdom God has ordained before the World
began to our Glory: It is not of the things of the Spirit of God, nor of the
Mystery of Faith, which the natural Man cannot receive, but are Foolishness
unto him: This is not the foolishness of preaching whereby God is pleased to
save them that believe, 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7, 9, 14.

Certainly the Justification of a Sinner in the sight of God by Faith only, or
to believe on him that justifies the Ungodly, is one of the chief Mysteries of
the Gospel; but if our Justification was by our own Obedience, or by conforming
our Lives to the Rules of the Gospel, Justification and Salvation would cease
from being any more a Mystery: But to be justified by the Righteousness of
another, though Sinners in our selves, and have done nothing to procure such
Favor and Acceptance at God's hand, cannot enter into the heart of natural and
self-deceived Mortals. Sirs, our Justification is a great Mystery, as it is an
Act of God's Sovereign Grace and Wisdom: Herein his Justice and Mercy equally
shine forth, and the one does not eclipse the Glory of the other; Sin is
punished, and the Sinner acquitted.

6 Arg. If when we have done all we can do, we are unprofitable Servants; then
by our best Works of Obedience and Services under the Gospel, we cannot be
justified: But contrariwise all Works in that respect, as done by us, are
excluded, Luke* 17. 10.

He is no unprofitable Servant, whose Works or sincere Obedience commends him
to God in point of Justification: no Man is able to come up fully to discharge
his Duty; If therefore sincere Obedience ^nstead of perfect, God now requires
of us in the case of Justification, and we are able fully to discharge the Law
of sincere Obedience, which our new Doctors must say, or they say nothing; then
it follows that all such Persons are not unprofitable Servants; for they have
done all that God requires of them: Nor indeed can I see (as a Divine observes)
if sincere Obedience be the Condition of Justification and Life, how the
Imperfections of the Godly should be any Sins against the Gospel, Where there
is no Law, there is no Transgression; For this New Law, i. e. the Gospel,
requires no more than sincere and upright Obedience, (say they) though the Law
did; and the Gospel also promises Life in like manner to sincere Obedience, as
the Law did to perfect and complete Obedience; they may be Imperfections (says
he) in Nature, but not proper Sins. Praeter, non contra Legem, as the Papists
say. If they say, that more than sincere Obedience is required of us, but not
as a Condition of Life, I ask by what Law? The Covenant of Works required
nothing but as the Condition of Life, no more does the Gospel, if it be a Law
of Life* (After such a manner) our Savior, doubtless by his Expressions shows
us, that all we do avails us nothing in point of Desert, though never so
sincerely performed; and therefore far from justifying us in God's sight, but
that all we have is of God's Free Grace.

7 Arg. Because we are said to be justified by the Righteousness of God: Hence
it follows that all our own Works of Obedience are excluded, Romans 3. 21, 22.
It Is called the Righteousness of God in opposition to the Righteousness of the
Creature; not the Essential Righteousness of God, but the Righteousness of
Christ the Mediator, who is God as well as Man; and that Righteousness God in
his infinite Wisdom has found out to discharge us guilty and condemned
Sinners, and to justify us in his sight. Hence St. Paul renounced all his own
Righteousness, that he might be found in the Righteousness of God which is by
Faith in Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10.

Obj. But say some Paul speaks only of that Righteousness which he had whilst a
Pharisee, or of the Righteousness of the Law. He intends not ( says Mr.
Williams, p. 204, 205.) Gospel-sincerity, but those Jewish thing, or what they
boasted of* And again he says, It was not Gospel-holiness which he counted
dung or loss.

Answ. It Is strange this Man should adventure to give such a sense of this
Text, when at the same time he would ^ain have his Reader believe he owns the
imputed Righteousness of Christ for our Justification, p. 202. It Is evident he
does deny that the Righteousness of Christ alone is imputed to us for
Justification, as being the only Matter that justifies us from all things, and
that without any Works done by us, either in respect of answering the Rules of
Law or Gospel, though never so sincerely performed. All indeed that I can find
he means, is this, i. e. That Christ's Merits are the Cause of the Gospel Rule
and Promise, and his Righteousness imputed is the Cause for which we are
justified and saved, when we have got new Hearts, and answer the Rule of the
Gospel in Holiness and sincere Obedience. And thus though imperfect Obedience
to the Law was Dogs meat; yet imperfect Obedience to the Rule of the Gospel or
Promise thereof, if sincere, is the Children's Bread; nay, that which they
ought to seek Justification by, and to desire to be found in. (If this Man's
Doctrine may be received,) it should appear by him that Christ's Righteousness
imputed, and our Gospel-obedience mixed together, justifies us: But the chief
part is our Conformity to the Rule of sincere Obedience, and Christ's
Righteousness, cannot do by Faith alone without this of ours.

2. But Soul know, and be not deceived, this Text has always been urged by
sound Protestant Writers, as one of the Pillars of the Doctrine of
Justification by the Righteousness of Christ applied by Faith alone. St. Paul
does not only disclaim his Righteousness he had before Conversion, or his
Obedience to the Law in point of Justification; but he speaks in the present
Tense, What things were gain to me, those have I counted loss for Christ: But
that which he adds, is more, I do count all things loss. He speaks, as our
Divines note, of all, both past, long since, and also now present, whether
Righteousness of his own, in Obedience to the Law, or Works done by him under
the Gospel, all he counted as dung in comparison of the Knowledge of Christ and
his Righteousness, or the Righteousness of God which is by Faith.

3. It Is to be noted how Mr. Williams and Bellarmine do jump together, and
agree in their Exposition of this Text: The latter says, That by Righteousness
which is of the Law, are meant Works of Obedience done through the Knowledge of
the Law by the only strength of natural Abilities before his Conversion. To
which Chemnitius and other Protestant Writers answer, That Paul rejected not
only his Works before his Conversion, which he signifies, speaking of the time
past, v. 7. but also the Works of his present Condition; yea, doubtless, and I
do count all things but loss.

Mr. Williams says, They were the Jewish Privileges, and that conceited
Christless Righteousness which he once valued: But says he, a Gospel-holiness
is not here intended; and that still by speaking in the present Tense, Paul
means what was past, says he. Pray observe they both exclude the Righteousness
of the Law, done by natural or legal Abilities; and they both agree to include
an inherent Righteousness, performed by gracious Assistance under the Gospel.
This Man is I hope no Papist, though he strives, it is plain, to maintain one of
the grossest parts of Popery, and that part God raised up holy Luther
principally to detect. Christians look about you, for you are greatly concerned.

4. Consider that the Apostle positively disclaims all Righteousness of
Obedience done by the Creature in Justification before God, and did rely on
the Righteousness of God: For if he sets our Righteousness, or the
Righteousness of the Creature in direct opposition to the Righteousness of God,
which is by Faith; then that which is the Righteousness of God applied by
Faith, is not the Righteousness of the Creature, though never so sincerely
performed, but the former is true: Ergo,

5. It Is such a Righteousness Paul here intended, that he desired to be found
in both at Death and Judgment; but durst he, think you, desire to be found in
any Righteousness of his own at that Hour, or in that great and dreadful Day?
As to this, take what Reverend Downham, and others say, When a Man shall be
summoned to appear before the Judgment Seat of God, shall seriously consider
with himself what he shall oppose to the Accusations of Satan, to the
Convictions of the Law, to the Testimony of his own Conscience, confessing
himself to be a most wretched Sinner, to the Judgment of God, and most
righteous Judge, if he look back on his own Conversation, as having nothing to
trust to but his own Righteousness, he shall find sufficient Master of Despair.
He may say with Anselm, Terret me vita mea, etc. My Life does terrify me.
Alas! what Man is fully able to say he is perfect, or that he sincerely has
done all his Duty, in respect of that milder Law of Obedience which they talk
of?

Sirs, there is no way in order to Peace of Conscience for us, but to do as
Paul did, i. e. renounce all our own inherent Righteousness and Obedience, and
fly to the Doctrine of Justification by the Grace of God, through the complete
Righteousness of Jesus Christ received by Faith only.

For while a Man (says he) retains this Opinion, that he can be justified by
his own Works, or inherent Righteousness, he can never be soundly persuaded
that his Righteousness is sufficient for that purpose; but has just Cause not
only to doubt, but also to despair: And this is the Cause of that Popish
Opinion, That no Man without special Revelation can be assured of the Remission
of his Sins in this Life, Downham^o^ Just, p. 202. Brethren, some of the
Papists themselves have on a Deathbed been forced to seek relief, by
renouncing all their own Works and Obedience under distress of Conscience, and
to fly to the Righteousness of Christ, only they kept it close to themselves,
lest that gap being opened, their Trade should fall to the ground, as appears
by the Answer of Stephen Gardyner to the Bishop of Chichester, Foxe's Acts and
Mon. Vol. 2. p. 46. Take two or three Arguments further here, viz.

1. If that Righteousness which is the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith,
in opposition to the Righteousness of the Creature does justify us; then all
Works done by the Creature are excluded in point of Justification in God's
sight: But the former is true; Ergo, all Works done by the Creature are
excluded, etc.

2. If Paul, nor no other Child of God durst, or dare to be found in any
Righteousness of their own at Death or Judgment; then Works done by us, or
sincere Obedience justify us not; but the former is true; therefore no Works
of ours, nor sincere Obedience does justify us in God's sight.

3 Arg. That Doctrine that holds a Christian down under slavish Fear, by
grounding his Justification on his own Works of Holiness and sincere Obedience,
is not of God; but the Doctrine of Justification by our own Work of Holiness or
sincere Obedience, holds a Christian down under slavish Fear, by grounding his
Justification on his Works of Holiness and sincere Obedience; therefore that
Doctrine is not of God. Christians take heed what Books you read, if you would
have a sound and steadfast ground of Hope, Peace and Comfort; nay, not only have
the Joy of God's Salvation, but Salvation it self; For if you build on your own
Righteousness or Obedience, and not on the Righteousness of God, which is
received by Faith only, you will fall into Hell, by stumbling at the same
stumbling-stone the Jews did, Romans 9. 32. Chap. 10. 2.

8 Arg. All Works done by the Creature are excluded in point of Justification
of a Sinner in the sight of God, because we are justified by that Righteousness
by which the Justice of God is satisfied, and his Wrath appeased. That
Righteousness that delivers us alone from Condemnation, and the Curse of the
Law, does justify us and none else; and is not that the Righteousness of
Christ? Is not he that is acquitted from Condemnation and Death, put into a
state of Justification and Life?

What is it that these new Doctors talk of? How is Christ's Righteousness made
our legal Righteousness, and yet not our Evangelical Righteousness? If the
Righteousness of Christ be imputed to us, as that which when applied by Faith,
delivers us from Condemnation, Wrath and Death, certainly we need no other
Righteousness to justify us in God's sight unto eternal Life.

Obj. But Unbelief is against the Gospel, what Defense against this?

Answ. The Person that we speak of, has Faith, he believes in Christ,
therefore the Gospel charges him not, and the Law cannot: Here is a Pardon, if
you receive it, you are acquitted: Here is a Plaster, if you apply it, you are
healed. The Man receives the Pardon, applies the Plaster; he is by the Grace of
God helped to believe, he is therefore delivered from Death, and put into a
State of Justification, and shall not come into Condemnation, Romans 8* 1.

2. No Man is acquitted from the Charge of any Sin, either against the Law or
Gospel, till he believes; but when he believes, when he applies the Merits and
Righteousness of Christ, he is justified from all Things, from all Sins of what
Nature soever they are. Must we by our sincere Obedience make God a
Compensation for the Sins we have committed against the Gospel, and free
Tenders of his Grace, or for slighting the Word of Reconciliation? etc. Has
not Christ satisfied God's Justice for all our Sins; and when we believe, are
we not thereby justified from all Sins committed against the Gospel, as well as
against the Law? Have we any Plea at God's Bar, but that of the Merits of
Christ, and his Righteousness only, let our Sin or Guilt be what it will?

Quest. But how does it appear a Man does believe in Christ indeed.

Answ. Why his Faith, if true, will make him a new Creature, 'twill purify his
Heart, it will lead him into sincere and universal Obedience; but it is Christ's
Righteousness still nevertheless that justifies him in God's sight, though his
Obedience and inherent Righteousness may justify his Faith, or evidence the
Truth of Grace to his own Conscience and to Men also. But,

Obj. God does require an Evangelical Righteousness in all that do believe this
Righteousness Christ is not, nor is it the Righteousness of Christ; he may be
said to be our legal Righteousness, but our Evangelical Righteousness he is
not. And so far as we are righteous with any Righteousness, so far we are
justified by it; for according unto this Evangelical Righteousness we must be
tried, if we have it we shall be acquitted, and if we have it not we shall be
condemned; there is therefore a Justification according to it.

To this, take reverend Dr. Owen's Answer, According to some Authors, or
Maintainers of this Opinion, I see not, says he, but that the Lord Christ is
as much our Evangelical Righteousness as he is our Legal: for our Legal
Righteousness, he is not in their Judgment by a proper Imputation of his
Righteousness unto us, but by the Communication of the Fruits of what he did
and suffered for us: And so he is our Evangelical Righteousness also; for our
Sanctification is an Effect or Fruit of what he did and suffered for us, Ephesians.
5. 25, 26. Tit. 2. 10.

2. None have this Evangelical Righteousness, but those who are in order of
Nature at least justified before they actually have it; for it is that which is
required of all that do believe, and are justified; and we need not much
enquire how a Man is justified after he is justified.

3. God has not appointed this Personal Righteousness, in order to our
Justification before him in this Life, though he have appointed it to evidence
our Justification before others, etc.

4. If we are in any sense justified hereby in the sight of God, we have
whereof to boast before him: Though we may not absolutely in respect of Merit;
yet we may so comparatively, and in respect of others, who cannot make the same
Plea for their Justification: but all boasting is excluded: And it will not
relieve, to say, that this Personal Righteousness is of the Free Grace and Gift
of God unto some, and not unto others; for we must plead it as our Duty, and
not as God's Grace. See his further Answer, Dr. Owen of Just. p. 221, 222. To
close this, take this Argument:

If by that Righteousness of Christ which is out of us, though imputed to us,
the Justice of God is fully satisfied, we are justified; then all Works done by
us, or inherent in us, are excluded in our Justification before God: But by
that Righteousness of Christ which is out of us, though imputed to us, the
Justice of God is satisfied; therefore all Works done by us, or inherent in us,
are excluded in our Justification before God.

Finally, says Bellarmine, Nothing more frequently does the Scripture testify
than that the Passion and Death of Christ was a full and perfect Satisfaction
for Sins. Further he says, God does indeed not accept, as a true Satisfaction
for Sin, any Justice but that which is infinite, because Sin is an infinite
Offense, etc. De Just. l. 2. Now the Sufferings of Christ and his Righteousness
only, is of an infinite Value, ours is not; therefore Christ's Righteousness
only, and not ours, is a true Satisfaction for Sin. Our Adversaries sometimes
are forced to speak the Truth.

(...) Arg. All Works done by the Creature, are excluded, etc. Because it is by
the Obedience of one Man that many are made righteous, that is Jesus Christ, he
is made of God unto us Righteousness, etc. Romans 5. 18, 19. 1 Cor. 1. 30. But
our inherent Righteousness is of many; i. e. every Man's own sincere Obedience
that obtains it.

10 Arg. All Works done by the Creature, are excluded in point of
Justification* I prove thus; If any one Man was justified without Works or
sincere Obedience, or through Faith only; then all Works of Obedience, etc. are
excluded: But the Thief on the C^oss was justified without Works of Obedience;
and so are all Infants that die in Infancy that are saved; the Matter of
Justification is one and the same; the Balsam that cures our Malady is all one
in Infants and in Adult Persons; it is Christ's Death, Christ's Blood, the
Merits of Jesus Christ; or it is his active and passive Obedience, which is our
only Righteousness to discharge us from Sin and Condemnation: Though the Mode
or Manner of the Application thereof may be different to the Adult, it is by
Faith only; to Infants in a more secret and hidden Manner, not known to us.

Nay, Abraham, David and Paul, were not justified by inherent Righteousness,
but by Faith without Works of Obedience; and as Abraham was justified, so are
all his spiritual and true Seed; to them, and every one of them, is Faith
imputed to Justification or Righteousness, even by Faith alone without Works as
Paul proves, Romans 4. 3, 4, 5.

11 Arg. Is, Because Christ is tendered or offered to Sinners as Sinners; not
as righteous Persons, but as ungodly ones, without any previous Qualifications
required of them to fit themselves to receive Christ; they are all as poor,
lost, undone, weary, and heavy laden Sinners required to believe in Christ, or
venture their Souls upon him, though they have no Money, no Righteousness; if
they have, they must cast it away, in point of Dependence, Trust, or
Justification: These are they, Christ came to call; these are they he invites
to come to him; these are they he came to seek and to save, who see nothing of
Good in themselves; but contrariwise, are sensible of their filthy Hearts and
abominable Lives: And yet though it be thus, if they come to Christ, believe
truly in Christ, they shall at that very Instant be justified, which Faith or
Divine Grace will soon make them holy and sanctify them; for holy Habits are
at that very instant infused into them, though Sanctification is a gradual
Work: This being so, it follows all Works done by the Creature are excluded, in
point of Justification of a Sinner before God. What said Paul to the ungodly
Jailor, when he cried out, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? Believe on the
Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved and thy house, Act. 16. 31. The Apostle did
not put him upon doing to be saved, but upon believing. But O how contrary is
this to the Doctrine some Men preach now adays; they tell Sinners what they
must do, what good Fruits they must bring forth, and this before the Tree is
good, or they have closed with Christ, or have real Union with him; nay, bid
the People take heed they do not too soon believe on Christ or venture on
Christ. Sirs, you cannot too soon believe in Christ, I mean truly believe; I
don't say you should get a presumptuous Faith, but true Faith: But is it not
strange a Minister should be heard lately to say, A Man must get a new Heart
before he can be justified. I thought a Man could not have a new Heart before
he had true Faith: Is not a new Heart one of the absolute Promises of the New
Covenant, Ezekiel. 36. 26. Can any thing, short of Almighty Power, make the Heart
new, or form the Image of God in the Soul; or can a Man that has a new Heart
be under Condemnation, for are not all in that Condition who are not actually
justified? Or can a dead Man quicken himself, or dead Works please God? Or the
Fruit be good before the Tree is good? Are not all that are new Creatures in
Christ Jesus, and have Union with him, 2 Cor. 5. 17.

12 Arg. With which I shall conclude the Proof of the Doctrine. (though I might
mention many more, to prove all Works done by the Creature, or Obedience of
his, are in this Case excluded, etc.) It is, because if a Man should so walk as
to know nothing of himself, i.e. be so righteous, or so sincere in his
Obedience, as not to have his Conscience to accuse, or reproach him; yet he
cannot thereby be justified. See what Paul says, Though I know nothing of my
self, yet am I not thereby justified, 1 Cor. 4. 4. Though he had kept a
Conscience void of Offense toward God, and toward Men; yet in the Point of
Justification, he renounces all his own Obedience and Righteousness that was
inherent in him. Durst holy Job depend upon his Sincerity, or venture in that,
to stand at God's Tribunal? Though he could plead Uprightness against the false
Charge of his three friends, and with much Confidence persevere therein,
justifying his Sincerity with his Faith and Hope in God; against their
Accusatio^s, he showed his Faith ^y his Works, and stands on his Justification
of himself against Hypocrisy. But at length he is called into the immediate
Presence of God, to plead his own Cause; not now as it was stated between
himself and his Friends before, Whether he were sincere or not. The Question
was now reduced to this, i. e. on that grounds he might, or could be justified
in the sight of God; and God to ^^epa^e him in this Case, and to show him what
to plead at his Bar, graciously ^anifested himself unto him. And quickly now he
comes to see all his former ^leas, as Dr. Owen notes, of Faith, Hope, and
sincere Obedience, would not avail ^^m; but he is made to fly under the deepest
Self-abasement and Abhorrency (...) Sovereign Grace and Mercy; For then Job
answered the Lord, and said, I ^m vi^e, what shall I answer thee? I will lay
mine hand upon my mouth: Once (...) I spoken, but I will not answer; yea twice,
but I will proceed no further, Job (...). 3, 4, 5. I have heard of thee by the
hearing of the Ear; but now mine Eye ^eth thee: Wherefore I abbor my self, and
repent in Dust and Ashes. Dr. Owen.

How, Job, abhor thy self! that art so holy, so sincere, such an upright ^an!
What is all the Beauty of thy inherent Holiness, and sincere Obedience ^ecome
nothing to thee? Is it as Dung now? Dare thou not appear before ^od in it,
not stand at his Bar thereby to be justified? No, no, he saw that here was Sin
cleaving to his best Duties, and that he was vile in God's sight. Sure th^^
agrees (...) with Mr. Daniel William's New Doctrine: It was not Go^^el-holiness
which Paul counted Dung, says he. No doubt Job's Righteousness was ^he Fruits
of Faith as well as Paul's, and purified his Heart too; who says, (...) knew
that his Redeemer lived, Job 14* But yet for all this Holiness. Up^ightness,
and sincere Obedience, he abhors himself, and repents he ever had (...) Conceit
of the Worth of his own Righteousness.

Let a Man place himself in the Condition wherein Job was to stand before the
Bar of God's Justice; and let him attend to the Charge he has against him; and
let him consider what will be his best Plea at God's Tribunal, that he may be
justified. I do not believe, (says the reverend Doctor,) that any Man living
has more encouraging grounds to plead for an Interest in his own Faith and
Obedience in his Justification before God than Job had: Alas, we must all say
with David, Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant; for in thy sight shall
(...) Man living be justified. This must be our Plea when we come to die, i. e.
My Trust is in Christ, in his Blood, in his Death, in his Righteousness: This
is only pleadable now, and in the Judgment-Day; this will give ease to a
convinced, terrisied Conscience, that knows the Nature, Holiness, Purity, and
Justice of God: We must say with Anselm, My Conscience has deserved Damnation,
and my Repentance is not sufficient for Satisfaction; but certain it is that
the Mercy abounds above all Offenses. The Prophet Isaiah cries out, He was
un^done, notwithstanding his sincere Obedience, because a Man of unclean lip^
Isa. 6. When the Day of Judgment or Death comes, all Hands will be weak and all
Hearts faint: Confidence in our own Uprightness will then fail (...) because no
Works can then be found to answer the Righteousness of God; (...) thou should
mark Iniquity, who shall stand? O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto the^ but
unto us Confusion of face; though I know nothing of my self, yet am I not ther^
by justified. No, no, he was justified by the Righteousness of God, by Christ's
sinle^^ Obedience, and not by his own imperfect though sincere Obedience;
therefore all Works done by the Creature are excluded: It Is evident the God^^
at the Judgment-Day will not plead their own Righteousness; but contra^^^wise
will then renounce it in this respect, as appears by that, in Matthew. 25. 3^
Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee; thirsty, and gave thee (...)
etc. They will rather blush, and be ashamed to hear any mention of their Work^
or of their Obedience, than to plead it at that Day: All the good Worl^ which
they have done, will be swallowed up in the Admiration of God's Fre^ and
Infinite Grace: But so much as to the Proof of the Doctrine. I shall (...) with
a brief Word of Application.

Application.
This reproves all such as go about to eclipse the Doctrine of Free Gra^^ or of
Justification by Faith only, and plead for sincere Obedience, and (...) Grace
and Works together: Also it may serve to convince all Men? That su^^ Teachers,
however cried up, are not true Gospel Ministers; and therefo^^ should be
avoided; though they should speak with a Tongue like A^^gels.

1 Caution. Do not think, O Soul, that thy own Righteousness does just^^ thee,
through Christ's Merits; or that Christ's Righteousness is thy (...)
Righteousness, and not thy Evangelical. No, no, he is thy whole Saviour^ it is
Christ's own Arm that brought Salvation, it is not our own Righteousne^^ joined
or coupled with the Merits and Righteousness of Christ; but his Personal
Righteousness only received by Faith. And,

2. Take heed you do not put Faith it self in the room (as your Act, or as a
Divine Habit, or as the Product thereof) of perfect Obedience; for it is
Christ's Righteousness that is put in the place or room of that perfect
Obedience which God required of us in Point of Justification. Faith only
justifies, in respect of the Object it apprehends and takes hold of.

3. Tremble ye who trust in your Moral, or Gospel-Obedience, your Acts of
Mercy, or good Deeds, and holy Lives. Tremble ye who rest on your Du^ies, who
glory in your knowledge, and outward Privileges; you fast, and ^ray, and hear
Sermons, and so you may, and go to Hell at last; notwithstanding, these things
you must do, but yet not seek to be justified thereby; do them as Duties in
point of Performance; but lay them down in point of Dependence.

4. Here is Comfort for Sinners; but if you are self-righteous Persons, or go
about like the Jews of old, to establish your own Righteousness, down to Hell
you will fall, Romans 10. 2. This Doctrine will support you that are weak, and
doubt for-want of inherent Righteousness, that want a Righteousness of your
own; see here is a Righteousness, take hold of it, A Robe of Righteousness, Put
it on, Believe on Christ, as poor Sinners come to him, you that have to Money,
no Worth, no Merit, no Righteousness, this Wine and Milk of Justification and
Pardon is for you: Cry to God to help you to believe; Christ is the Author of
your Faith, it is the Gift of God, it is a Grace of the Spirit; Do you see you
are wounded? Look to Christ, Believe, and thou shall be saved, Mark 16. 16.
Joh. 3. 15, 16. If thou can not come to God as a Saint, come as a Sinner;
nay, as a Sinner thou must come, and may come.

Obj. But this Doctrine is decried for Antinomianism.

Answ. They know not what Antimonanism is, that thus brand us, as hereafter I
shall God-assisting prove. If this is to be an Antimonian, we must be all such,
and let them mock on; the Lord open their Eyes: We are for the Law as Paul was,
and for Holiness and sincere Obedience, as any Men in the World; but we would
have Men act from right Principles, and to a right end: We would have Men act
in Holiness, from a Principle of Faith, from a Principle of Spiritual Life, be
first married to Christ that they may bring forth Fruit to God, Romans 7. 4.

We preach to you, Sinners, that Jesus Christ will entertain you, if you come
to him, bid you welcome, and not cast you off, because of the Greatness of your
Sins, though you have no Qualifications to recommend you to him. Would you wash
your selves from your Sins, and then come to the Fountain of his Blood to be
washed; we hold forth Christ to be your whole Savior, and that he is set forth
as the Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, whom if you close with, and
believe in, you shall be justified: We tell you God justifies the Ungodly, i.
e. that they are so before justified.

Nor is ou^ Doctrine any other, than what all sound Protestants have always
contended for; nay, which the Church of England in her 39 Articles does assert,
viz. Imputed Righteousness and Justification only for the Merits of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ by Faith, and not for our own Works and Deservings,
and that we are justified by Faith only; and that Works done before the Grace
of Christ, and the Inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasing to God,
forasmuch as they spring not from Faith in Christ, neither do they make Men
meet to receive Grace, etc.

Let me exhort you not to receive for Truth all things that you find asserted
in some Men's Books, Sermons, and Writings, though recommended by such Men you
have so great a Veneration for. I hope some of those Ministers that have set
their Hands to Mr. William' s late Book, will see Cause to repent of their rash
Act, and great Inadvertency; for we cannot see but that the said Book brings in
another Gospel, or is a Subversion of the Gospel (though the unwary Reader may
not soon discover the Poison that lies hid in it) and it is full of hard, and
uncouth, or unintelligible Terms, Notions and Expressions, not formerly known
to the Christian World: It Is strange to me that he should intimate and hold
forth the Gospel to be a Law, or Command of Duty, as a Condition with the
Sanction of Threats upon Nonperformance, and Promises of Rewards upon
Performance of sincere Obedience; for if Sincerity of Grace and Holiness be not
the Condition of that which he often calls the Rule of the Promise, which he
nevertheless says is not the Precept, I understand him not: Does he not mean a
Man must be holy, sincere, or a New Creature, before he ventures on the Promise
of the Gospel, or can be justified, which is the Error my Text opposes; as if
the free Promise of the Grace of God in laying hold on Christ and his
Righteousness justifies us not, but that we must get some inherent
Qualifications of Holiness, as the Rule of the Promise, before we venture upon
it, or throw our selves upon Jesus Christ, and so must receive him as Saints
and not as Sinners; which is directly contrary to what all our true Protestant
Writers and Modern Divines have all along asserted. The Papists say, a Man must
be inherently righteous before he can be declared just; and that Faith
justifies, as it infuses such a Righteousness in us: And this Man says but
little else, if I understand him; i. e. a Man must answer the Rule of the
Gospel-Promise, asserting that the Gospel does judicially determine a
Conformity to the Rule thereof; and when God forgives, he judicially declares a
Man has true Faith, and by Faith he means doubtless more than a laying hold on
Christ, viz. the making good the Baptismal Covenant, i. e. to love, serve, and
sincerely to yield Obedience to the Gospel; so that Faith must by him be taken
in a large and comprehensive manner: And that before God declares us righteous
to Justification, he looks whether or no we have fully answered the Conditions
(according to the Doctrine these Men preach) and finding the Creature has done
that, God judicially gives the Promise in a way of Reward; and the Obedience
being sincere, though imperfect, it is accepted as far forth as perfect
Obedience would have been (could it have been performed) under the Law of
Works; so that still inhereut Righteousness is the Condition (...) our
Justification before the holy God, and not the Righteousness of Christ: Away
with this Error.

Brethren, This New Law it seems can give Life upon Obedience thereto, the
first being taken away; but if by the Law, any Law, a Man might be justified,
Christ is dead in vain: For as one Law, so all Laws of Works since Man has
sinned, utterly fail, and are unable to justify us in God's sight. For as some
learned Men have observed, the Greek Word is not [ the Law] but [ a Law.] Let
it be what Law or Rule of Righteousness it will, that requires perfect or
imperfect Obedience, it will not do, Gal. 3. 11. For the just shall live by
Faith: Justification and Life comes only that way, and not by Works of
Obedience we have done.

And truly to talk of sincere Obedience, when performed by an unregenerate
Person, it is strange Doctrine. Sincerity must only be looked for in him, who is
renewed by the Grace of God: It Is as impossible for an unregenerate Person to
perform sincere Obedience (if we speak of Gospel-Sincerity) as it is for a
Believer to perform perfect Obedience to the Law of Works.

Therefore Sinners, though it is your Duty to reform your Lives, and leave your
abominable Sins, which often bring heavy Judgments upon you in this World, and
expose you to eternal Wrath in the World to come; yet know that all that you
can do, will fail in point of your Acceptance and Justification in God's
sight, or to save your Souls: Your present Work and Business is to believe in
Jesus Christ, to look to him, who only can renew his sacred Image in your
Souls, and make you New Creatures, which must be done, or you perish. O cry
that he would help your Unbelief: Come, venture your Souls on Christ's
Righteousness; Christ is able to save you, though you are never so great
Sinners. Come to him, throw your selves at the Feet of Jesus: Look to Jesus,
who came to seek and save them that were lost; If any man thirst, let him come
to me and drink. Joh. 7, 37, 38. You may have Water of Life freely. Do not say
I want Qualifications or a Meetness to come to Christ. Sinner, do thou
thirst? Do thou see a want of Righteousness? It Is not a Righteousness; but
it is a sense of the want of Righteousness, which is rather the Qualification,
thou should look at: Christ has Righteousness sufficient to cloth you;
Bread of Life to feed you, Grace to adorn you; or whatsoever you want, it is to
be had in him. We tell you there is help in him, Salvation in him, through the
Propitiation in his Blood you must be justified, which is by Faith alone.

Know that God justifies the Ungodly; not by making them first inherently
righteous, nor are they ungodly any more after justified: The Faith of the
Operation of God will soon purify your Hearts, and cleanse your Lives; this
Grace will teach you to deny all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present evil World. We do not tell you,
you must be holy, and then believe in Jesus Christ; but that you must believe
in him, that you may be holy. You must first have Union with him, before you
can bring forth Fruit to God; you must act from Life, and not for Life.

Obj. But O it is hard thus to believe; to be ungodly, and yet to believe; to
see no Holiness of our own, no divine Habits planted in us: Had we some degree
of Sanctification, or Righteousness of our own, we could then believe.

Answ. Is not Christ able to save you, or is he not willing to save you, unless
you are Co-workers and Copartners with him in your Salvation? Or are you
unwilling to be saved, unless you might share with him in the Glory of your
Salvation? Is it hard for you to believe the highest Testimony and Witness that
ever was born to any truth? Cannot you believe the Report of the Gospel, or
receive the Record God has given of his Son? Is resting on Christ hard? Cannot
you beg for Bread rather than perish? Cannot you drink when thirsty, when you
are bid to do it freely?

We say the Gospel is not a conditional Covenant of Obedience; or that Faith,
and Holiness, or Faith, and Good Works, are the Condition of it, denying we are
justified by any Works of ours, as a subordinate Righteousness to the
Righteousness of Christ, or that we are justified for Christ's sake only; but
not that his Righteousness is imputed to us also, as our Sins were imputed or
laid upon him. We say that Faith does not justify as an Act, nor as a Habit,
or from any Worth there is in that, it being only as a hand to apply the
Remedy. We say, Faith is a Fruit of Christ's Purchase; and that he who spared
not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, will much more give us all
things, that is, Grace here, and Glory hereafter: He that gave us the greatest
Gift, will not deny to his Elect ones the lesser Gift.

And now know all you Pharisaical Persons, this Doctrine will pull down your
high Thoughts and Imaginations, and abase your Pride.

To you that are Believers, Oh! admire Free Grace; lift Christ up who died for
you, the Just for the Unjust, who bore your Sins, who was made sin for us that
knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. He gave
himself for you, and has given Grace, the Fruit of his Death, and himself to
you. O labor to be a holy People; live to him that died for you, and rose
again.

To conclude, Is there any Sinner here? Are you ungodly, and in a wr^tched
Condition in your own Eyes? Are you weary and heavy laden? Come to Christ, lift
up your Heads: For to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies
the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness.

POSTSCRIPT.
REader, I have now given thee the Substance of the two first Sermons preached
on this Text; and that which follows, contains an Answer to all the main
Objections brought against this Doctrine; particularly that of the Apostle
James, about Works justifying, and not Faith only. And if this meets with kind
Reception, and I have Encouragement, I shall publish two Sermons more (God
willing) and fully demonstrate, That Justification is by the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, or by Grace alone; and the Nature of Imputation opened,
together how we are to understand the change of Persons: Wherein I shall
produce the Testimony of the ancient Fathers, and a multitude of our faithful
Modern Divines, and worthy late Writers; that so you may see we plead for no
New Doctrine, but the very same that all Good Men and Orthodox Christians, in
every Age have maintained; which will, I hope, be of great Advantage to the
Church of God. And also show you how Faith is concerned in our Justification,
or is said to justify, and how not; together with the Nature of that Faith. As
also the Difficulty and Excellency of that Faith that is accounted for
Righteousness: Likewise the horrid Evil and Danger of the Sin of Unbelief; and
Mr. Williams's Book and Doctrine further considered.

Reader, there are some Faults that have escaped the Press, which spoil the
Sense; Pray be pleased to correct these following with you Pen.

PAge 14. Line 27. for true read new. p. 15. l. 1. for no more r. no where. p.
15. l. 41. for that Christ, r. not that Christ. p. 24. l. 22. blot out indeed.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
A Vindication of the Protestant Doctrine concerning Justification, and of its
Preachers and Professors, from the unjust Charge of Antinomianism. In a Letter
from a Minister in the City, to a Minister in the Country. London, Printed for
Dorman Newman, at the King' s-Arms in the Poultrey, in the Year, 1692.

MR. Rutherford's Letters, the Third Edition, now divided in Three Parts; The
First containing those which were written from (...) where he was confined by a
Sentence of the High Commission, drawn forth against him, partly upon the
account of his declining them, partly upon the accoun^ of his Nonconformity.
The Second and Third containing some, which were written from Anworth, before
he was by the Persecution thrust from his Ministry; and others upon Occasions
afterward, from St. Andrews, London, etc. Printed for Dorman Newman at the
King' s-Arms in the Poultrey.


