THE LIFE Of that Most Illustrious PRINCE, Charles V. Late DUKE of Lorrain and
Bar, GENERALISSIMO Of the Imperial Armies.

Rendered into ENGLISH From the Copy lately Printed at Vienna, Written by a
Person of Quality, and a Great Officer in the Imperial Army.

DEDICATED To the KING's Most Excellent MAJESTY.

Printed by Edw. Jones; and Published by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall.
M.DC.XCI.

To the King.
AS the Memory of a Hero may Naturally Claim Your Majesty's Protection, so none
ever had more Right to it, then the Great General here described. Succeeding
Ages will admire his Fortune, and his Conduct; but the present is justly taken
up in Celebrating Yours. His Prudence, and his Valor we find in You Excelled,
and Success always attends Your Person.

May that Providence which has always shown a Peculiar Care of Your
Preservation, be still a Mighty Guardian against Yours, and the Nations
Enemies; and after a Long Series of Happy Victories, may You be Crowned with
Immortality; Which are the hearty Prayers of,

May it Please Your Majesty, Your Majesty's most Faithful and Devoted Subject
WILSON.

THE LIFE OF Charles V. DUKE of Lorrain and Bar, And Generalissimo of all the
Imperial Troops. THE FIRST BOOK.
THE House of Lorrain is a House so well known, that 'twill be needless to
enumerate so Ancient a Train of Successions. I shall content my self with
acquainting you, that at the beginning of the Age last past, it divided it self
into two Branches, by the two Sons of Rene II. Duke of Lorrain and Bar. Which
two Sons of Rene were Anthony and Claudius.

The last, who was the Younger Brother, went into France, and Espoused
Antonette of Bourbon, Daughter of Francis of Bourbon, Count of Vendosm; and
signalized himself by so many renowned Actions under the Reign of Francis the
First, that that Renowned Monarch, who no less rewarded Men of the Sword, then
Persons eminent for Learning, erected in his Favor the Territory of Guise into
a Dukedom. And from that time the Princes of that Branch were called Dukes of
Guise.

Anthony remained in Lorrain with the Eldest Branch, that enjoyed the Dukedom;
and he had a Son called Francis who succeeded him. Charles the III. succeeded.
Francis, and had three Sons; Henry who had only two Daughters, Nicole and
Claudia; Charles, afterward made a Cardinal, and Francis Count of Vaudemont.
This Count left two Sons, Charles the IV. and Duke Francis. Charles the IV. was
Married with the Princess Nicole his Cousin, by whom he had no Children: And
Duke Francis, who was Cardinal, Espoused the Princess Claudia, from whom
descended Charles the V. the Hero whose Life we are now to write.

Charles the IV. touching whom it is necessary that I should say something, was
Generous, and Hardy. He had a lively and stirring Genius. He was civil and
complaisant, well made as to his Person, in undertaking Bold, indefatigable in
Labor, and patient in Adversity. But with all these great Qualities, and an
infinite number of others, he was so wavering in his Resolutions, and sometimes
so great an Enemy to Counsels, which they who most sincerely Espoused his
Interest gave him, that he became the most unfortunate Prince of his Age.

He succeeded Henry his Uncle; and during the time that he had the most
peaceable Enjoyment of his Territories, he embroiled himself with France, which
precipated him into so many Misfortunes, that he could never extricate himself;
and this was the Original.

The President de Bret, Intendant of Justice in the City of Mets, had made a
Decree touching some Pretensions of the Country of Messin, which he maintained
to belong to the Bishopric of the capital City of that Country. Though this
Affair was of no grand Importance, Charles however took Fire at it; and without
foreseeing the events, having made the Emperor sensible that this was an Affair
which concerned him, because of the Bishopric of Vic, which he then enjoyed,
and which was distinguished from that of Mets, he made him this Proposal, That
if for the maintenance of his Privileges, he would send some Regiments, to
take up their Winter Quarters in that Country; he on the other side, would
engage to furnish him underhand with what Money might be necessary to fortify
Moyenvic, which was a curb to the City of Mets, that by this means he might be
in a condition to resist the Enterprises of the King of France.

Lewis the XIII, who Reigned at that time, was then busi'd at the Siege of
Rochel. So that the Emperor, who believed he might make his Advantage of the
opportunity, sent such a Force into the Bishopric of Vic, which he thought
necessary: And set himself to fortify Moyenvic. The Duke Arms also of his
side, under the pretense of defending his Territories. But though this feigned
Precaution appeared very lawful, Lewis XIII. soon saw through it; and therefore
after a Years Siege, having reduced Rochel, he was fully resolved to revenge
himself upon the Duke, ere he turned his Arms elsewhere.

Madam de Chevreuse, who was Married to a Prince of the House of Lorrain, at
that time was fled to Nanci, being compelled to absent her self from the Court
of France, and from the Kingdom, for certain Intrigues which all the World
knows. This Princess, concerning whom it was said Procurat. Nani.
, That she kindled the Fire of Love in the Heart of all those Princes with whom
she went to Negotiate, during the time that she carried every where the Fire of
War against France, being extremely disgusted by reason of her Banishment,
forgot nothing to animate the Duke against Lewis the XIII; and she had no great
trouble to bring her Design to pass, the Duke being already sufficiently
disposed to it. For in short, how little considerable the Usurpation in
dispute, was, yet the consequence might prove very pernicious. And indeed, this
resentment was very natural, it being no great satisfaction for a Prince to see
that any one should usurp upon his Rights.

In the interim, the Duke not being strong enough to resist the King of France,
he thought it best to Dissemble, until a more favorable Conjuncture should
present it self, than that, wherein his Affairs then were; and this Policy had
such good Success, that Lewis the XIII. beginning no longer to distrust him,
turned his Forces toward Italy, that he might assist the Duke of Mantua, who
had War with the Emperor.

During the time that these things past in Italy, Monsieur the Kings only
Brother, dissatisfied at the too great Favor of Cardinal Richelieu, who then
absolutely Governed France, departed the Kingdom, and withdrew himself into
Lorrain, to the Dukes Court, where he Espoused, sometime after, Gaston John
Baptiste of France Duke of Orleans, Espoused Margaret of Lorrain at Nancy in
the year 1632.
in Second Marriage, the Princess Margaret, youngest Daughter of the Count of
Vaudemont, without the Consent of the King his Brother. The Duke, who, had his
Reasons for managing the Humor of Lewis the XIII. informs him of the
retirement of the Duke of Orleans; but the King nevertheless would not lay
aside his Suspicions, that he held Intelligence with that Prince. And that
which confirmed him in this Suspicion was, That the Duke had at that time on
Foot an Army of more than Fourteen Thousand Men. This Warlike Preparation which
was considerable, and gave him a Jealousy, obliged him to press the Duke of
Lorrain to declare himself, or to lay down his Arms; and the Duke, who was not
as yet in a Condition of undertaking any thing, after many Negotiations,
carried his Men at length to the Emperor, who lost the Battle of Leipsic, to
the King of Sweden.

Yet this was no hindrance, but that the King went to besiege M^yenvic, some
time after. The Duke received the News by a Post which the Count of Vaudemont
his Father sent him. Upon which he made all the have imaginable to relieve the
Place. But having lost almost all his Men, e're he could come to a Battle, he
thought the best course he could to take, was to find out the King; and so
without pondering any farther, he went to Mets, where the King lay. It Is true,
he had as Magnificent a Reception as he could have expected. However, the Siege
was still carried on; and the place was no sooner delivered up, but the King
expressed himself thus to the Duke, Though he had manifested some Marks of good
Will, nevertheless he was very much dissatisfied touching his Conduct, and that
if he desired a Reconciliation, he must yield him up Marsal.

Now in regard the Duke had put himself into the Hands of his Enemy, he was
forced to undergo the Condition. Therefore by a Treaty which he Signed, he
resigned Marsal as a Pledge for four years to France, to the great
dissatisfaction of all his Friends, and above all of the Duke his Father, who
was extremely troubled at it. After this he returned to Nancy.

One would have imagined that this ill Success would have made this Prince
sensible, that he was not as yet in a Condition to resist France. All those who
tendered his Interest, and who had any Access to him, Counseled him to be
quiet, for fear of bringing on himself some new Misfortunes. But listening to no
Body but his own great Heart on this Occasion, and being as it were in Despair,
for that the King of France, having taken the Advantage of his Sincerity, had
constrained him to deliver up Marsal, he Levies new Forces, and the better to
conceal his design, he made as if it were to fall upon the King of Sweden.

Liwis the XIII, who had made a League with that King, and who was glad to have
any pretense, did not only acquaint the Duke, that it was the same thing to
take Arms against him, as against a Prince who was his Ally; but that he might
make him incapable of undertaking any thing, marches at the same time toward
Lorrain with a considerable Army.

The Duke was much alarmed at this News, and as he knew not what Course to
take to oppose the Kings Forces, he sent the Cardinal his Brother, Duke
Francis, to meet the King, and acquaiat him that it was not his design to
contend with him. But all this tended to no other Conclusion, but that he must
deliver up four Places as Gages for his Fidelity, viz. Stenay, Clermont,
Jamets, and Dun; which being performed, he promised him that he would protect
him against the Swedes, who threatened to enter to his Country, and burn it.

For the King of Sweden was an Enemy no less to be feared than the King of
France. And therefore the Dukes Friends would frequently remonstrate to him,
that there was great Policy requisite in the managing those two Princes; that
he must wait for a favorable Opportunity, if he designed to make War, and not
rashly embark himself into any new Enterprises. He had lost all the Hopes which
he could have proposed of Benefit and Advantage from the Discontent of the
Kings Brother, by the defeat of the Duke of Montmorenci, and the Swedes struck
terror into all places wherever they came. In the mean time, though there was
not any appearance that he could have the least Advantage in the World over his
Enemies, as his Affairs then stood, yet he flattered himself with a thousand
Hopes. He Ordered his Army to march against the Suedes, and endeavor to raise
the Siege before Haguenau, and to relieve Brisac, which the Swedes had blockt
up for some considerable time. But this attempt was so far from succeeding
well, that it proved utterly Deplorable. For though the Swedes were forced to
raise their Siege from before Haguenau; whithin two Leagues of that Place they
gave Battle to the Lorrain Army; which was so furiously fought on both sides,
and Fortune so fantastic, that both Armies were Routed. And whilst these
things were a doing, a French Army enters into Lorrain with a design to Besiege
Nancy; Lewis the XIII. assuming this for a pretense, That the Duke had not
punctually observed the Conditions of the Treaty, which had been Concluded with
him.

This is most certain, that if the Duke at his arrival had performed what he
might have done, he might have broken all the King of France's Measures. For S.
Chamant, who Commanded the French, had no more than Four Thousand Men with him,
when he came to invest that Place. In so much that the Duke might have forced
him to quit his Post, ere he had received any Assistance. But in lieu of making
the attempt, he had recourse to a Negotiation. Only he hastily puts all things
into what Order he could for the Defense of Nanci; into which he clapped about
Three or Four Thousand Foot, and Two or Three Hundred Horse, and retiring into
the Mountains of Voges with some small Forces to defend the Avenues, he sends
his Brother the Cardinal to find out the King, and acquaint him with his
Reasons. The King receives him, after his usual manner, with great Marks of
Distinction; and declared, That if he had been only to Treat with him, he
should have received all the Favor that he could have expected from him; so
fully he was persuaded of his Sincerity and just Dealing: But seeing he could
not any longer depend upon any Word of his Brother the Duke, it was necessary
that for a Pledge of his Fidelity he should resign up to him the City of Nanci.

This Condition was too severe to be accepted by the Duke. In the interim the
King comes in Person before the Place, and spares nothing to make himself
Master of it. On the other side the Cardinal of Lorrain went backwards and
forwards using all his endeavors to render Lewis the XIII. more flexible,
though Nanci was besieged. But all that he could obtain after many Civilities,
was, That in case he were himself Duke of Lorrain, it would be no difficult
matter to grant his Request, being indeed really persuaded, that he might
depend upon his Word. Charles the IV. was in a strange Confusion upon this
Answer, insomuch that a Thousand Thoughts came crowding into his Mind. But in
the conclusion, having made some particular Reflection upon those obliging
Words which the King had spoken to his Brother the Cardinal, and believing that
if he should seem to comply to the making a Surrender of his Principality^, the
King would become more tractable; he resolves therefore to take that Course. He
performed his Submission in all the Forms. The Cardinal received the Homages
for his new Dignity. And the King himself gave him Joy of his Confirmation. But
he would not forego his Pretensions upon Nanci. And having drawn the Duke into
his Camp by the Artifices of Cardinal Richelieu, this unfortunate Prince was
forced to Surrender up that Place for four Years by a Treaty, that he might
recover his Liberty.

The Cardinal of Lorrain flattered himself, that after all these Concessions of
his Brother the Duke, Lewis the XIII. would rest himself there. But as the
Design of France was to seize the Principality of that Prince, Lewis the XIII.
always pretending some new occasion of Discontent, sent the Marshal de la Ferte
into Lorrain with considerable Forces, pretending that he had some Design upon
Germany.

This News not only surpised the Cardinal of Lorrain; but very much alarmed
him, as being apprehensive of some Violence. He knew that Lewis the XIII. was
extremely incensed against his Brother, for it was by the Benefit of a
Passport which that Prince had granted during the Siege of Nanci, that he had
assisted the Princess Margaret his Sister to make her escape, in the midst of
those Fears, wherein he was, that the French would carry her away by force: For
the King did not approve the Marriage of the Duke of Orleans his Brother.

In the height of these Apprehensions he retires himself to Luneville with the
two Princesses, the Princess Nicole and the Princess Claudia, who remained with
him; Duke Charles being withdrawn into Burgundy, after the resigning of Nanci.

The Marshal de la Ferte was not long ere he Besieged them in their Retirement.
And therefore the Cardinal having received Information, that the King had a
design to force away those two Princesses, and send them into France, he
proposed a Marriage to the Princess Claudia, between her and himself, to which
the Princess gave consent, not only upon the hopes of preserving their House,
but because that for a long time she had always a great Fancy and Inclination
for the Cardinal.

There was one Difficulty to surmount; for, that being Cousin-Germains, they
could not Marry without a Dispensation, and there was an absolute necessity
that they should Marry speedily. For seeing the Duke of Lorrain had no Children
by the Princess Nicole, it was very much to be feared, that if the Princess
Claudia his Sister should fall into the Kings Hands, before she was Married to
the Cardinal her Cousin, he would Marry her to some Prince of the Blood in that
Kingdom, which would soon furnish France with a new pretense to seize upon all
Lorrain, as undoubtedly it was the Design of France.

Seeing therefore no time was to be lost, all the Ecclesiastics, and Learned
Men among them which could be found out, were assembled together, and this
Assembly being convened, and concluding that on Occasions of that Nature, no
other Rules could be followed than those of Necessity, the Obstacle was soon
past over; the Marriage was concluded the same Day Nicholas Francis Married the
Princess Claudia in the Year 1643.
, and afterward allowed and approved of by the Pope.

Duke Francis the next Day sent one of his Gentlemen to the Marshal de la
Ferte, to acquaint him with the News of his Marriage. To which the Marshal, who
was surpised, and never expected that the Cardinal would quit his Purple to
Marry a Wife, returned Answer, That he believed the King would be displeased
that he was Married without his being acquainted with it. And therefore
flattering himself, that the Marriage could not be Consummated, because of the
want of a Dispensation, and that some Nullity might be found in it, he forced
the Duke and Princesses to go to Nanci, there to expect farther Orders from the
King his Master, to whom he dispatched an Express immediately.

The Marshal ordered that they should be Treated with much Respect.
Nevertheless, they were no sooner arrived in the Dukes Palace, but their
Chamber was surrounded with Guards. In this extremity, Duke Francis made it his
Study to find out some Contrivance to get clear of his Keepers. And having soon
bethought himself, he imparts his Design to the Princess his Wife, who readily
condescending to Act her part, he so well ordered his Business, that his Design
succeeded to his Wish.

He chose for this purpose the first day of April, on which day it is usual in
Lorrain to put little Deceits upon such Persons who are easily cheated. And
such Fools are called, The Fish of April. This practice was so well known to
the French, that to avoid their being deceived, they mistrusted whatsoever
could be said to them upon that day. And this was the Reason that they would
give no Credit to those several Cautions given them very seasonably, concerning
the escape of the Prince and Princess, being really persuaded that this was
only given out to make them run after them; so that the fear which they had of
being Deceived, was the only occasion they were trickt in good earnest.

The following Night, the Duchess, that she might the better deceive the
Guards, got out of the Palace in the Habit of a Page, carrying a Flambeau
before one of the Duke her Husbands Gentlemen, whom she was to meet in the
House of his first Gentleman of the Chamber; and where he was already come
disguised, under the contemptible Habit of a Porter, not sparing his own Hair,
which was very delicate and lovely, but having cut it off, that he might be the
less known.

So soon as day approacht, and the Gates of the City were opened, the Duchess,
who was now disguized into a poor Country Woman carrying a Basket upon her
Back, and conducted by the Duke, who was disguized likewise, they went out by a
Gate, called Notre Dame, and walked about half a League in this Equipage, with
incredible trouble to the Princess, who had never before walked so many weary
Steps on Foot before. However after they had thus overcome the Ways, which were
very uneven and rugged, they found a Gentleman who expected them with Horses.

But indeed that which was very Singular, and might have caused the whole
enterprise to Miscarry, was, That when they were past the Gate, a Female
Peasant who came from the Field, and was going into the City, knew them though
they were in that uncouth and strange Disguize. And this Woman, by a rustic
Imprudence, and desire of Prattling, which is so Natural to that Sex, could not
forbear imparting it to a Soldier of the Guard, with whom she was acquainted.
This Soldier declares it to his Officer at the same time: But the Officer only
Laughed at it, believing that it was the Fish of April, which the Peasant would
have put upon him. Nevertheless he gave the Count of Brassac, Governor of the
City, an account of it some Hours after, but yet without giving any credit to
the Relation. But the Count, as he was Naturally Suspicious and Fearful, was
more diligent, and therefore sent away to the Officer who had the Guard of the
Duke and Duchess, to be informed of the Truth. The Officer had no sooner
received this Order, but he went and knocked at their Chamber Door, to know if
they were up; but a Valet de Chamber, who was privy to the Secret, beckoned
with his Hand, thereby to signify that he should not make a Noise, for that
they were as yet a Sleep.

This Officer had always treated them with great Respect, and all the Civility
imaginable; and therefore being afraid to wake them, would not order the Door
to be opened. But the Count of Brassac upon his arrival, compelled the Valet de
Chamber to do it. And then he went himself and drew the Curtains of the Bed;
where finding the Birds flown, he discharged his fury upon the Master of the
House where they had withdrawn themselves the Evening before, and upon the
Dukes Domestics, which were found there, whom he sent to Prison, threatening
withal to put them to the Torture if they would not discover the place of their
Masters Concealment.

But though they were very severely handled, yet there was no way to make the
least discovery; for the Duke had not only concealed it from his Domestic
Servants, but from the Gentleman of the House, of whose service he made use,
what way he designed to take; not that he was distrustful of him, but that he
might safely Swear that he knew nothing of the matter.

They pursued every way after them, but it proved ineffectual, because of the
extreme diligence which had been used, notwithstanding the delicacy and
tenderness of the Duchess; for a Man mounted behind on Horseback held her
always in his Arms for the greater Expedition, and to keep her from falling. At
length they gained the County of Burgundy, and arrived the same day at a
Gentleman's Castle, about Twenty Leagues distant from Nanci, from whence the
Princess, who was quite tired out, was not in a Condition to depart till three
or four Days after. The Reason why they rather determined to go to Burgundy
than elsewhere, was, That they were in hopes to find the Duke of Lorrain at
Besancon; but being informed that he was gone into Germany, they took the road
for Florence, and came to the Duchess their Aunt, Grand Mother to the great
Duke of Tuscany, then Reigning. There they remained almost Three Years: But the
Air of that Country not agreeing with them, the Reason as they thought why they
could have no Childdren there, they resolved to quit Italy, and went to Vienna
in Austria, to the Empress Leonora, another of their Aunts.

This Marriage of Duke Francis was such a blow that broke all the Measures of
the King of France, who being resolved whatever it cost him, to make himself
Master of Lorrain; would have been glad to have gotten the Princess Claudia
into his Alliance, as I have already observed. Nevertheless he would not desist
from that design which he had been contriving for so long a time: And
therefore, as he always made use of the old Pretense, That the Duke of Lorrain
had broken the Articles of Treaty which he had concluded with him, soon after
he returned into the Principality of this Prince, and takes the City of St.
Michel; and though that in the mean while an Army of Imperialists were obliged
to post themselves near Mets; these Troops of the Emperor, as much Confederates
as they were, yet set their last helping Hand to the Ruin of Lorrain.

But that Which seems particularly Remarkable is this, that during the time
that this Country was the Theater of War, and that unheard of Hostilities were
exercised in it, Charles the IV. seemed not in the least to be concerned; but
as if his Principality had enjoyed the most secure and Halcyon Tranquillity, he
fell in Love with the Princess of Cantecroix This was Beatrix of Cusance, Widow
of Eugenius Leopold, Prince of Cantecroix. He Married her at Besancon, in the
Church of the Friars Minime, the Second of April 1637.
, whom at length he Espoused. From this Match Descended Charles Henry Prince of
Vaudemont, so well known by his first Campagnes, and by the Illustrious Rank
which he holds at this day in the Army of the Allies; and a Princess called the
Princess Anne, who was Married with the Prince of Lislebonne.

I could give an account of several remarkable Things concerning Charles the
IV, which I shall pass over in silence, as likewise the History of his
Marriage; for besides that you may Read those Passages elsewhere, they are not
so material to my Subject. I shall only acquaint you, that after he had
defeated in Alsatia Count Otho, one of the most dreaded Generals of the Suedes,
and signalized himself in Germany by many other Actions of Valor, he withdrew
himself into Flanders, where the Spaniards, who had War with France, received
him with much Joy, and conferred on him diverse Employments; during which time
he also seized upon some small places of Lorrain. But being cast a third time
into the Hands of the King of France, he Signed another Treaty, which was no
less disadvantageous than the former; and this was the occasion of a new War,
wherein likewise he saw himself stripped of all his Principality.

The Air of Vienna was more wholesome to the Princess Claudia than that of
Florence, and for an Accumulation of Happiness and Joy, after various Troubles,
and a long Exile, she grew big with Child, and was brought to Bed in the year
1639. of Prince Ferdinand Philip Francis; who, after he had given infinite
Proofs of his Bravery, while he was cutting for the Stone, died in the
Operation, the first day of April 1658. And four Years after, the Third of the
same Month of April 1643, was Born Charles the Fifth, who was called Charles
Leopold Nicholas Sixtus. The same Year died Lewis the XIII, and Cardinal
Richelieu, the greatest Enemies at that time to Charles the Fourth. But neither
did the Nativity of this Prince, (which seemed to be a happy Presage for the
House of Lorrain, nor the Death of the King of France, and of his Minister, who
then might be said to Reign,) bring any considerable change to the Dukes
Affairs, though he had conceived at first great hopes to be restored to his
Territories. He flattered himself that he might accommodate Things with the
Queen, the Mother of Lewis the XIV, and there was some appearance for it. For
this Princess simpathizing in his Misfortunes, by reason of that conformity
which was between her destiny and his, had always testified a great Affection
for him, notwithstanding he was so much imbroil'd with the Court of France.

But things did not succeed in such a manner as the Duke expected. For Cardinal
Mazarine who succeeded in that Ministry, and who trod in the Footsteps of his
Predecessor, had inspired this Princess with such Interested Politics, that
from the very Moment of her assuming the Regency, she was possessed with
another Spirit; and indeed we may affirm, that she was more severe to the Duke
in particular, than Lewis the XIII. ever had been.

Charles the IV. therefore frustrated on that side of all those hopes which he
had conceived, bent his Thoughts wholly to render himself formidable to France,
and made no delay in the performance of it. He signalized himself in so many
Occasions against the French, that considering how much his Courage was thereby
exalted, there was great likelihood that one day he would attempt to re-enter
into his Dominions by plain force; so that the Queen, and Cardinal Mazarin,
used all means possible to bring him over to their Party. And this Desire
particularly increased, when they saw France began to be torn in pieces by
those Civil Wars, which made so great a Noise during the Minority of Lewis XIV.
They urged, That in regard it was upon the King that his Restoration to his
Dominions depended, (since the King held them in his Hands,) he might expect
from him more favorable Conditions than from the Spaniards, with whom he was
then engaged. They offered him an entire Restitution of all those Places which
had been taken from him, Nancy excepted; which nevertheless they obliged
themselves to restore upon the general Peace, without demolishing the
Fortifications. But whether the Duke thought himself strong enough to regain
his Country by force, or that he would be revenged of the Queen, or that he
thought he could not place any great Assurance upon a Treaty made in the
Minority of the King, or what other Reasons he might have, which could never
yet be dived into, he rejected all these Conditions, though seemingly so very
Advantageous to him.

He was always at Brussels, and as he was become very necessary to the
Spaniards, by the Assistance of his Men, for which he was paid considarable
Sums; he made use of these Sums, and of such as he gained by the Contributions
of his Country, to purchase many fair Lands in Flanders, which yielded a great
Revenue. In the mean time, how rich soever he might be, Duke Francis was not so
well at Ease. For Charles the Fourth looking upon the Prince of Vaudemont as
the presumptive Heir of Lorrain, and perceiving well enough that the Duke his
Brother could not but oppose his Pretensions, by reason of Prince Charles his
Son; this thought had made such an Impression in his Spirit, that he left him
for this Reason at Vienna, without affording him any great Assistance. But this
was not the worst which then befell Duke Francis, who could patiently enough
support the capriciousness of his Fortune. For about that time he lost the
Duchess Claudia his Wife She died in the year 1652.
, a Princess generally lamented in the Court of the Emperor, by reason of those
many amiable Qualities wherewith she was Adorned.

Duke Francis had wrastled above Fifteen Years with his evil Fortune, yet he
looked upon this Blow as the most severe and heavy that he had ever felt; and
he was so afflicted with it, all his Life, that he would never Marry, how
profitable soever a second Marriage might have proved for the Re-establishment
of his Affairs. He entrusted to the care of a Religious House, a young
Princess, born likewise in the same Wedlock, who afterward was Abbess of
Remiremont, but is since Dead. And for Prince Ferdinand, and Prince Charles, he
put them into the Hands of Monsieur the Marquis of Beauvau, to take care of
their Education; Charles the Fifth not being above Nine Years of Age when the
Duchess died.

But how great soever those Services were which Charles the Fourth had
performed for Spain, after his withdrawing himself into Flanders, that Crown
never did any thing for him, though they were particularly engaged to join
their Forces with his, for the restoring him to his Dukedom. Of this the Duke
loudly enough complained; insomuch that the Spaniards fearing lest being
repulsed by so many vain Promises which had been made by him, he would in the
Conclusion seek out some other Asylum, and more secure Protection than theirs,
to procure Tranquillity for himself and his Subjects, resolved to stop him. And
the Count of Fuensaldagne, Governor of Flanders, who was none of his Friends,
had Order to put this Design in Execution, as soon as he could find a
favorable opportunity for it. At the same time Archduke Leopold, assisted by
the Lorrain Forces, gained Rocroi from the French, and this was in the year
1655. And now the Campaign being ended, and all the General Officers of the
Spanish Army retired to Brussels, the Count of Fuensaldagne, whom Jealousy
rather put upon Action than the Interest of his Master, was only intent upon
executing that secret Order which was given him. And that he might not miss his
aim, after he had communicated his Design to the Archduke, who was obliged to
give his Consent, he quickly dispersed the Duke of Lorrain's Soldiers into
Winter Quarters, so remote the one from the other, and divided one from another
by Rivers, that it was impossible for them to assist their Prince, who little
expected so sad a Destiny, though he had been admonished of it sufficiently
beforehand.

Things being thus disposed, the Count, who now only waited for a favorable
Opportunity, found out a way to draw the Duke to the Palace, under the specious
pretext of some important Affairs which had fallen out, and wherein he had an
Interest. But as he thought to enter into the Council Chamger, he was stopped at
the Door. The next Morning he was conducted by Water down the Canal of Antwerp
into the Citadel of that City, and from thence was brought into Spain, and
confined in the Castle of Toledo, where he remained a Prisoner during the space
of five Years.

The Count of Fuensaldagne had no sooner brought his Designs about, but
Archduke Leopold sent the Count of Saint Amor at Vienna, to acquaint Duke
Francis with the Confinement of the Duke his Brother. He alleged the Reasons
which obliged the King of Spain to secure the Person of that Prince; and at the
same time he requested him to come, and put himself at the Head of the Lorrain
Forces, assuring him that his Catholic Majesty had no other Intention than
that of his Re-establishment; and that he would never Consent to any Peace, but
what should prove for the advantage of his Family.

Duke Francis, not a little grieved for the Misfortune of the Duke his Brother,
and it is probable no less apprehensive lest the like Fate might befall him, upon
the first Motion refused the Offer. But the Emperor and Empress Eleonora his
Aunt having united their Prayers to the importunate Solicitations of the
Archduke, and laying before him the grand Advantages which he might reasonably
hope for from the King of Spain; this Prince, rather persuaded by the
Considerations of the Interest of his Family, than his own particular Concerns,
resolved to go to Brussels, and to carry Prince Ferdinando and Prince Charles
along with him.

When Duke Francis departed, the Emperor was at Ratisbonne, whither he was gone
to reside for some time, till the King of Hungaria his Eldest Son were Crowned
King of the Romans. The Duke went to take leave of him; at what time Ferdinand
the III, after he had given him all the Marks of a tender affection, and made
him a Magnificent Entertainment, ordered him to be conducted by a Troop of his
Guards to Noremberg, together with the Marquis of Haraucourt, who was sent to
meet him by the Archduke, to solicit his departure and to hasten his Journey.
He passed through the Territories of the Electors of Mayence, Treves, and
Cologne, and the Duke of Neuburg, where he was received with all the Honor
that could have been paid to the Emperor himself; and above all, at Dusseldorp.
The Spaniards defrayyed all his Expenses during his Journey; and the Archduke
came to meet him within a League of Brussels with all the Burgesses, who had
all ranged themselves in Arms; so that greater Joy was never seen.

Duke Francis was not long ere he put himself at the Head of the Lorrainers,
who received him with Acclamations, not easy to be expressed. At the same time
the King of France had laid Siege before Stenai by Marshal de Fabert. Upon
which the Spaniards, who thought that all the Freneh Forces were employed at
this Siege, resolved to begirt Arras. Duke Francis, who foresaw the difficulty
of this Enterprise, and who likewise perceived that the Ministers of Spain had
only given their Consent to please the Prince of Conde, who was in the Spanish
Army, and who absolutely desired this Siege, made it sufficiently appear that
he did not believe they could carry the Place. But in regard he perceived that
they absolutely resolved to lay Siege to Arras, he marched thither with his
Army, and was desirous that Prince Ferdinand should there begin his first
Campaign: For Prince Charles, being as yet extremely young, was left at
Brussels under the Tuition of Monsieur Romecourt.

What Duke Francis was afraid of came to pass. The Spaniards were forced to
raise the Siege of Arras; they were beaten by the French; and the Rout was so
great, that all their Infantry, their Cannon and Baggage remained in the
custody of their Enemies; insomuch that Duke Francis, and Prince Ferdinand
being arrived at Valenciennes, they found themselves destitute of all Things,
not having so much as a Field Bed. However, the Archduke ordered that they
should be assisted with incredible Civilities. But things began to change
Countenance when they came to Brussels. They found the Chambers of the
Archdukes Palace, where they lodged, all stripped of those Movables which were
in it before; and they were informed that the great Master of the Household had
prohibited Prince Charles to take the Air in the Park in a Coach, though it
were a liberty which was very rarely refused to Women of the meanest Quality in
the City.

The Archduke, who was a good Prince, and who had an entire Affection for Duke
Francis, was extremely dissatisfied in his Mind, to see him treated so ill. But
he was forced to dispense with, and allow these Hardships and Injustices, not
daring to oppose the Count of Fuensaldagne who was entirely Master in Brussels,
and who not having met with that pliantness in the Duke which he expected,
endeavored to humble him. Duke Francis nevertheless was in hopes that the
Count would become more Tractable. But upon a Rumor which then run, that
Charles the Fourth had sent from his Prison an Order to the Lorrain Officers,
that they should retire into France, where the Princess Nichole was, and carry
with them as many of their Men as they could, the Spaniards laid a design to
stop the Duke. That which obliged the Spaniards to this Resolution, was this,
That some time before two Colonels had deserted with their Regiments, and were
gone over to the Service of the King of France, and this had alarmed them. Yet
for all that, this is most certain, that the Duke had no Design, or the least
Intention to cast himself into the Hands of the French, who were his mortal
Enemies, and who had invaded all Lorrain. But the Duke saw himself so ill
treated by the Count of Fuensaldagne, and perceived so many little Artifices
made use of to secure him, that he went into France with all the Lorrainers
which were in the Service of the King of Spain; taking Prince Ferdinand with
him. For Prince Charles, upon what grounds of Policy I know not, was left at
Brussels. But being he was in good Hands, they ordered his escape when they saw
it convenient; so that at length he was conducted by Water through the Canal of
Antwerp into Holland, to secure him from the fury of the Spaniards, for the
Revolt of the Duke his Father. And being come to Paris, where Prince Ferdinand
was already, the Duke presented these two young Princes to the King, withal
acquainting him, that he put them both into his Hands, for a Pledge of his
Fidelity to his Service; which was kindly accepted by his Majesty, who promised
likewise that he would protect them, and advance them to Employments
proportionable to their Birth.

Prince Ferdinand had already been in Four Campagnes, wherein he had highly
Signalized himself, but then Died after that manner, which we have already
related. His Death had almost overwhelmed Duke Francis with Grief, and some
Months after he was in great hazard of loosing Prince Charles, by an Accident
which had like to have proved as fatal as the Minute was Auspicious, which
ushered such a Prince into the World, whom he loved to the height of Passion
and Tenderness; as one who gave in his younger years as great and pregnant
Hopes, as any Prince of his Years. The Accident was this.

The young Prince managing a Horse in the Academy, where he performed his
Exercises; the Horse, that had but one eye, yet very sprightly, hit so ruggedly
against one of the Pillars of the Manage, that the Prince, as nimble and active
as he was, in a moment was thrown backward to the Ground; and though he fell
only upon Sand, yet he received so terrible a blow upon the Head, that he lay
without any Motion. Endeavors were used to bring him to himself; but all those
little Remedies which were applied, signified nothing; he was laid upon a Bed
in the Academy; where he continued six whole Hours without giving any sign of
life, though there appeared neither Wound, nor Contusion in his Head, nor in
any Part of his Body. The News of this Fall quickly allarmed all the Court. And
the King who had an account of it, e're it was declared to Duke Francis, was so
really afflicted at this accident, that he commanded that without losing time,
his Physicians should be sent to him, and the most experienced Surgeons
which could be found in the City, that he might not be blamed in any thing, if
the Accident proved fatal. The King's Orders were immediately obeyed, but the
Prince was in so sad a Condition, that one of the principal Physicians, after
he had well considered, and viewed him, declared aloud, as he was going out of
the Chamber, That he would Die; which made others too sadly believe there was
no hopes, and that whatever could be done, would be to no purpose. However,
recourse was had to all sorts of Remedies, and those which were applied were so
prevalent, that six Hours after, he began to breath. From that time forwards,
every moment there appeared new signs of life in him; and at length he
recovered his Speech. And by little and little he regained so much Strength,
that his Cure was no longer doubted of.

We need not question but Duke Francis was extremely alarmed and afflicted at
this sad Accident. For though he were accustomed to these kind of trials, yet
this mischance quite sunk him, though Father Poirot a Jesuit, his Confessor,
who brought him the News, used all the Precautions imaginable; however, he
surrendered up himself with a profound Humility to receive this last
Affliction, which his ill Fortune seemed to have prepared for him; and letting
fall some Tears, he was heard to pronounce these Pious Words; God gave, and God
has taken away, his Will be done.

But there was nothing mournful that afterward accompanied this Accident.
There were no Symptoms succeeded which the Physicians were afraid of, and which
might not reasonably be expected in such Mischances. The young Prince himself
felt nothing of Inconvenience some days after. On the contrary; he found
himself in such a good disposition of Body, that he thought himself strong
enough to continue his Exercises. However, in regard that in Accidents of this
Nature, extraordinary care is to be observed, Duke Francis, by the Advice of
the most learned Physicians, forced him to keep his Chamber for above three
Months; during which time he was visited daily by all of both Sexes, which were
of the greatest Rank and Quality in the Court. Yet this was observed that the
King never went to see him, notwithstanding he appeared so very much concerned
at this Accident, when the sad Tidings were first brought him.

The Pyranean Peace was concluded the following Year. Cardinal Mazarin, and Don
Louis Mendez de Haro, one for the King of France, and the other for the King of
Spain, being assembled in the Island of Faisans This is an Island made by a
River called Badasson, which comes out of the Pyrenean Hills, and empties it
self into the Sea near Fontarabic. This River separates France from Spain.
, concluded at length, after many Conferences, a War, which had been kindled
for a long time between those two Princes. In this Treaty of Peace, Don Lewis
consented to leave to the King of France, the Dukedom of Bar, the County of
Clermont, and to permit him to demolish the Fortifications of Nanci, provided
that he would restore to Charles the Fourth the Dukedom of Lorrain. There were
some other Articles also in this Treaty, which were not very advantageous for
that Prince. So that the Duke, who was yet a Prisoner at Toledo, complained to
the King of Spain, that his Concerns were disposed of without his being made
privy to it. But in regard his Catholic Majesty held no Correspondence with
him, and that he looked upon him as a Prince, of whom he had no reason to be
afraid in any respect, thought it sufficient to give him his Liberty, with a
slight Intimation that he had served his Interest, as far as he judged it
necessary for the good of Christendom: That what was done, could not be
otherwise done, and that he must rest himself contented with his Destiny. This
Answer of the King of Spain, though brisk, and highly disobliging, yet it was
not the only hard measure in the Proceedings of that Monarch. He ordered these
things to be told him by one of his Ministers; and though the Duke took a
Journey to Madrid to see him, he would not admit him into his Presence;
apprehending, without doubt, that the Duke would reproach him with his
Injustice and Ingratitude, which had overruled him to deprive a Prince of his
Liberty, who had sought his Protection, and who had totally lost his
Principality, for having been but too much united to the Interest of Spain. In
so much that the Duke perceiving that there was not the least likelihood of
making his Complaint to the Catholic King, he departs with all speed for the
Island of Conference, with a design to complain to Don Lewis de Haro of the
Injury which he had received. But whatever Words he could use to aggravate this
Injustice, he could receive no other Satisfaction from the Spanish Minister
than a sad Acknowledgment, that he could not possibly conclude the Peace for
him in a more advantageous manner, than as it was done already. The Duke had
recourse in this extremity to Cardinal Mazarine, who drew up his Objections to
the Pyranean Treaty. But in regard the Duke was still in the Hands of Don
Lewis, and that the Cardinal had his Reasons why he would not serve him any
farther in that Affair; he was obliged, though never so dissatisfied, to
consent to the Treaty, and to sign it, for fear he might run the risk of a
worse Fortune.

In the mean time, the Cardinal heaped Civilities upon him, and always treated
him like a Prince. He flattered him with great hopes, and made him sensible,
that the thing depended so absolutely upon the King, wholly to establish him in
his Dominious, and restore his House to its pristine Luster and Dignity, that
he got his consent to return into France; where being stripped of his Dukedoms of
Lorrain and Bar, yet he had the same Honors paid, which are usually renderd to
Princes who are Sovereigns in their own Country: But these were but outward
Civilities, he was near the less unfortunate for all these shows.

The Fruit of the Pyrenean Peace was the Marriage of Lewis XIV. with the
Infanta of Spain. For in regard that great People never Marry but out of
Policy, and that this Marriage was the Knot which was to unite that Peace which
had been so much desired, and which the People had so long wished for; the
Queen did agree to it without any difficulty. But this we may say, That he
Espoused this Princess without having the least Inclination for her. Not but
that the Portraiture which had been given of the new Queen, might be capable
enough to move him. But the King was in Love with Mademoiselle de Mancini,
Niece to Cardinal Mazarin; who, though she was a Woman of great Wit, yet she
was no ways well made. So that it was the common saying of the Town concerning
her, that you no sooner heard her Discourse but you forgot she was Deformed,
and Men could not avoid, but they must Love her; so that it was no wonder the
King was so taken with her.

And as Mademoiselle de Mancini answered the Kings Friendship, so the King
Loved her in so tender a manner, that he had undoubtedly Married her, if
Princes upon such emergent Occasions, might be Masters of themselves.

The whole Court began to discover plainly the great Passion which that King
had for the Cardinals Niece; For he paid his Assiduities to her in the view of
all the World. His Complaisances extended so far, and he made her such
Magnificent Presents, that the Queen Mother was alarmed at it. For she being a
Spaniard, since the Death of Lewis XIII. had labored nothing more, than to
conclude a War, which could not but prove fatal to her, on which side soever
the Advanvantages fell; and she saw moreover, that all her Endeavors for the
Peace would be utterly Ruined, if the King did not wholly forget Mademoiselle
de Mancini, and Marry the Infanta of Spain.

It Is true, the Cardinal, as all Men might easily Judge, would never have been
sorry to have seen his Niece the Kings Companion in the Royal Throne. But
whether it were that he was willing to yield a blind Obedience to the Queen; or
that he feared least the King, coming at length to dislike his own Act and
Deed, should one day null the Marriage, he was the first that dispossessed
Mademoiselle de Mancini of those vain Thoughts which she had, that the King
intended to Marry her, and he drove on the Business so vigorously, that a Match
was concluded with the Infanta.

The King however had much ado to consent to an Alliance that was to resettle a
Peaceful Calm between two Potent Monarchies. For he still felt the same
Inclinations for Mademoiselle de Mancini, which he had for her, ever since the
day that he first began to have a Passion for her. Of which he gave her such
sensible Marks, as left her no room to question his Affection: And both the
Queen and the Cardinal sufficiently perceived it.

Nevertheless, in regard the Marriage was determined, and that there wanted
nothing but the Performance of the Ceremonies, the Court prepared all things
ready for their departure toward the Frontiers, to receive the new Queen. The
Cardinal also designed to set forward first of all, and to carry his Niece
along with him, to remove her out of the Kings sight, fearing least her
presence should put a stop to his Journey, and obstruct the grand Design of
Establishing Peace over all Europe.

On the other side the King could not without an extraordinary turbulency of
his Thoughts, support the violent Separation from him of a Person whom he
preferred in his Affections before all the Princesses in the World. But in
regard there was no Remedy, he retired to Chantilli for some days; from whence
he did nothing but send Messenger upon Messenger to Mademoiselle de Mancini,
till she was gone.

At length Mademoiselle de Mancini departed the City, and the Cardinal her
Uncle, who knew well the Force which he put upon her, endeavored, during the
whole Journey, to persuade her to make a Conquest of her self, and extinguish a
Passion that began to grow Criminal: He laid before her all those Reasons which
she had to induce her to vanquish her extravagant Ambition, and declared at
length, that he had a design to Marry her to the Prince of Lorrain.

And indeed, when Charles the IV. was a Prisoner in Spain, he had himself made
that Proposal to Cardinal Mazarin, who having given his Consent upon the first
Motion, had engaged to gain the Kings Consent to Re-establish him in his
Territories. And he had certainly done it: For at that time the Cardinals
Favor was vastly great. But in regard, that when the Duke was in France, he
thought no more of the Match, which he made appear by his Carriage toward the
Cardinal; for he never so much as spoke to him of it afterward, though it were
an Overture of his own making; the Cardinal was so incensed at this Contempt of
his, which appeared to him so Fantastical, that far from inclining the King to
make a Treaty with the Duke to his Advantage, he instilled into him such an
Aversion for that Prince, that from that time forward they only amused him from
time to time with fair Promises of what he desired, without ever minding to
give him Satisfaction.

On the other side, Duke Francis, whose Designs were altogether opposite to
those of Duke Charles his Brother, considering that there was no surer course
for him to take, than to seek the Friendship and Support of Cardinal Mazarin,
and that he could not incline that Minister to afford him his Protection by any
way more Advantageous, than that of a Match between the Prince his Son, and
Mademoiselle de Marcini, resolved to propose it; which he did effectually. True
it is, That as he would have been glad to have ascertained the Possession of
the Territories of Lorrain to Prince Charles, by a more secure way, so would he
have been better pleased that Charles IV. would have Consensented to have
Married with the Princess. To which purpose he proposed the Business to him,
before he made a step in order to the Cardinals Niece. But the Duke would by no
means listen to him; and then it was, that he Married that Princess to the
Prince of Lislebonne.

But Mademoiselle de Mancini was not long before she returned to Paris. At what
time the Cardinal, who earnestly desired to Match her, that he might wean the
Kings so openly testified Affection from her, gave order to Madam de Venelle,
her Governess, to remove her immediately from the Country of Aunix, where she
then Resid'd; and his orders were no less punctually obeyed.

Now in regard she was in high Esteem, not only for the Figure which Cardinal
Mazarin made in France, but for her own proper Merits, and the Reputation she
had gained by being Beloved by the King, all the great Personages in Paris that
had not followed the Court which was then at Tholouze, made it one of their
chiefest Concerns to link themselves to her Friendship, and be her continual
Visitants. Of this number the Prince of Lorrain was One, and his Sedulity
showed that he applied himself to her in a more particular manner than the
rest. And this was by the advice of Madam de Choisi, a Woman of deep Intreague.
This Lady, cordial to the Interests of Duke Francis, was persuaded, That if
Prince Charles could gain the Affection of Mademoiselle de Mancini, the
Cardinal could not do otherwise but Marry her according to his own Inclination;
nor was there any question but that the King would approve the Match.

To this purpose, at the same time that the young Prince used all his
Endeavors to gain her Affection, Madam de Choisi, who had made it her own
Business, set her Friends underhand, to instill into the Cardinals Niece, that
besides, that Prince Charles was to be considered as a Prince who had a Claim
to the Dutchies of Lorrain and Bar more firmly Grounded than only to flatter
his Ambition, there was no other way to free her self from a kind of Slavery,
wherein she languish'd under the Queen Mother and the Cardinal her Uncle, with
whom she was forced to live in a kind of close Confinement.

Mademoiselle de Mancini knew all that very well, and besides she saw that
Prince Charles was a goodly Person. She looked upon his Courting her, as a thing
that might be Advantageous to her; and delighted in his Company. But she was as
yet so little inclined to entertain a new Passion, that she knew her self to be
insensible of all the Prince's Applications. The fall that threatened her was
too steep to be so soon forgot. Nevertheless, as it was a difficult thing to
make a long Resistance against so brave a Prince as the Prince of Lorrain,
Mademoiselle de Mancini grew sensible at length, that she Loved him a little
more than she had done. She was Charmed with his Assiduities; and by Degrees
she began to accustom her self to take no delight but in his Company. And in
regard, that Madam de Venelle would not permit the Prince to visit his Mistress
in her own House; there was not a day past, but he gave her a Meeting either in
some Church, or in the Tuilleries. In short, her Passion for the Prince became
so vehement, that she told the Cardinal her Uncle one Day, That she would
either Marry the Prince, or shut herself up in a Nunnery.

Certain it is, That Cardinal Mazarin had consented to the Marriage. For though
it had not been so advantageous for his Niece as it was, the Queen Mother
pressed him with so much importunity to marry out of the Kingdom, that being
out of his Eye, the King might the sooner forget her, that the Cardinal would
never have made the least Hesitation; besides, that he passionately desired the
Match. But in regard the Cardinal was haughty, though desirous otherwise to
appear very moderate in things that regarded his own Interest, to make the
World believe he only studied the Interests of the King his Master, yet he
could have wished that the Duke would have sincerely sought his Alliance for
Prince Charles; but the Duke opposed it. In a word, the Duke having pierced
into his Nephews design, and fearing least the Prince, by virtue of the Match
in Agitation, should receive from the Cardinal those Advantages which might
turn to his Prejudice, he utterly disappointed all the Princes measures: and
then it was that the Cardinal married his Niece to Constable Colonna, who had
demanded her in Wedlock sometime before, by the Addresses of Marquis Ang^el. Or
rather it may be said that he banished her into Italy against his own will, and
with a despair so violent, that he could not forbear reproaching the King, with
the want of Courage he had shown upon her account.

Nevertheless, the Duke of Lorrain forbore not giving many Testimonies to
Prince Charles of his Kind Intentions toward him; affirming that if he had
crossed him in his Marriage, it was only to procure him a more honorable
Alliance; and that his design indeed was, to Marry him with Mademoiselle de
Montpensier, the Eldest Daughter by the first Wedlock to the deceased Duke of
Orleance The D. of Orleance died at Blois Feb 2. 1660. In the Year 1626. he
married Mary of Bourbon, the only Daughter of Henry of Bourbon, Duke of
Montpensier, Dauphin of Auvergne; and by her he had Mademoiselle.
.

And fearing least it would be said, that all these Discourses were only
feigned to amuse the Prince, he caused the Proposal to be made at the same time
to the Princess; and to convince her that he was in good Earnest, and that
there was nothing in the world which he more passionately desired, he caused a
farther Proposal to be made her, that if she would consent to Marry his Nephew,
he would in favor of her, surrender up all his Territories to him, reserving
only a Pension of a hundred Thousand Crowns.

The Cardinal to whom the Address was made, as much incensed as he was against
the Duke of Lorrain, declared at the same instant that he was well pleased with
the Proposal, and that he would omit nothing that lay in his Power that might
induce Mademoiselle to accept it.

In short, whither the Cardinal feigned his Approbation of the business, or
whither he believed the Match to be for the Princesses advantage, or that he
intended to sound the Duke's Integrity, he wrought with the King to depute
Monsieur de Lionne to treat about the Affair with Mademoiselle de Montpensier's
Counsel. But the Duke, always Irresolute, far from coming to any Conclusion,
started so many difficulties, that the Cardinal The Cardinal died at Vincennes,
Mar. 9. 1661. in the 59 year of his Age.
died, before any thing could be fully resolved upon.

However, in regard that Monsieur de Guise solicited the Cardinal to incline
the King to some Accommodation with the Duke of Lorrain, he that had been a
long time sick, and despaired of Recovery, thought it now high time, upon the
brink of Death, to make his peace with God, and that he had sufficiently
revenged himself of the Duke, by drilling him on so long and only feeding him
with Promises. So that about three or four days before his Death the Duke
concluded and signed a particular Treaty with the King, of which the substance
was, 1. That he should be restored to the Dutchies's of Lorrain and Bar.
Wherein nevertheless the King should still keep possession of the Grand Road or
This Passage is a Road not above half a League broad, but little less than
Thirty Leagues in length.
Passage, extending from the Entrances into his Dutchies next to Stenai, quite
through his Countries into Germany, which should remain in Sovereignty to the
King. 2. That the Fortifications of Nanci should be demolished. 3. That the
Towns of Stenai, Clermont, Jamets and Dun should continue in Propriety to
France. 4. That the Duke should disarm all his Soldiers and Militia, except his
Regiment of Guards and Light Horse, and some Companies of Foot for the
Preservation of such Garrisons as remained in his hands. 5. That the Duke should
not repair the Fortifications of Nanci, nor make any New Fortifications about
any other Town within his Territories, without leave of the King, nor give any
Protection to any of the King's Subjects, contrary to his Majesty's pleasure.

These were the principal Conditions, to the Severity of which the Duke was
obliged to consent, that he might regain his Principality of Bar; his Friends
having generally advised him to accept them, for fear, lest under the sway of
some other Minister of State, he might meet with far greater Obstructions.

No sooner had the Duke signed the Treaty, but he departed into his own
Dominions; and to the end Prince Charles might have no reason to complain of
him, upon the Marriage propounded with Mademoiselle de Montpensier, he declared
to him, that he always earnestly desired it, and to remove all suspicions, he
sent at the same time a full Power in writing under his Hand and Seal to the
Duke of Guise to conclude the Articles, upon the same Conditions which he
himself had proposed.

The Princess was overjoyed at this Marriage: she found in Prince Charles all
the Noble Qualities she could desire; and besides, the Condescension of the
Duke his Uncle seemed to be no small advantage to her. On the other side,
considering the Condition of the House of Lorrain at that time, it was the
greatest good Fortune that could befall it, in order to a Re-establishment; for
besides the Greatness of the Alliance, Mademoiselle had a plentiful Estate. And
therefore as all people desired the Match, so all endeavored to bring it to a
Conclusion. Prince Charles every day paid his Visits to Mademoiselle. On the
other side the Princess took delight in his Assiduities. All the Court took it
for granted that every thing was agreed upon; but when all things were ready
for Consummation, Prince Charles fell in Love with Mademoiselle d' Orleance, a
Princess Young and of surpassing Beauty: to which may be added, that having
been bred together, their Affections had taken root along time before. And
indeed, to speak the Truth, Mademoiselle de Montpensier was a little too far
advanced in years to inflame so Youthful a Prince. And as certain it was, that
Mademoiselle d'Orleance was designed the Prince of Tuscany; the King himself
being for engaged to make the Match, and it being also his Interest to see it
concluded. Of all which Prince Charles could not be ignorant: But being of an
Age not apt to make reflections, he gave himself blindly over to a domineering
Passion, not considering that he forgot his own Interests to run after a
Chimera; since it was a Conquest impossible for him to make: and this was that
which caused him so much to slight Madam de Montpensier, that the World took
notice of it.

All that were concerned for the Interest of the Young Prince were alarmed at
his manner of proceeding. They said, that he posted visibly to his own
Detriment and the ruin of his Affairs. It was laid before him, that he acted
to his Uncles wish, whose design it was to cross his Marriage, so he might not
be seen to be in the fault; to the end that by that means he might secure the
Succession of his Territories to his Son the Prince of Vaudemont. They gave him
to understand that he labored inconsiderately, to loose himself not only in
the Kings good will, who had a high esteem for him, but also in the Affection
of all the Lorrainers, who looking upon him as their Deliverer, would cast of
all that Love and Endearment which they had showed him upon several Occasions,
when they should come to be informed, that for a passion impossible to succeed,
he had renounced the Re-establishment of his House, and the repose of a
Languishing People, that had their Eyes fixed only upon him. They told him at
length, that being presumptive Heir of Lorrain, he owed himself entirely to his
Subjects; that he ought to think of no other Alliance but such a one as might
be for their Consolation, and to redeem them from their Miseries; and that, in
short, he was to put a force upon his Inclinations. But in regard that
Mademoiselle d' Orleance was the only Object that possessed his Soul, he would
not listen to any thing that could be said concerning Her; or if he did hearken
sometimes, 'twas only to answer, that he did not think he was obliged to
sacrifice himself to the public; and that a Prince was in an ill Condition,
that was bound to be miserable all his Life, to procure the uncertain Welfare
of his Subjects.

Now that which confirmed him in his Obstinate Resolution to Court that
Princess, was this, that he met with some Persons, who designing to make
mischief between the King, Mademoiselle de Montpensier, and himself, fed him
with vain hopes, that he might find a thousand ways to compass his Desires.
'Twas true, they told him, that the King had given his Word to the Duke of
Tuscany, for the Prince, his Son; but they flattered him at the same time, that
if he persisted in his Pursuit, the King would fall off at last from his
Promise; that he was not so fond of the Match as Men imagined; and that he knew
well, that an Heir to the Dutchies of Lorrain and Bar was as good as the Prince
of Tuscany.

On the other side, the great Affection which Mademoiselle d'Orleance
manifested for the Prince of Lorrain, and her Reluctance to Marry the Prince of
Tuscany, contributed not a little to make him the more eager in his Design. He
knew that the young Princess had opened her Heart to the Duchess of Orleance
her Mother; that she had not concealed the tender Kindness she had for him;
that she had also discovered to her the little Love she had for the Prince of
Tuscany; and that it was the Dutchess's desire that her Daughter might be left
to her own Choice. But in regard the King took little care to satisfy the two
Lovers, and that he only minded his own and the Interest of the Kingdom in this
Affair, he pressed so hard the Conclusion of the Marriage, at the very time that
the Duchess of Orleance was about to have declared her Mind to him, that he
sent Monsieur de Tellier to her, to let her know that he had already Signed the
Contract, and that there was a necessity for Mademoiselle within three or four
days at most to take her Leave of the Court, and set forward for Tuscany; and
that she must either resolve to obey, or prepare her self for a Nunnery: nor
was there any Reply to be given to this. So that the Marriage with the Prince
of Tuscany was concluded, as the King had contrived it, and Mademoiselle
d'Orleance was sent away like Mademoiselle de Mancini, to end her days in Italy.

Prince Charles, thus disappointed of his Hopes on that side, there was nothing
left for him to do, but to put a Constraint upon his Inclinations, to forget
Mademoiselle d'Orleance, and to endeavor the regaining the Affections of
Mademoiselle de Montpensier, which without difficulty he might have effected.
But by I know not what strange Blindness, that always accompanies vehement
Passions, he was so far from taking that prudent Course, that he openly
bewailed his hard Fate, and privately withdrawing himself from his Father, some
days after that the new Princess had begun her Journey, away he posted to
overtake her at St. Fargeau, whither Mademoiselle had carried her, to take her
last Farewell of her. And this was that which completed the Ruin of his
Affairs. For Mademoiselle soon perceived, that 'twas not for here is, but solely
for her Sisters sake, that the Prince had taken that small Journey; and
therefore could not forbear to make it known to all the World.

Now though Prince Charles had so little Inclination to Marry Mademoiselle de
Montpensier, yet all the Court would not believe but that the Duke of Lorrain
was the only cause of it* and that the Aversion which his Nephew had to that
Alliance, was the Effect of his Contrivancces. Neither did Madam de Cheureuse,
(who concealed nothing from the Duke, as being wholly devoted to his Interests)
dissemble it one day to him, but told him, 'twas the general Report that was
spread abroad. She also declared, that the Queen Mother seemed to be convinced,
that he underhand made it his Business to cross the Conclusion of that Match;
and that notwithstanding all the Reasons she could allege in his
Justification, she could not persuade her to the contrary.

Now in regard it was the Duke of Lorrain's Interest that the Queen Mother
should be dispossessed of those thoughts, he revolved in his Mind a thousand
Contrivances which way to undeceive her. And at length having bethought himself
of going with his Nephew to Visit Madam de Cheureuse, where he had also
appointed to meet Mademoiselle de Guise, they were no sooner entered into
Discourse, but Madam de Cheureuse cunningly engaged the Prince in the Story of
Mademoiselle de Montpensier, as it was laid beforehand.

And then it was that the Duke, who knew Prince Charles's Aversion to that
Princess, believed that his Nephew would make no scruple to open his Mind
before those Ladies, who being Witnesses of what they heard themselves, would
be able to inform the Queen.

The Prince stood upon slippery Ground. For besides that he had not foreseen
the Ambuscado's that were laid for him, Madam de Cheureuse, who was the Lady of
the Court, that had the most Vivacity and Wit, changed the Discourse with so
much dexterity, made use of so many windings and turnings, uttered things so
pleasing, and charged the young Prince so home on every side, that 'twas to be
feared the subtle Lady would infallibly have compassed her Ends. But the Duke
perceiving the Snare, kept himself so well upon the Reserve, and so neatly
dissembled his Reluctance to Marry Mademoiselle de Montpensier, though
sometimes his Countenance betrayed his Expressions, that Madam de Cheureuse was
at a loss. However she made a fresh Onset, and told him with a Thousand
pleasing Insinuations, that she was persuaded he did but disguise his Thoughts,
and that his Lips betrayed his Heart. But she could draw nothing from him, but
that he Passionately desired the Match might be concluded, and that the Duke
would always persevere in his Desires of procuring him so great an Advantage.
Withal, he requested her to atone the Queen Mother in his Behalf, that his
Design might not miscarry, and at the same time to wait upon Mademoiselle de
Montpensier, and make her sensible of the Falsehood of what his Enemies had
imprinted in her Mind, that his Affections were never real toward her.

And now Prince Charles, who saw full well from that time forward, that Madam
de Chevreuses design was to ruin him with the Queen Mother, by causing her to
withdraw that Kindness which till then she had for him, at length believed
there was no other way to avoid falling into Disgrace, but to apply himself in
good Earnest to Mademoiselle de Montpensier. Thereupon, he resolved at the same
instant to try his utmost; and he not only listened to the Counsels of his
Friends, by all the was imaginable to endeavor the appeasing of a Princess,
that took all occasions to manifest her just resentment of his past Behavior,
but he followed those Counsels so punctually, and made so many fair Steps to
the Mark he aimed at, that Mademoiselle some days after began to find in her
self, that she was not so much incensed as she thought she had been.

And indeed, there was all the Probability in the World, as the Prince began to
follow his Business, that all things would have gone well again. But the Duke,
who had an eye upon all his Actions, was not long before he perceived his
Intentions; and in regard that according to the Conditions which himself had
proposed to Mademoiselle de Montpensier, the Match could not but be altogether
to the disadvantage of his Son the Prince of Vaudemont, he left no Stone
unturned to break it. But in regard he wanted a plausible Pretense, and that
Mademoiselle had endeavored to inform herself concerning the Revenues of the
Territories of Lorrain and Bar, and of the Security which she was to expect,
in case the Duke should make a Resignation in favor of the Prince; the Duke
made as if he looked upon this to be such an Affront, that one day before a
great Number of considerable Persons in the Palace of Orleance, he declared
aloud, That since Mademoiselle de Montpensier was so scrupulous, he would keep
his Territories, and never hear more of his Nephew's Marriage with her as long
as he lived. The Prince was then present, when the Duke brake forth into this
Passion; and in regard it would have been no great trouble to him, if there had
been never any more mention of the Marriage, provided there appeared no
Opposition in him, and that he might still preserve the Queen Mothers favor,
he was no sooner gone out of the Palace, but he hastened immediately to Madam
de Choisi, to let her know in what a Chafe he had left the Duke his Uncle.

Mademoiselle de Montpensier had such an Aversion for Madam de Choisi, that she
had often desired the Prince never to visit that Lady; and the Prince had
Promised to gratify her in that particular. And indeed, although at that time
he were very indifferent whether he displeased or no, yet he was in some
measure careful to make his Visit private. But in regard that Mademoiselle had
her Spies continually upon him wherever he went, she was informed of it the
same day, and took it so hainously, that she sent the next day two or three
times for the Marquis of Beauvau to acquaint him with her Resentment, and
complain of the Prince's breach of Promise.

The Marquis, in two or three Discourses which he had the same day with
Mademoiselle made use of all his Invention to excuse the Prince. But the
Princess, admitting no Atonement, continued her Complaints, broke out into
Reproaches, and in the height of her Indignation, not Mistress of her self,
could not forbear with some Tears in her Eyes, to call the Prince Ungrateful,
and to tell the Marquis he was unworthy the Affection, which she had been so
weak as to show him.

To this Monsieur de Beauvau, who plainly saw that as much incensed as
Mademoiselle de Montpensier seemed to be, yet that she really loved the Prince,
replied at the same time, That 'twas true, she had given him a terrible Alarm,
but that he perceived in her Eyes those Marks of an Inclination to Pardon the
Prince of Lorrain, which convinced him, that upon the first Visit the Prince
should pay her, she would not be offended if he endeavored to justify
himself; and that she would forget a Crime, which as heinous as it seemed to
be, would vanish into nothing when it came to be examined. To which
Mademoiselle answered only with a smile, and the Marquis who desired no more,
took his leave well satisfied; and from thence went to wait upon the young
Prince, with new Instructions, which he received like an apt Scholar.

In the mean while, the Duke of Lorrain understanding that Mademoiselle had
sent two or three times for the Marquis of Beauvau, and not able to fathom the
Reason of the Princess's being so earnest, was desirous to understand the
Mystery, which the Marquis as soon unfolded to him: And withal he aggravated
things so effectually, that the Duke, though he had begun a Quarrel with
Mademoiselle, could not forbear blaming his Nephew, and to disapprove his
Conduct. He found that he had done very ill in visiting Madam de Choisi, since
he knew there was nothing in which he could more disoblige Mademoiselle: adding
that he could not understand how a Prince that had any wit to understand his
own Interests should so strangely forget himself. And after he had himself
reproved him, the next day he admonished him for the future to carry himself
with more observance toward Mademoiselle than he had done. He laid before him
all the Advantages which that Match would procure to the House of Lorrain: and
for three or four days he was so eager to bring it to a Conclusion, that the
Prince was really allarum'd at it. For indeed considering the Condition of that
young Prince, he knew not what it was he desired, or what not: Or rather, he
always found in himself so great an Aversion to that Alliance, that he could
have wished the Duke had never thought of procuring him that Advantage, after
he had so strongly opposed it. Nevertheless, at the same time that the Duke
appeared so eager to Match the Prince with Mademoiselle de Montpensier, of a
sudden he changed his Mind, and proposed to Marry him with Madam de Nemours de
Longueville, who was looked upon to be above Six Millions richer than the
other; but neither Young nor Handsome, and nothing near so well descended as
Mademoiselle de Montpensier; and besides that, she was reputed a Woman not well
in her Wits; for that many People looked upon her to be freakish in her Humors.

But in regard the Duke had conceived great Advantages from this Match, by
reason of her extraordinary Wealth, though indeed she was not so rich a Fortune
as Mademoiselle de Montpensier, he caused one of his Gentlemen to treat first
with a Female Friend of Madam de Longueville, to bring the Business about. The
Gentleman acted according to his Commission, and found a Compliance to his
Wishes. But the Gentleman was no sooner out of the Duke's Lodgings, but the
Duke had altered his Mind, and so that Negotiation came to nothing: And Madam
Longueville's Friend was not a little troubled, imagining the Duke's design to
be only to make himself Sport, and to fool the Lady and her self. And indeed no
body knew where the Duke intended to fix his Eyes; and the greatest part of
those that were of this Mind, imagined that he had not any one particularly in
view, but that he only designed to lull his Nephew asleep. Yet two days after
he explained himself, and declared that the reason which obliged him to alter
his Mind was, because he had a Proposal made him for Marrying the Prince with
Mademoiselle de Nemours, the Duke of Vendosme's youngest Daughter.

This Proposal had been effectually made him, and he had at first rejected it;
but presently after his Gentleman was gone to treat with Madam de Longueville's
Friend, reflecting more seriously, he looked upon it as a Match so
Advantageous, that he could have no reason to demurr in consenting to it; so
much the rather because he was in hopes of Marrying the Prince of Vaudemont to
Mademoiselle d' Aumale her Sister. Besides, that Mademoiselle de Nemours, not
being of that High Rank as Mademoiselle de Montpensier, he should not be bound
to resign his Territories in favor of his Nephew. On the other side, Madam de
Nemours, Mother of the two Princesses, openly declared that she desired nothing
more than such a Double Alliance with the House of Lorrain. And with this
Design, she often went to visit Madam de Choisi, who had a great Ascendant over
the Prince. More than that, the Queen Mother had approved the Propasal. And
there was great likelihood, that Mademoiselle de Nemours would be no less
acceptable to the Prince; for she was Young, and surpassingly Beautiful.

Thus all things seemed to concur with the Designs of those that made the
Proposal; but Duke Francis, and Madam the Duchess of Orleance were Obstacles
in the way; who neither of them could relish the Proposal of Marriage. The Duke
was absolutely desirous that his Son should keep close to Mademoiselle de
Montpensier, hoping that if he persisted, he would not fail to regain the
Favor of that Princess, and that the Duke his Brother would not recoil from
his word, since he had engaged it to the King. And in case the Match with
Mademoiselle de Montpensier did not succeed, the Duchess of Orleance was then
for Marrying the Prince to Mademoiselle d' Alanson, her Daughter.

During these Amorous Intrigues, the Nobility of Lorrain, sent two
Commissioners to the Duke to lay before him their right to certain Privileges
which he denied them, believing that the Opportunity of the Matches proposed
for the Prince, would be favorable for their purpose. But the Duke would by no
means hear them. And therefore judging that his presence was necessary in
Lorrain, where he was afraid of threatening Commotions, he departed from Paris
somedays after the Lorrain Commissioners arrived; and in regard he was in great
haste, he took his leave of no person living, not so much as of the King.
However he left a Power in writing, under his Hand and Seal to conclude the
Marriage of his Nephew with Mademoiselle de Nemours, with this Restriction,
that it should not be a Match but upon Condition that Madam de Nemours, her
Mother, would justify her to be worth two Millions, as she had offered to do.

The Commissioners from Lorrain, of which one was the Count of Mauleon, made
very considerable offers also to Prince Charles of their Service, which he
refused to accept. On the other side, his Friends having plainly made it appear
to him, that the only course he had to take, was to reconcile himself with
Mademoiselle de Montpensier, he resolved to follow their Advice. And manifestly
seeing it was one of the greatest Advantages he could pretend to at that time,
he labored thenceforward to regain her favor by all the ways of Observance
and Submission imaginable.

Sometime after, the Count of Furstenbergh (now Cardinal Furstenbergh) was made
privy to these Intrigues of the Prince of Lorrain; and in regard he was in good
Esteem with Mademoiselle, the Prince desired him, after he had discovered his
mind to him, to make use of his Interest, to pacify her just Indignation, and
to spare no means that might conduce thereto, there being nothing which he more
desired then to be Married to her.

The Count of Furstenbergh, as one that was glad to serve the Prince, undertook
the Affair; and the next day, he gave a visit to Mademoiselle; and then it was
that he set forth after such an insinuating manner the Prince's extreme sorrow,
for having made so bad a use of his Good Fortune, and the Resolution he had
taken to surrender himself wholly to her, that he soon discovered in the
Countenance of the Princess, that she was no way displeased at his Mediation.

However, she could not dissemble to the Count the several occasions of
dissatisfaction which the Prince of Lorrain had given her. She ripp't up the
whole History of what had passed between 'em; and after she had spoken for
sometime with heat enough, she added, in a softer tone, that she would
endeavor to forget all the Injuries which the Prince had done her, and to give
him a real token, that she had nothing of Anger against him, she would not
complain to him of an Outrage, that had wounded her to the Soul, and which
another Lady would have resented, perhaps as long as she had lived, how
submissive soever the future Observance of the Prince might have been.

Now in regard that here she made a stop, the Count desired her to proceed, and
tell him what it was. The Princess begged his Excuse at first; but after a long
Importunity, she told him at length, That the Prince of Lorrain, having by the
means of one of her Gentlewomen obtained her Picture, which was extremely like
her, when she was but At which Age she was one of the greatest Beauties in the
Court.
Sixteen years of Age, he made a Sacrifice of it to the Princess of Tuscanny;
and that after all the most Injurious Jests and Flouts that both could utter
upon the Difference of what she was then, and at the time when he courted her,
they threw it into the Fire.

The Count of Furstenburgh made as if he could not believe the Story: telling
her with all, that the Prince of Lorrain was too prudent a Person, so much to
forget himself as to commit such a rudeness as that, and therefore that it was
certainly some invention of his Enemies. In a word, that there was no
Probability that Prince Charles could be capable of an Action of that Nature;
and that if she pleased to permit him to satisfy himself of the Truth from the
Prince's own Lips, he was convinced that the Prince would justify himself so
well, that she should acknowledge the Misinformation. The Princess, fearing
without question, that the Prince of Lorrain was not so Innocent as the Count
would persuade her, at first refused her leave; but the Count of Furstenbergh
pressed her with so much Importunity, that at length she condescended, and gave
him Permission according to his desire.

So soon as the Count had taken his leave of Mademoiselle de Montpensier, he
found out the Marquis de Bouveau, to whom he gave an Account of the Story of
the Picture, which very much perplexed the Marquis; for he tenderly loved the
Prince; and after they had argued for some time upon the Accident, they went
both together to the Prince's Lodgings. Presently the Count of Furstenbergh in
few words gave him to understand the favorable Inclinations which Mademoiselle
continued in his behalf, and then falling upon the Chapter of the Portraiture,
he conjured the Prince to tell him whether the Story were certainly true or no,
and whether the Picture were really thrown into the Fire, as Mademoiselle had
made her Complaint. The Prince paused a while at first, and seemed to be at a
kind of stand. Of which the Marquis and the Count, desirous to take their
Advantage, to the end they might the more easily make the intended Discovery,
fifted him every way, without giving him leave to recover himself: but all they
could get out of him, was, that the Picture had not that unhappy destiny which
Mademoiselle de Montpensier complained of; that in truth, he had it not in his
possession; for that he had left it with the Princess of Tuscanny; but that
Mademoiselle did him wrong to think he was capable to violate with so much
contempt, and after so unworthy a manner, the Portraiture of so great a
Princess as her self; that it was a malicious Story which his Enemies had
forged, to render him Odious to her; and that if they desired any clearer
Satisfaction, they needed no more but to address themselves to Mademoiselle de
Firtoi, who had been always the great Confident of Mademoiselle d'Orleance,
before she was Married to the Prince of Tuscany.

The Mother of Mademoiselle de Firtoi was a Lorrainer, and Wife of the first
Squire to Madam the Duchess of Orleance. Now besides that for these Reasons,
she was highly for the Marriage of the Prince with Mademoiselle de Montpensier,
and consequently would be willing to justify him against any accusation that
redounded to her Detriment, the Marquis de Bouveau was particularly acquainted
with her, and therefore having taken it upon him, resolved to visit her the
same day.

Madam de Firtoi was no sooner informed of the matter by the Marquis, but she
sent for her Daughter to understand the Truth of the Story. And indeed
Mademoiselle de Firtoi was at a stand at First; but being pressed by her Mother,
she presently told her, that she needed not take care for the Picture; for that
she had it in her Cabinet. In short, her Mother having commanded her to give it
the Marquis, to do with it, as he should think Convenient she delivered it into
his Hands.

The Marquis of Beauveau was extremely satisfied with his happy Success, and
immediately carried the Fatal Picture to the Count of Furstenbergh, to the end
that by showing it to Mademoiselle, he might convince her of the Falsehood and
Calumny of the Story. He acquitted himself exactly of his Commission; telling
Mademoiselle that the Prince of Lorrain had never parted with the Picture out
of his possession; that he had always kept it most charily; and that he always
carried it about him. And though the Princess suspected at first that there was
some juggle in the case, and that it was but a Copy; it was so easy a thing to
disabuse her in that particular, that the Count found it no hard matter to do
it.

There was all the Reason to hope, after such an Illustration as this, so
happily managed, that Mademoiselle de Montpensier would have condescended to
whatever the Prince of Lorrain could desire: and indeed his Affairs were never
in a better Condition: Mademoiselle took delight in his Company; and it may be
said, that they looked upon themselves already as by Destiny Appointed the one
for the other. But the Duke of Lorrain, who had tasted the sweets of
Sovereignty, and therefore would not strip himself of his Territories, started
so many Obstructions every day, that Mademoiselle tired out with so many
various Irresolutions and tedious Delays, would no more hear talk of the
Marriage. And that which utterly spoiled all, and made her to break off all
Conversation with the Prince, was this, that the King at the same time
rigorously Exacting the performance of the Treaty at Vincennes, constrained the
Duke to demolish the Fortifications of Nancy, which could not choose but offend
her, and make her disgust the Marriage. And thus was the Prince of Lorrain
defeated of all his Hopes, for not vigorously driving on his own Affairs till
it was too late: though in all likelihood this Match would never have come to
any thing; for that they who understood Affairs, were of opinion, that the King
himself opposed it underhand.

The Queen Mother therefore seeing that all the Preventive Care that had been
taken till that very time, had proved ineffectual, and that there was no way to
bring the Business about again, thought she could not do better then to concern
her self in the Duke of Lorrain's Design of Marrying his Nephew with
Mademoiselle de Nemours. And indeed in regard the Queen Mother had a great Love
for Madam de Nemours the Princess's Mother, she labored with an extraordinary
sedulity to bring about the Match. And to the end she might omit nothing that
could contribute to the success of her Design, she so vehemently importuned the
King then at Fontainbleau, to speak to the Duke of Guise, and to write to Duke
Francis then at Paris, that the King immediately dispatched away one of the
Priviledg'd Gentlemen of his Guards with a Letter to Duke Francis, wherein he
let him know how well he was pleased with the Match, and therefore desired him
to come and Confer with him about it as soon as possible he could.

But Duke Francis having a Reluctance to this Match, pretended an Indisposition
of Body, that he might not be obliged to attend the King. For he always
flattered himself that his Son might Marry Mademoiselle de Montpensier, and
therefore his design was to gain time, and to take his own, to break the
Queen's Measures, who earnestly labored in behalf of Mademoiselle de Nemours.
But the King having written to him a second Letter, more positive than the
former, he was constrained to repair to Fontainbleau.

Now though Duke Francis did not absolutely say that he was against the Match,
nevertheless he made it appear, that he had no great Inclination to it. And the
King who was not ignorant of his Reluctance, yet unwilling to make use of
Compulsion, thought it sufficient to let him understand by a great number of
Reasons, that he opposed the Happiness of the Prince his Son, since there was
no more to be expected from Madam de Montpensier. And to render his Reasons the
more effectual, he promised him, that if he would condescend to the Match, so
firmly to engage the Duke his Brother to secure the Possession of his
Territories to the Prince his Son, that he might depend upon it. His design
being, to take all manner of Security; to have it pass by an Authentic
Declaration in the Contract of Marriage, and in a manner so binding, that the
Duke should never be able to revoke it, in regard that he himself would be the
Guarantee.

These last Words of the King began to make Duke Francis totter, but that which
absolutely made him give his Consent to the Match, was a Letter to the Duke of
Guise, wherein the Duke of Lorrain had written to him, that if the Duke his
Brother did not resolve to Marry his Son to the Princess of Nemours, and that
before the King set forward for Bretagne, which would be within a few days, he
would revoke the Power given to him to Sign the Contract of Marriage in his
Name. So that every thing being ready prepared, Monsieur Lionne, together with
the Messieurs de Guise, and Archbishop of Laon, (afterward Cardinal d'
Estrees) went to the Lodgings of Duke Francis, there to pass the Contract of
Marriage as it was concluded at Fontainbleau, under the Conditions agreed on
both sides. So that the Contract was Signed by Monsieur Lionne, in the Name of
the King; by Monsieur de Guise, in the Name of the Duke of Lorrain; and by the
Bishop of Laon, in the Name of Madam de Nemours, for Mademoiselle de Nemours
her Daughter.

In the mean time the Queen Mother earnestly wishing to see the Marriage
concluded, which was only in dead colors as yet, and fearing lest the Duke of
Lorrain should change his mind, obtained of the King immediately to dispatch
away a Courier, to give him notice to send his Ratification in due form, or
else to desire him, to take himself a Journey to Paris, to put his last helping
hand to the Affair. The Duke of Guise also sent a Gentleman to give him a
particular Account of what had past. But though the Duke of Lorrain had himself
most earnestly desired this Fortune for the Prince, his Nephew, and that he had
made the first Proposal, yet was he so vexatiously mad, that the Business was
so far driven forward, that he sent a Gentleman to the Duke of Guise, to let
him know, that he had made too much haste, and that he was extremely surpised
that he had no sooner notice of it, to the end he might have given him new
Instructions. However this did not hinder him from Writing to the King that he
would be in Paris within a few days, as indeed he was; but it was only with a
design to cross the Marriage, and to break it quite off, if it were possible.

But though he did not openly declare his mind, the King, who easily guessed
his Intentions, not only by others, but also in Person frequently proposed to
him, that he would give him all the Assurances he could reasonably desire, and
that he would manage things so well, that all should be for the Advantage of
his Family. But in regard, that that was not the thing which he desired, he
started still so many new Difficulties, that the Prince of Lorrain began to
despair.

For he, by often visiting Mademoiselle de Nemours was become passionately
enamored of her, and from that time forward there was nothing which he more
desired then the Enjoyment of that Princess. And therefore perceiving that the
Business, as far advanced as it was, in stead of being brought to a speedy
Conclusion, was spun out with insupportable Delays; and fearing also, left in
the end he should be disappointed of this Match, as he had been of all the
rest, he was quite out of heart; more especially finding that all his
Submissions to the Duke proved ineffectual. One Obstacle was no sooner removed,
but another sprung up in the place, so that the Prince despairing of ever being
happy with Mademoiselle de Nemours, so long as the Business depended upon the
Duke of Lorrain, he went to the King, by the Advice of the Queen Mother, and
besought him with so much importunity to oblige the Duke to come to a
Conclusion, and to remove the Obstacles which he started every moment, that the
King immediately promised to make it his business, and to follow it so close,
that he should have no cause to complain of his neglect.

In short, the King, who had himself made the Match, by the Consent of the Duke
of Lorrain, was so incensed at his Shifts and Evasions, that the Prince was no
sooner gone, but he resolved to make use of all his Authority, and slight all
the Reasons which the Duke alleged to spin out the Business. Nevertheless,
considering presently after, that it was better to proceed in a fair way, if it
were possible, he endeavored by all the Arguments imaginable, to persuade the
Duke that it was his best Course to come to a Conclusion. To which purpose he
ordered Monsieur Lion to manage him; who had several Conferences with him to
that end. But those Conferences proving fruitless, he sent the Marshal
d'Estrees, Mademoiselle's Uncle, to him; who had no better success than
Monsieur de Lion. So that the King, at length tired out with his delays, sent
him Word, That it was his Desire that the Marriage of his Nephew should be
concluded within three Days at farthest; and therefore, if he would not give
his voluntary Consent, he would interpose his own Royal Authority, without
consulting him any more. This Resolution inflamed the Duke; and though he durst
not complain of the King, yet he made loud complaints of his Nephew. He told
the Marshal d'Estrees, That the Prince did very ill to make his Applications to
the King, to procure him to threaten force upon his Inclinations: That he
wished with all his Heart, he were Married to the Princess of Nemours, but he
had very strong Reasons not to be too hasty in the Affair, and that he might
one day repent of putting him upon Extremities. To this the Marshal Answered,
That the Prince was no ways concerned in the Matter, and that he accused him
unjustly: To which the Duke made no other Reply, but that his Nephew went the
way to loose all; that he should have let him had a Breathing time for some
Days, and not have driven on with such a violent Career. So that the Marshal
perceiving, that such a force upon his obstinate Will, would put him upon some
desperate design, endeavored to pacify him as much as he could, and took his
leave, with a promise, That he would endeavor to persuade the King to retract
what he had said; adding withal, to justify the Prince, That the King had
taken that Resolution of his own accord; and that indeed, he might see himself,
that after he had only amused his Majesty with Words, when he had positively
promised that he would sincerely labor the Conclusion of the Match, it was no
wonder his Majesty should grow a little Impatient. So that the Marshal having
importuned the King to stay Seven or Eight Days more without pressing the Duke,
he condescended to his Request. And this delay it was, to which the King
however did not condescend without an extraordinary Reluctance, that quite
broke off the Match, and reduced the House of Lorrain to that sad Condition,
wherein it is at this day. For the Duke, from that time forward, minding
nothing else but to revenge the supposed Injury which he had received from his
Nephew, took a Resolution so strange, as never could have been expected from
him, and which Posterity will hardly believe, considering the bad usage he had
received from France.

But that which exasperated the Duke, was the Haughtiness of Lewis XIV. who
making use of his Power, had been a little too quick with him, as already has
been said, in declaring so positively to him, that he would interpose his
Authority, in case he persisted obstinately to oppose the Marriage, or started
any new Difficulties to delay it. But this was to drive him on furiously; to
accustom him by degrees to be conformable to the Kings Will; and to enure him
betimes to obey such Laws as the King should afterward think fit to impose
upon him: So that the thing being rightly considered, was of dreadful
Consequence. But although the King had not carried things so high as he did, in
respect to a Sovereign Prince, who had no dependence upon him, certain it is,
that the King of France was the greatest Enemy he had, and he knew it by woeful
Experience. For besides, the Towns which he detained from him, the Treaty which
he had forced him to Sign at Vincennes, after he had drilled him on whole
years, as he did in that Negotiation, he had made it his whole Business ever
since the Death of Lewis XIII. to invade his Dukedoms; and that all the World
knew. All these Reasons with an infinite number of others not necessary for
this place, were sufficient to render the King hateful to him. Nevertheless he
was so far from taking a course to throw off his Fetters, that his Resentment
against Prince Charles, and the Artifices of his Enemies that incensed him to
Revenge, rendered him so little the Master of himself, that never considering,
that to make his Nephew miserable, he run the hazard of making more Unfortunate
his Son, the Prince of Vaudemont, so Worthy to succeed him, he laid a design to
make the King of France his general Heir, and to Translate the Succession of
his Territories to a Prince who had been the only occasion of the greatest part
of his Misfortunes, and wore the very Crown which he complained that his
Predecessors had usurped from his Family. Which the Duke of Guise, and Madam de
Montpensier were within a little of proving under the Reign of Henry III. in
the time of the League.

However it was a thing of too great Consequence to be determined without
serious Consideration. So that he Studi'd for some days, before he would put
his Design in Execution. And in regard, that all that while he was turmoil'd
with a thousand Thoughts, he was become so Distracted, that his Domestic
Servants perceived there was some strange Combat in his Mind, which caused his
Understanding to take those Flights which were not usual with him. Nor would it
be an easy thing to express his Condition at that time. You should have him of
a sudden call for his Coach to go to the King and discover his Intention: By
and by he would recollect himself, that this was so contrary to his real
Interests, as afterward he declared, that he would whisper to himself, that he
had rather his Nephew should succeed him, than a Prince, who not content to
have stripped him of his Territories, used him no better than one of his
Subjects, with his petty Menaces. He had once a design to retire into Lorrain,
and let the King do what he pleased. But immediately changing his Mind, he
resolved at length to spend some time in the Country, there to walk away the
disquiet of his Thoughts, and bring his Determinations to an absolute
Conclusion.

To which purpose he made choice of the Village of Montrevil, which is not
above a League from Paris.

Now in regard there were some that attended the Duke who were highly concerned
for Prince Charles, they gave him notice that the Duke was designing to go out
of Town, and that they had some Suspicion that he would be gone the next day.

When this News came to the Prince, it was so late at Night, that it was
impossible for him to wait upon his Uncle. But the next day he rose very early
in the Morning to attend him, and let him understand that he was acquainted in
part with his intention to withdraw himself privately out of Paris into
Lorrain, and to beseech him at the same time, with all manner of Submission and
Profound Respect, not to take a Resolution so fatal as that would prove. But
the Duke was already gone. The Prince was at his Wits end. But being told that
he was to lie that Night at Vilmareuil, a House of Pleasure belonging to the
Prince of Lislebonne, about Fourteen Leagues from Paris, he took Horse as soon
as possible with only three or four in his Company. Yet with all the Speed he
could make he could get no farther then Meaux, which is above Four Leagues from
the House, and it was late in the Night before he got thither too.

But the Duke being gone no farther then Montrevil, there was no News of him at
Meaux; beleiving therefore that he might have taken some other Road, the Prince
sent away a Messenger to Vilmareuil: Where finding that the Intelligence that
was given him was altogether mistaken, he returned in all have to Paris.

The sudden departure of Prince Charles strangely allarum'd Duke Francis, and
the Duchess of Orleance. For the Prince was no sooner out of Town, but a
Report was spread about, That he was only gone to overtake the Duke his Uncle
to Duel him, not able to endure the Injustice which he did in refusing his
Consent to his Marriage with the Princess of Nemours. But his return soon
quieted their Minds again. However, they that were acquainted with Prince
Charles's Humor did him that Justice, and justified him from being capable of
such an Ignominious Despair, which was so far from procuring him any change in
his Affairs, that it would have utterly ruined 'em, and been an injury to
himself never to have been repaired. In short, he was a Prince too Prudent to
forget himself to that Degree: And besides, he knew too well, by what ties he
was bound to the Duke of Lorrain, to dip his Hands in his Blood, in case
Fortune had favored him in a single Combat; which however was a chance very
dubious.

And therefore it may be readily conjectured, that they were none of the
Princes Friends that spread about such a Rumor. And as it could not be without
a purpose to render him odious to his Uncle, so the News quickly flew to
Montrevil.

But though the Duke gave little Credit to the Report, he could not forbear
flying out into sharp Language against his Nephew. He was already too much
incensed, not to show some symptoms of his Anger. For Princes are like other
Men; they are subject to the same Infirmities; they are also many times more
apt to entertain violent Passions, than their Inferiors: And there are few,
how generous they may be otherwise, that do not find some Sweetness in Revenge.
So that the Duke himself could not refrain from saying openly, That he would be
Revenged of the Rashness of his Nephew; that since his good or bad Fortune
depended solely upon him, he knew how to humble his Pride; and that let what
would happen, he wore a Sword by his side as well as he, and would not stir an
Inch for him.

But this was not the only Misfortune that befell the Prince of Lorrain? For at
the same time that the Duke seemed most exasperated, Madam the Duchess of
Orleance received a Letter from an unknown Hand, and without any Subscription,
wherein she had warning given her, that three Friends of Prince Charles's,
among whom the Count of Furstembergh was one, had a design to make away the
Duke of Lorrain. That they had been a long time consulting whither they should
Assassinate him, or seize upon his Person, and then shut him up in some Castle:
But that at length, having considered that which way soever they should do the
Business, it would be absolutely impossible to preserve the Reputation of the
Prince; in regard, that all would come out in the end; they resolved, that the
Prince should Fight his Uncle Hand to Hand, there being no other way to rid him
of a Prince that persecuted him so Cruelly.

This Letter could not be kept so private but that it came to the Duke of
Lorrain. Nevertheless, although he had all the reason in the World to conclude
it an Imposture, as the Author of the Letter since Confessed; and that he were
otherwise Convinced, that if the Prince had any such design, he could have had
a thousand ways to put it in Execution; he determined to make the King his
Heir, as he had contrived it before: And three Days after he Signed a private
This Treaty was signed in the Abbey of Mont-Marte, in the presence of the D. of
Guise, and the Abbess his Sister. Feb. 6. 1662.
Treaty, of which the principal Articles were,

I. That he made the King his Heir of the Dukedoms of Lorrain and Bar.

II. That for the security of his Faith and Word, he would immediately
Surrender into his Hands the Town of Marsal.

III. That the King on his part, in Acknowledgment of this Donation, should
associate to his Crown all the Princes of the House of Lorrain, and that for
the time to come they should be looked upon in France as Princes of the Blood;
and that their Creation should be allowed in all his Courts of Parliament, and
acknowledged by all the States of the Kingdoms of France and Navarr; so that
those Princes, according to their Eldership, should be capable of succeeding,
in Case the Line of Bourbon failed.

Upon occasion of which last Article it was, that the Duke, who sometimes loved
to break a Jest, one day joaking with the Prince of Conde, told him, That he
never knew how to make above one Prince of the Blood in his Life, but that he
with one dash of his Pen had made Four and Twenty.

This Treaty was already Signed without the least Suspicion that either Duke
Francis or the Prince had of it: for indeed, who could have expected any such
thing? But in regard it was a thing actually done, and that the King cared not
to make a Secret of it, those two Princes had notice of it soon enough. For
Monsieur de Lionne, who was himself the Author of the Negotiation, made it
known to the Count of Furstenbergh, and the Count the next moment carried the
News to Prince Charles, who was so stunned with the Blow, that he knew not
where he was. It Is true, Monsieur Lionne had not positively said that the
Treaty was yet signed; and therefore in regard the Friends of Duke Francis, and
Duke Francis himself were in hopes, that it would prove no more than a Loud
Threat; or, that if the Duke had resolved upon such an Extremity, he might be
wrought upon to change his Mind, by making him sensible of his going about to
ruin his Family, therefore Prince Charles was advised to go and throw himself
at his Feet.

The Prince was deeply sensible of his Misfortunes: for he saw himself not only
stripped in a Moment of the Territories of the Duke of Lorrain, upon the
Succession to which he depended; but that which more cruelly perplexed him at
that instant was, that after this terrible blow, he was no more to think of
Mademoiselle de Nemours: there being no likelihood that she would marry a
Prince despoiled of all his hopes, and reduced to the Condition of a Private
Life.

In the midst of these thoughts, he accosted his Uncle with a Consternation
hardly to be represented by the most Skilful Pencil. He moved him at first with
an infinite Number of wounding Expressions; and after he had laid before him,
with a profound Submission, the Injury which he did to himself in the World, if
he persisted in his Resolution to make a Foreign Prince the Successor to his
Territories, to the Prejudice of his own Lawful Heirs: He conjured him to
withdraw himself from Paris; there being but that only way to break a Treaty,
the Conclusion of which he would infallibly repent when it was too late. He
besought him to consider, that out of a desire to ruin him, he ruined the
Prince of Vaudemont, his Son; and that he would be universally looked upon as
the weakest of all the Princes of Europe; which he must be forced to
acknowledge upon maturer and more considerate thoughts. And that he might
endeavor by all manner of means to bring him to a Recollection of himself, and
render his persuasions prevalent, he added, that if he were resolved to leave
France, which he most humbly besought him to do, he was ready to follow him,
and to surrender himself up into his hands; to give an absolute Obedience to
his Commands; and in a word, he let him know, that after what manner soever he
used him, he should be satisfied with his Destiny, provided he brake off the
Treaty.

Now in regard that all that Prince Charles said proceeded from his Heart, his
Remonstrances pierced the Duke of Lorrain so deeply to the quick, that he could
not forbear to relent, and to protest that he had over-rashly engaged himself
in that Affair. But the Prince was come too late; the Duke could make no
Advantage either of his Counsel or his Remonstrances: And though he were a Person
of a present utterance, he knew not at first what Answer to make the Prince.
But at length, after he had paused a while, he told him, that himself was the
Cause of his Misfortune; that if he had not driven on so furiously as he did,
he had never reduced himself to that Extremity; and that it was an Act of
Despair to which he had forced him against his own will. He did not think it
necessary to tell the Prince he had Signed the Treaty, but he let him
understand, that he had given his word so positively to the King, that he could
not retract. And whereas the Prince persisted in representing to him the
necessity of his withdrawing himself out of France, and that then there might
be some Expedient thought upon, he replied, That it was observed on all parts,
ever since the Negotiation was on foot, that the Counsel which he proposed was
good, but dangerous to take; that in short, he had been so unfortunate at
Toledo, that he would not try the Experiment, whether he should be more happy
in Paris, should it be his Misfortune to be Arrested.

While the Prince was thus importuning the Duke his Uncle, Madam de Nemours,
and the Marshal D'Estree arrived at the Duke of Lorrain's Lodgings. Now in
regard they could speak with more freedom than Prince Charles, they omitted
nothing to show him in the worst dress the Error he had committed. And the
Marshal after several Discourses, told him plainly, That neither the Prince his
Nephew, nor his Son the Count of Vaudemont, would have any reason to be
beholding to him, unless he resolved to retract what he had done; besides, that
all the World would talk of him to his eternal Infamy. To which he replied with
a cold indifferency, that as for his Nephew, he did not pretend to oblige him,
though he began to repent that he had carried on his Revenge so far; That he
was above all that his Enemies could say of him, to the staining either of his
Honor or his Memory; and that as for the Prince of Vaudemont, he had managed
his Interests so well, that he would have Cause to be glad to see himself
stripped of an Estate which he was not sure that he should ever enjoy, though he
never had signed the Agreement, considering the Pretensions of Duke Francis,
and the Condition of Affairs. In short, besides the Articles mentioned, the
King had accorded him the Liberty of disposing a Hundred thousand Crowns a
year, to whom he should think fit, to be charged upon such Lands as he should
make choice of in his Dutchies; and he had also leave for once to Levy a
Million, and to employ it as he thought convenient.

Madam de Nemours was so exasperated at the Duke's Answer, that she brake forth
into a violent Passion against him; more then that, she complained after a most
extraordinary manner, of the Injustice which the King himself had done her,
insomuch that the Marshal was constrained to give her a Check: for indeed she
uttered very injurious Language in the Transports of her Choler. But these were
only airy Complaints, that signified little, and therefore might the more
easily be forgiven. For besides that these Ejaculations of a boiling Passion,
no way contributed to accommodate the Breach, the Duke had already done that
which he was fully persuaded he ought not to have done. And this was evident
the next day. In a word* it was discovered, that the Duke of Guise himself had
carried the Agreement Signed, to the King, at the time that he was raffling at
St. Germain's Fair; and this Circumstance was farther added, that the King had
no sooner cast his Eyes upon him, but with a smile he told him, There was never
a Jewel in the Fair of equal value to the Price of that which he had brought
him.

The King, till the Signing, Sealing and Delivery of this Treaty, had looked
upon the Prince of Lorrain with so much Esteem and Honor, and had given him
also so many Testimonies of his Favor, upon all Occasions that offered
themselves, that this Unfortunate Prince, in that Extremity to which he saw
himself reduced, believed that the only course he had to take, was to have
recourse to the King's Generosity. For considering what was done, there was no
likelihood that he could expect any thing from the Duke of Lorrain. So that he
relied no farther upon him; but he flattered himself that the King would suffer
himself to be wrought upon, to desist from his Pretensions of Succession to the
Duke's Territories, if he could but come to lay open the Matter before him; and
this was also the Opinion of his Friends. Now in regard he was to be at a Ball,
that was to be Danced within some few days before his Majesty, believing that
while the Preparations for that lasted, he might find some Pretense to
discourse the King more frequently than he was wont to do, he neglected no
opportunity to speak with him. At last, three or four days before the Ball,
having met with a favorable Moment, he conjured him to be his Protector, as he
had been till that day; to remember how much his his Royal Word was engaged for
the Conclusion of his Marriage with Mademoiselle de Nemours, and not to take
advantage, to his prejudice of the Duke of Lorrain, his Uncle's Hatred toward
him; since his Majesty was so well convinced, that it was only because he had
thrown himself into his Arms, that he had drawn this Tempest upon himself. I
know not whether the King gave any heed to this Remonstrance, how submissive
soever it might be; but howsoever it were, he was not a little surpised at it.
He looked very sternly upon the Prince, and in a grave and serious tone, told
him, That Kings did not govern themselves like private Persons. That there were
certain Maxims of State which were a Law to them; which Law was also very
Natural; that nevertheless, if he would confide in his Affection, and
absolutely refer the Business to him, he would promise him to take a particular
Care of his Interests, and that considering the Condition of his Affairs, the
best Counsel he could follow, was to rely upon his favor.

The Duke perceiving well by this uncertain and indefinite Answer, that there
was nothing more to be done there, took his leave without making any reply; and
though he had laid the design of a Method quite contrary to that which the King
advised him to take, he dissembled so well his Resentment till the Night that
the Ball was to be danced, that no body had the least suspicion of the
Resolution he had taken. He came to the Ball, and danced with a surprising
Activity of Body, and Gayety of Mind. But he had no sooner finished his Part,
but he withdrew himself, and that Night departed Paris, attended only by his
Squire, and his Valet de Chamber, so privately that nobody perceived it. This
Absenting himself, as much agreed upon as it was between himself, Duke Francis,
and the Duchess of Orleance, put them however into a very great Consternation,
when they came to reflect upon the Destiny of a young Prince, who saw himself
constrained to go a Begging, from Court to Court, the Favor of Foreign
Princes, after so many fair Hopes, and so frequently arriving within view of
being one of the most happy Princes of Europe. But the little hope which he
had, that the King of France, who had been a long time in love with the
Dutchies of Lorrain and Bar, would resign his new Pretensions, by the Donation
of Charles IV. and the severe Necessity to which the Prince of Lorrain was
reduced to wander perhaps in vain, without meeting any Settlement, worthy his
Great Heart, and Birth; All these and a thousand other various Thoughts
crowding into their Minds, afflicted them to that degree, that they could not
dissemble their Grief, whatever they could do to conceal it. And if Duke
Francis, and the Duchess of Orleance were so extremely perplexed for the
departure of the Prince, Madam de Nemours was no less. For as she was a Woman
of great Sincerity, and that she was not of a humor to conceal her Passions,
she showed her Resentment to all the World. And for the Princess her Daughter,
she was so little Mistress of her self upon this Occasion, that she could not
refrain from bursting forth into Tears.

THE LIFE OF Charles V. DUKE of Lorrain and Bar, And Generalissimo of all the
Imperial Forces. THE SECOND BOOK.
THE Prince of Lorrain's withdrawing himself, did not a little of a sudden
surprise the King. But in regard, that considering the Condition of his
Affairs, there was no danger to be apprehended from it, he did not much mind
it. Nay, when he had better considered it, he was rather overjoyed that the
Prince had Banished himself. For though he had let the World already
sufficiently know, that he was no way disposed to give Ear to the Plaints and
Suits of that Prince, he was glad that now the Prince had given the World an
occasion to say, That the Prince himself had drawn all his Misfortunes upon his
own Head; that he might have come to an agreement with him, had he left the
Business to his Discretion; and that he might perhaps have been wrought upon by
his Submissions, and his Services, to have resigned, in his Favor, the
Donation of the Duke his Uncle. Besides, that it was a plausible pretense to
break off the Marriage with Mademoiselle de Nemours; for there it was that the
game was to begin.

On the other side, the Prince esteeming himself happy, that he had so well
withdrawn himself from Court, where he was afraid of doing those Things, which
might in the Consequence be prejudicial to him; and fearing besides, least so
soon as it should be perceived he was missing, that he might be pursued and
Arrested by the Kings Warrant, after all his diligence to avoid this second
Misfortune; he was no sooner got out of the Hall where the Ball was Danced, but
he made haste to a Street, where some of his People attended him with his
Coach; and in a Moment after, taking Horse, he rode all Night, and all the next
day, without making any stop, till he arrived at Besunson; from whence it was
agreed between Duke Francis, and Madam d'Orleance, that as soon as he received
News from them, he should immediately depart for Vienna.

Now in regard this was the safest course that he could take; besides that he
himself was positive, that considering the condition of his Affairs, there was
a necessity for him to throw himself into the Emperors Protection, Duke Francis
made no question but that he would have followed his own Resolutions. But his
Love for the Princess of Tuscany unluckily awaking in him at a time when he had
something else to think of, of a sudden he altered his Design; and without
foreseeing, that what he projected could signify nothing; that he went to
expose himself, and at the same time to expose the Princess, he departed the
next day for Florence, under pretense of going to Rome, to inform the Pope of
his Condition, and desire his Protection.

The Grand Duke, who knew too well the Affection which the Princess of Tuscany
had had for the Prince of Lorrain, and feared that the presence of a Prince
that was handsome, and had been once Beloved, would trouble the repose of the
Prince his Son, was very much allarum'd at this unexpected visit. However he
paid him all the Honor imaginable: He told him how much he was concerned for
his Misfortunes, and protested his extreme Sorrow to see a Prince of his Merit
reduced to such a Condition. However that did not hinder the Dukes intimating
to him, himself; and letting him know by others, that he should be infinitely
obliged to him if he would retire from his Court. Adding withal, that he could
not but know himself, the powerful Reasons that constrained him to that
Request, and that when he had considered it, he would never take it ill. As for
the Princess of Tuscany, she never saw him but in Company, and that very rarely
too. Thereupon following the Advice, and withal foreseeing the little
Mortifications, which he was likely every day to undergo if he staid in
Florence, he departed the City, and went immediately for Rome.

It is not to be expressed what infinite Testimonies of Tenderness and
Affection the Pope gave him. For besides, that from the first Moment he saw
him, he was Charmed with his Wit, his Air, and his Behavior, the deplorable
Condition to which he was reduced, augmented the extreme Kindness which he had
conceived at first sight for a Prince who seemed to him so little to deserve a
Destiny so severe. He made him deeply sensible of the great Inclination which
he had to grant him his Protection, and embrace his Interests. But in regard,
that at that time the King of France and he were at some Difference, he gave
him to understand, that it was absolutely impossible to do him any Service with
that Monarch, who instead of listening to him, would look upon whatever he
could say in his behalf, as an Affront. And his Holiness at length so perfectly
convinced him of the little Success that could be expected from such an
Attempt, that the Prince at last, without any more ado, concluded to go to
Vienna, seeing well that the Popes Favor could do him no good.

Had he been overruled by the Inclinations of his Heart, he had certainly
repassed through Florence. He felt within himself those violent Emotions for
the Princess of Tuscany, which it was impossible for him to quell, though he
well knew at the same time that he only pursued a Shadow; and that it was a
Weakness which could not choose but do him an Injury, if he did not endeavor
to conceal it, since he could not quite extinguish it. For it may be said, that
he laid as much to Heart the loss of that Princess, as of the Territories of
Lorrain and Bar. He found by Experience upon this Occasion, that a Flame never
well quenched is easily rekindl'd; and that his first Inclinations had got
Possession of the better share of his Thoughts. But his Reason, and his Duty,
or rather his real Love for Mademoiselle de Nemours, having at length
vanquished his Chimerical Passion, he resolved at last to think no more of the
Princess of Tuscany, as long as he lived; and because he would not expose
himself to a new Temptation, he went directly for Venice, where he was received
with great Honor.

Before he arrived at Vienna, he stopped a while at Munick, where he received
so many Civilities from the Elector and Electoress of Bavaria, that he could
have willingly tarried longer at that Court, but that his Affairs called him
farther off. He arrived at length at Vienna where the Emperor upon his first
coming, assured him, that he would lay his Interests to Heart, and when
opportunity offered, he would use his utmost Endeavors to restore him to his
Rights, and secure him a Succession, which the Duke of Lorrain could not
dispose from his own Line without the greatest Injustice in the World.

He also took such an Affection for the Prince, that he always called him his
Brother, remembering that when they were Children, they were wont to give one
another that Appellation.

In the mean time the King of France, to show his extraordinary Joy for having
so easily acquired two such considerable Dukedoms, gave Order for a Carousel in
the grand Piazza of the Tuilleries, with an incredible Magnificence: But for
all that he was forced to make use of Violence, before he could assure himself
the Possession of his new Inheritance.

In the Duke of Lorrain's Donation, as I have already observed, the Duke had
inserted an Article, whereby the King was obliged to cause all the Princes of
the House of Lorrain to be acknowledged Princes of the Blood in all the States
and Parliaments of France, to the end they might be capable of Succeeding to
the Crown, in case the Line of Bourbon happened to fail. So that when the King,
in pursuance of the Treaty, Summoned the Duke of Lorrain to deliver Marsal into
his Hands, the Duke on the other side required from the King, the Allowance of
the Treaty in the Court of Parliament of Paris, and that he might be admitted
into the States of the Kingdom; in regard it was agreed, that before all
things, he should cause all the Conditions and Articles of the Donation to be
accepted in Form according to the Covenants.

Neither did the King oppose the Duke of Lorrain's Demand at all; but when the
Covenants came to be put in Execution, he found an infinite number of
Obstructions which he never expected.

Duke Francis no sooner understood that the King was gone in Person to the
Palace to Register the Donation so prejudicial to all his Family, but he
presently hastened thither, to make some Opposition, which immediately he did,
though he were thrust back by the Kings Officers; and that too with an unseemly
Violence.

He set forth in that Opposition, that the Donation made by his Brother to the
King, was to be looked upon as Null and Void. For if the Dutchies of Lorrain and
Bar were to be considered as States, where the Salick Law took place, they were
not Alienable; and farther, that if the last Will and Testament of Rene King of
Sicily, and Duke of Lorrain, were to be observed as it ought to be, by which
his Territories were be Entailed upon the Male Heirs, the same Consequence was
still to be drawn from it, that the Person in Possession was but Tenant for
Life, so that the Duke of Lorrain could not dispose of the Dukedoms of Lorrain
and Bar as he had done. In the Second place, That if on the other side, they
insisted upon the Female Right, which was most observed in Lorrain, as might be
proved by several Examples, and chiefly by that of the Princess Nicole, in
whose Right Charles IV. enjoyed the Government of the Dutchies which he had
Alienated; those Dukedoms ought to revert to Prince Charles, the only Heir of
that Duchess.

But Duke Francis was not the only Person that opposed the Registring of the
Donation. For the Duke of Vendosm at the same time presented a Petition,
wherein he besought his Majesty to consider, That Henry IV. had sent a
Declaration to the Parliament, purporting, That he should walk in Processions
immediately next after the Princes of the Blood, and according to that
Declaration, his Majesty allowed him that place in the Ceremony of the Knights
of the Holy Ghost. And therefore that he hoped his Majesty would grant the same
Privilege to his Children, who had a Right to it by their Mothers side, being
the Daughter of Emanuel of Lorrain, Duke of Mercoeur, who ought to precede all
those of the House of Guise, and that of the Marquis of Mouy, that were
descended only from the younger Family. And lastly* he besought his Majesty to
permit both him and his Children to make their Opposition, and defend their
Rights, according to the Rules of the Common Law. The Prince of Courtenai, and
his Children also made the same Protestations. And the Dukes and Peers
Remonstrated in their places, That the Preeminence that the King had granted to
the Princes of Lorrain, wounded the highest Dignity in the Kingdom. That they
could produce Examples to prove that the Princes of the Blood, and even Kings
themselves of Foreign Countries had been preceeded by the Peers at the
Coronations of the Kings of France, in Assemblies of Parliament, and at other
Ceremonies; and that they hoped his Majesty would not suffer them to undergo
any Diminutions of their Privileges under his Reign.

They who were concerned in this Affair, flattered themselves, that the
Parliament would refuse to verify the Donation. But in regard, the King was
come to the Parliament, with Four Thousand Men at his Heels, and consequently
with a Resolution to be Obeyed, the Parliament without any Hesitation fulfilled
the Kings Pleasure. So that the same day, which was the 27th of February 1662.
the King having himself presented a Declaration containing the Clauses and
Conditions upon which Charles IV. had surrendered to him the Propriety of the
Dukedoms of Lorrain and Bar, the Declaration was Registered. And to show that
he did not altogether despise the Oppositions and Remonstrances which had been
made him, and that he had not laid 'em aside, till he had made it appear that
they were of no validity, the Advocate General Talon, maintained, before he
came to his Conclusions, that the States of Lorrain and Bar were never
regulated by the Salic Law; and as for what concerned the Entail made upon the
Heirs Male by the King of Sicily, which was that which Duke Francis alleged,
it made for the Kings of France, seeing that Charles of Anjou, Nephew and
Successor to Rene, not having any Childern, made Lewis XI. and Charles the
VIII. his Heirs. To which he added, that 'twas Ridiculous to allege the
Succession of Women, after having set up the Male Title only: That Lorrain
having been always dependant upon the Crown of France, it was but just that it
should be reunited to it; and in a Word, that by what ever Title Duke Charles
claimed a Right to the Dukedoms, as he had been stripped of 'em by the Deceased
King, so they were not restored to him but by the Indulgence of his Successor;
and therefore since there was a way found out to unite them again to the Crown
by an Authentic Stipulation, it behooved his Majesty for the Interest of his
Kingdom, to make his Advantage of it. And as for what concerned the Honor
which the King had accorded to the Princes of Lorrain, to be reputed Princes of
the Blood, it was a Privilege that was never yet contested with a Crowned Head;
though Monsieur the Chancellor had spoken very boldly in that Affair; for he
had positively and in proper terms affirmed, That the King could not make
Princes of the Blood without his Consort the Queen.

The Publication of the Donation thus made, put Duke Francis into a great
Consternation, and all those of the House of Lorrain. There were none but some
of those Princes that were settled in France, and enjoyed all their Estates in
that Kingdom, who suffered themselves to be dazzled with the Hopes of coming to
be Princes of the Blood, and of being preferred under that Character, to all
Foreign Sovereign Princes, without considering that it was to the Extinction of
their own Family; and that there was so little likelihood of seeing that
Article for their Association into the Princes of the Blood observed, in regard
of an Infinite Number of Oppositions that were made, and would be made every
day, that they had more reason to fear, lest one day they should be reduced to
be no Princes at all.

In the mean time, Duke Francis omitted no Industry to let the Duke of Lorrain
understand the wrong he had done him: And his Remonstrances wrought so
effectually upon the Duke, that after he testified his extreme Sorrow for
having signed the Donation, he promised without intermission to labor the
Disannulling it, and that so soon as he had brought his design to pass, he
would restore his Territories to Prince Charles; reserving to himself a
reasonable Pension. And to assure him of Performance, and let him see that he
approved the Prince's withdrawing out of France, he had furnished him with Five
hundred Pistols to defray his Expenses to Vienna.

The Duke being thus returned to himself, and extremely troubled at the
Donation which he had made of his Territories to the King, refused to Surrender
up Marsal, though the Stipulation were verified in Parliament. And the Pretense
which the Duke laid hold on was very lawful; for that the Parliament, in
verifying the Deed, had added a Condition which rendered it utterly void. The
Clause of the Verification imported, that the Princes of Lorrain should not be
reputed Princes of the Blood, but upon Condition, that all the Princes of the
Blood should Sign and Ratify the Stipulation: for defect of which they were
all in general excluded from the Benefit of that Association. It was urged by
the Duke of Lorrain, that there were several Princes of that House, who were as
yet under Age, and therefore incapable of doing any Act that could stand good
in Law: that Duke Francis had put in Exceptions against the Registring of the
Donation; that Prince Charles, his Nephew, had withdrawn himself out of the
Kingdom, because he would not be forced to Sign it; and so, that Clause which
the Parliament had added, overthrowing all, he was not bound to perform the
Articles of the Treaty which concerned the King's Interest: that the King had
not performed those, that concerned the Interest of his House, since he had not
stripped himself of his Territories in Kindness to him, but with this
Consideration, that the Princes of the House of Lorrain might be in a Capacity
to succeed to the Government of a Kingdom which had formerly belonged to their
Predecessors.

The King, who saw that the Duke of Lorrain was fixed in his Resolutions, urged
no farther the Surrender of Marsal. He made a show, as if he did not much care
for that Town* and imagined that the Vexation for what had passed a little
before, had put the Duke into an ill Humor, and that if he managed him well,
he should bring him in time frankly to perform whatever he desired: and there
was great likelihood that this way would take. But when the King found him to
be unalterable; that all his Managements proved fruitless; that he still
obstinately demanded that the Parliament should change their Language; and that
he was ready to retire into Lorrain, with a Resolution to defend Marsal; he
thought it then high time to employ more effectual means than he had hitherto
made use of. To that purpose, he endeavored to hold Intelligence with the
Lorrain Nobility, who were not a little discontented. He imagined, that if he
could but gain some of the Principal Gentlemen, there would be nothing more
easy than to make himself Master of Marsal, and some other considerable Place
to boot; and therefore to effect this, there was no means that he left
unessay'd. This Negotiation was undertaken by the Governor who stayed at Nanci,
with a strong Garrison, till the Fortifications were dimolish'd, and he missed
but very little of Success. For in regard he made large Promises to the
Nobility, that if they would shake off the Duke of Lorrain's Yoke, they should
be restored to their Ancient Privileges, they stood tottering a long time. But
coming at length to consider, that there is seldom the more Liberty gained by
the Change of Domination, and that our Enemy becomes our Master, they rejected
the King's Offers: choosing rather to languish for some time under the
Government of a lawful Prince, though he disputed their Privileges, than to
purchase a dubious Liberty by Treason and Revolt.

But before the Lorrain Nobility had determined to refuse the Advantages
offered them by the King of France, Prince Charles, who remained at the Court
of Vienna, was informed of what passed at Nanci; and indeed, the News alarmed
him; for he thought the King would compass his Ends. Fearing therefore, lest if
he became Master of any one Strong Hold, he would soon get Possession of all
the rest, and that it would not then be in the Duke's Power to expel the Enemy
out of his Dominions, he posted away for Lorrain, and found a means himself to
get into Marsal undiscovered. He was no sooner arrived, but he dispatched a
Courier to the Duke his Uncle, to give him notice, that he might not be
surpised at his coming: Protesting withal, that his putting himself into the
Town, was only to secure it, upon the Information which had been given him,
that the King of France had a design to Besiege it; but that he was resolved to
defend the Place, and Sacrifice his Life for his Interests. The Governor also
of the Place had sent him an Express for the same reason, wherein he let him
know, that besides, that the Prince was in no Condition to attempt any thing to
his Prejudice, he had made him a thousand Protestations, that he had undertaken
that Journey only to Sacrifice his Life for him, and to oppose the Designs of
France. But the Duke mistrusting the Prince, did all he could to get him out of
Marsal: To which purpose he caused Duke Francis to write to him, and withal
wrote himself to him. The Prince's Friends likewise, who saw there was somewhat
of rashness in the Attempt, in regar'd he exposed himself to the danger of
falling into the hands either of the Duke or the King, were the first that
incessantly importuned him to withdraw.

Thereupon the Prince being convinced that the King of France had no Design
upon Marsal, as having not yet assured himself of the Nobility; and finding
besides, the King could not corrupt any one Officer of the Garrison; and that he
had fancied to himself without any grounds, that he could make himself Master
of the Place; he departed some few days after, and returned to Vienna.

This Action of the Prince of Lorrain, as inconsiderately undertaken as it was,
showed nevertheless a Great and Generous Spirit, which they who blamed him
most, admired in him. And all agreed that it was an Auspicious Preludium to his
future Performances; and that in that Attempt they beheld the Bravery of his
Ancestors. To which they added, that what would have been an inexcusable
Imprudence in an experienced Captain, was a piece of Temerity to be applauded
in a young Prince, whom it behooved to be covetous of Honor; that they who
never had an opportunity to signalize themselves, ought not to refuse the first
that presents it self; and that the Prince had done more in daring to put
himself into Marsal at that time, than if he had made himself Master of it at
another: and this was also the Discourse of his Enemies. Nor could Lewis XIV.
refrain from acknowledging, that he had made himself an Enemy, that he feared
would find him work enough one day. And the Duke himself was so scared with a
Resolution so daring, that in a short time after, he left Paris and returned
into Lorrain, out of an apprehension that the Prince would not stop there, but
that he was laboring underhand to make a Party, and excite the Nobility to
Rebellion. For he could not put it out of his Mind that the Prince would have
engaged in an Enterprise so hazardous, but that he had kept Intelligence with
his Enemies: which was a Conjecture not without Probability.

However these Reasons could not oblige the Duke to be more moderate toward the
Nobility in respect of their Privileges. Nay, he carried things with so high a
hand, that they were near upon the Point of throwing off their Masks, and
declaring for the King of France; who desirous to make Advantage of the
Occasions of their Discontents, never ceased soliciting them to shake off the
Duke's Fetters; flattering them withal, that under his Government* they should
enjoy their Privileges so amply, that they should never repent the change of
their Master. Nevertheless, the Lorrain Nobility, upon better Consideration,
chose rather to suffer for a while, than to venture the utmost Extremity; so
that all the Practices of the King of France came to nothing. Which caused him
to take a more sure way to constrain the Duke to deliver up Marsal.

He therefore Summoned him to Surrender the Place without further delay:
alleging, without vouchsafing to hear the Duke's Reasons, that the Princess
Nicole, had privately passed a Donation of the Dukedoms of Lorrain and Bar to
the deceased Lewis XIII. his Father, and that he himself had made another so
authentic, that it was impossible for him to retract it, whatever Imaginations
he might have; and thereupon, he ordered his Forces that lay still in and about
Nanci, to seize upon the Duke's Dominions; which was presently done with all
extremity of Rigor. For the Counts of Guiche and Pradel, who commanded the
Body, no sooner received their Orders, but they constrained all the Duke's
Officers to deliver up all the Money that was in their hands to Monsieur
Colbert, who was sent into Lorrain to take the King's Accounts. And not content
with these Vexations, he upheld the Claims of some of the Nobility, who laying
hold of the Advantage, raised Men, seized upon some Castles, which as they
pretended, the Duke unjustly detained from them, and mitted an infinite Number
of Hostilities.

The King perceiving that notwithstanding all that he had done, the Duke still
kept Marsal, resolved at length to seize the Place by force, and for that end
to besiege it. However to observe the Formalities usual upon such Occasions, he
sent one of the Captains of his Guards to the Duke of Lorrain, to let him know,
that he was resolved to have Marsal, whatever it cost him; and that he had no
more to do, but to determine without farther Hesitation, to perform the last
Treaty in every particular. He told him farther, that it would be his best way
to surrender the place quietly; as being resolved, that if he met with the
least resistance, he would seize upon all his Territories, whereas he should
show him all the Esteem and Respect he could desire, if he freely and willingly
performed his Promise.

Charles IV. not being strong enough to oppose the Arms of France, took the
only Counsel that was to be followed in such a ticklish Conjuncture; which was
to Treat with the King anew. He sent him therefore Word, that he would enter
into new Articles with him, which were concluded at Marsal the First of
September 1663.

I. That the Duke of Lorrain should within three days deliver up Marsal into
the Hands of the King of France; in lieu of which, his Majesty promised him the
Free Enjoyment of his Territories and Demesnes; and to restore him the Money
which had been already seized; and that he would recall all his Forces as well
out of Nancy, as all other Places in Lorrain, so soon as the Fortifications
were demolished.

II. That he should be at Liberty either to raze the Fortifications within a
year, or else to enjoy the Propriety of the Town, which he pleased. But in that
case he should be obliged to settle upon the Duke other Lands equivalent to the
Demesnes of the Place.

III. That if his Majesty within one year should choose to demolish the
Fortifications, he should restore the City to the Duke with all the Demesnes
belonging to it; together with all the Warlike Ammunition, and Furniture of the
Cannon which should be in the Place when it shall be restored to the Duke: of
all which there should be an Inventory made.

IV. That the King should constrain the Gentlemen who had taken Arms to return
to their own homes, and restore the Castles which they had seized in his
Dominions; saving that they might be left to take their Remedy at Law to sue
for such Pretensions as they had against the Duke

V. That in pursuance of this Treaty, the Duke should be restored to his
Territories, according to the Treaty of Vincennes, which the King promised to
Observe, and Ordered to be Registered in the Parliament of Paris.

Now in regard the King had renounced his Succession to the Dukedoms of Lorrain
and Bar, the Duke was desirous to have an Article inserted, wherein the
Renunciation should be expressed in due form. But the King would not hear with
that Ear. The Ministers which the King had sent to treat at Marsal, told the
Duke, that the King never cancelled by Public Acts any Treaties which he had
once Signed; that it was below his Royal Majesty so to do; and that it behooved
the Duke to be satisfied, that the King had tacitly renounced the Treaty at
Montmarre. So that the Duke, not having any other way to take, was constrained
to be contented with what was done; though the Assurances which they gave him,
that the King would think no more of the Treaty of Succession, were but only
Verbal Assurances, upon which he could not depend; not having an Army powerful
enough to make the Article to be interpreted according to the true meaning of
the Words.

However it were, Charles the Fourth was so well satisfied with the last
Treaty, that he let the Nobility be at Quiet: and though he were also convinced
at the same time, that there were several Gentlemen who had instigated others
to shake off their Fetters, and betake themselves to the Protection of the King
of France, he was contented to let them perceive his Resentment by mild and
gentle Admonition; and to show that he had no Animosity against them,
notwithstanding the false Steps which some of 'em had trod, he advanced 'em to
Principal Places of Trust, which was that they never expected.

And this was a happy Accident for the Lorrain Gentlemen, as having brought
them all to participate of his Favors. Only Duke Francis and Prince Charles
his Nephew, were the two Persons that reaped no Benefit by this last Treaty.

However so soon as the Duke of Lorrain, and Duke Francis, his Brother, were
returned home into their Dominions, they had both concerted together to free
themselves from the French Yoke, and break the Treaty of Montmarre. And Charles
IV. had engaged, that if they could but once bring about their Designs, he
would acknowledge Prince Charles for his Lawful Successor. For in regard that
by the Treaty of Marsal the King of France had renounced the Donation that
Entitled him to the Succession of Lorrain and Bar, Duke Francis was of
Opinion, that seeing the Duke so well disposed, it would not be amiss to send
for Prince Charles from Vienna, and imparted his Intentions to the Duke his
Brother, who readily consented that the Prince should quit the Emperors Court,
and repair into his Dominions. Thereupon Duke Francis, well satisfied that he
had met with no Opposition, sent away his chief Usher to Vienna. But he was
hardly got to the Frontiers of Lorrain, before he was overtaken with a
Prohibition from the Duke to go any farther. And in regard, the Duke was
afraid, that his Injunction to the contrary, would not hinder the Prince from
hastening his Journey, and meeting him at Nancy, where he then lay, he gave
Order to all the Governors of his Towns, through which he thought he might
come, to stop him; alleging, that the reason why he dealt so odly by the
Prince his Nephew, was, that he might not be constrained to break with the King
of France, with whom he acknowledged, he had been sufficiently embroiled
already.

But the Principal Reason why he would not have the Prince of Lorrain so near
him, was his fear lest the Prince should make himself too many Friends within
his Territories. And though the King of France cared little whither the Prince
were in Lorrain or in Austria, in regard that he had actually made it appear
that he was incensed against him, not only for leaving his Court without taking
Leave, but also because of some injurious Language that he had let fall against
him both at Rome and Vienna, the Duke was glad of this pretense, which he had
not in his thoughts when Duke Francis made the proposal of sending for him, but
afterward came into his mind.

On the other side, though the Prince had been long accustomed to these
Severities of his Uncle, he was strangely surpised at this Prohibition of his,
but much more at the Pretense which he made use of for it. And therefore
touched to the Quick at this Repulse, and desirous withal to justify himself
before the King, that he had never mentioned him but with all Respect
imaginable in all the Courts where he had been, away he flew to Paris, without
Consulting any Person about him, or so much as Duke Francis himself, and
without reflecting, that considering the Condition of his own and his Uncles
Affairs, it was a most headlong Resolution, and a dangerous Attempt which would
inevitably cost him a dear Repentance; and it fell out accordingly. For the
King was so far from being inclined in the least to hear his Justification,
that Monsieur Tellier, to whom he made his first Addresses, having given notice
to the King of his Arrival, and of his Design, he sent one of the Captains of
his Guard, with Orders to Command him forthwith to depart the City, and within
four days to quit the Kingdom. And though the Marquis of Villequier, who was
the Person that carried the King's Orders to him, took his leave so soon as he
had delivered his Message, yet he left behind him a Priviledg'd Gentleman of
the Guards, with a Command not to stir from him, till he saw him clear of
France.

This was too severe an Order not to make a noise in the City. All People knew
immediately that Prince Charles was arrived at Paris, and that his Arrival was
no sooner known at Court, but that he had received a Command to be gone again.

Thereupon, Madam, the Duchess of Orleans, who knew nothing of all this, till
every body knew it, besought the King to grant him one days time, that she
might see the Prince her Nephew. To which the King returned for Answer, That in
respect to her, he would allow him two hours, during which time she might see
and Discourse with him as much as she pleased: and as to the Complaints, that
she made him, that the Duke of Lorrain would not admit the Prince into his
Territories for fear of provoking his Majesty, he replied, That that was
nothing to him; the Duke of Lorrain might admit him if he thought fit; for that
he had never exacted any such thing from him; and that if Prince Charles had
been wise, he would have kept where he was.

The Prince, who was carefully informed of all these things, repaired to the
Palace of Orleans, with the Priviledg'd Gentleman of the Guards, where he
Discoursed the Duchess for some hours, and then taking Horse, departed out of
Paris the same day.

I cannot here forbear to observe how little Resolution and Courage the Prince
of Lorrain showed upon this Occasion, though he were one of the most Resolute
and Daring Princes of his Time. The Kings Order had so terrified him, that he
durst not see Mademoiselle de Nemours, though he most passionately loved her,
and were Married to her. For in short Duke Francis had duly and formally Wedded
her in his Name above six Months before: and there was nothing more now to be
said against the Marriage, but only that it was not yet consummated. However*
it so happened, that when the Prince departed from the Duchess of Orleans, in
order to his leaving Paris, he past by the Palace of Nemours. And in regard the
Prince had not made choice of that way, but with a design to call in, though it
were but for a moment, he asked the Priviledg'd Gentleman of the Guards that
attended him, whither he had any Order to hinder him. The Gentleman answered,
that in truth he had none; however he advised him to avoid seeing of
Mademoiselle de Nemours; for that besides that he could not permit him to stay
but a very little while, the Visit would but augment the Kings displeasure; and
that therefore it was better for him to deny himself that Liberty, unless he
intended to draw upon himself the utmost rigor of an offended Prince, whom it
rather behooved him to manage with discretion and prudence.

One would have thought that the Prince of Lorrain should not have stood to
argue the Point at that time, but that in contempt of all the Dangers that
could befall him, and all the Tempests that could pour upon his Head, he should
have resolved upon this Visit, since there was nothing to hinder him; and he
was just going twice to alight from his Horse. Nevertheless, being struck with
a Panick Fear, he followed the Advice of his Keeper, and as if his Passion has
been as Calm as it was Violent; or as if he had not been concerned to visit
Mademoiselle de Nemours, who was the only Person for whose sake he ought to
have undertaken his Journey, he left Paris, without seeing her.

All men were surpised, that Prince Charles had given such a mark of a faint
Heart; and that he had not considered, that besides that the Visit could do him
no injury, in respect of the talk of the World, it was the only probable Means
to resettle his Affairs. For in regard he was really Married, the only thing
without doubt on his side to be done, was to have consummated the Marriage. Or
if any reasons of Modesty and Niceness in Mademoiselle de Nemours had obliged
him to abstain, however there would have been a strong Presumption that the
thing was done. For besides that, Mademoiselle de Nemours knew very well, that
she was duly and lawfully Married; and besides, that she had a tender Affection
for the Prince, Madam de Nemours, her Mother, so passionately desired a
Consummation of the Marriage, whatever Crosses of Fortune afterward befell the
Prince, that she offered to bring the Princess her Daughter to him wherever he
would be pleased to appoint, without considering the hazard which she run of
incurring the King's Displeasure. In short, the King having urged her several
times to Marry that Princess to the King of Portugal, she utterly rejected the
Proposal, alleging, That her Daughter being effectually Married to the Prince
of Lorrain, she could not Marry her to another, how advantageous soever the
Match might be that his Majesty proposed. In a word, the Affection which
Mademoiselle had for the Prince was so well known, that the Princess dying
sometime after he left Paris, all People believed, that she died for Grief, as
not being able to support her Affliction, that the King should oppose the
Consummation of a Marriage which he had made himself, and which she could never
hope to see accomplished after an Obstruction of that Nature.

All People agree, That the Reasons which obliged the King of France to give
such rigorous Orders in reference to the Duke of Lorrain, was the Apprehension
which he had, that if the Prince should stay too long in Paris, he would visit
the Princess so often, that she would make such Evidences appear, as would
speak aloud to all the World, that they were Married; and it was the King's
Interest to break the Marriage: there being no other way for him to disengage
himself from the Promise he had made the Prince, upon his signing the Contract;
by which he bound himself to acknowledge him the Sole Heir that was capable to
Succeed to the Dukedoms of Lorrain and Bar, after the Death of Charles IV.
which was a clear disannulling of the Donation made of the same Dutchies by the
Treaty of Montmarre.

But to return to the Prince of Lorrain, he had engaged himself so imprudently
in his Journey to Paris, that he had not half Money enough left to supply his
Necessities; and Madam the Duchess of Orleance, of whom he had desired to
borrow, was forced to acknowledge that she was not in a Condition to furnish
him at present; in regard her Family was now no Richer than under the Ministry
of Cardinal Mazarine. So that the Prince was constrained to accept of the
Dutchesses good will, not daring to delay his Departure.

He was no sooner out of Paris, but he posted in all have to the Frontiers of
France, taking thence the Road to Luxemburgh, where he made a short stay, till
he could find some body so charitable as to furnish him with Money; and indeed
he was very hard put to it to find a Creditor; but at length a Knight, who was
altogether unknown to him, having Lent him Two hundred Crowns, he returned to
the Emperor, with a Design to apply himself wholly to his Service. For as for
the Duke his Uncle, he saw well it would be to no purpose to solicit him to
permit his Return to Lorrain; more especially when he should come to understand
the ill Success of his Voyage to Paris.

The Emperor received the Prince with infinite marks of his Affection; He
testified his Sorrow for his being so ill entertained by the Duke his Uncle and
the King of France, and promised him his Protection as he had done before.

Soon after his Arrival at the Court of Vienna, the War brake out in Hungary
between the Emperor and the Turks. I shall not enter into the Particulars of
that War, at what time the Grand Vizier appeared at the Head of a Formidable
Army, and in the last Battle that was fought, left behind him Eight thousand
Men slain upon the Place, besides those that were swallowed up in the River of
Raab.

Now in regard all Christendom was concerned in this War, all the Christian
Princes sent their Forces to join with the Emperors; and France among the rest
furnished his Imperial Majesty with a considerable Assistance of Men, that did
him signal Service.

And then it was that the Prince of Lorrain, to whom the Emperor had already
given an old Regiment of a Thousand Horse, perceiving there were in the French
and other Troops, a great number of Young Gentlemen, who had undertaken a long
Journey, to signalize their Courage in that War, found the Incitements of his
Emulation so importunate, that he besought his Imperial Majesty, to let him try
his Fortune the next Campaign. But because of the great hazards he was to run,
in regard the Ottoman Army was prodigiously numerous, besides, that the Prince
was not then above Twenty years of Age, the Emperor thought it not fit at that
time to grant him his Request. So that the Prince saw himself compelled to
abide at Vienna, while others were gaining Honor in the Field. However not
being able to overrule himself, to give Obedience to the Emperor in those
Commands that seemed to curb him in the Acquisitions of Future Fame, he
privately withdrew from the Court and got to the Army.

The Turks had then besieged the Fort of Serini; so that the Prince thought he
should be soon enough to join the Succor that was already sent to relieve that
Place. But the Fort being won much sooner than was expected, he was frustrated
of those Hopes. Nevertheless, in regard his Mind gave him that he should
signalize himself in that Campaign, he met with an Opportunity wherein he
behaved himself after an extraordinary manner.

A Body of Seven or Eight thousand Turks, of the most resolute in the Grand
Signior's Army, being Commanded by the Grand Vizier to cross a River that
separated the Ottoman from the Christians Camp, with a design to surprise them,
so furiously assailed the Right Wing of the Imperial Army, that they began to
give ground, without making any considerable resistance. Which cast such a
terror among the Imperialists, that General Montecuculi, being at his Wits end
to see so bad a Beginning of a Fight, was glad to bring on the Left Wing to
renew the Combat. Among whom, the first that Montecuculi met, was the Prince of
Lorrain. So that in regard he had no time to lose, and that he could not make
choice of what Men he pleased, he only told the Prince, that in the Unfortunate
Conjuncture wherein he found himself, he was constrained to oppose his Regiment
against the Fury of the Turks, till he could cause others to advance; only that
which troubled him beyond Expression was, to see the Danger to which of
necessity he must expose himself to save the Honor of the Christians. To which
the Prince made as short a reply, That he was overjoyed to meet with an
opportunity to venture his Life; that he was only to direct him where he should
Charge; and that he would infallibly Perish, or repel the Enemy. Adding withal,
That nothing grieved him so much, as that he wanted Five hundred Men of his own
Regiment, which were sent to secure the Forragers: however they that followed
him had so much Courage, that he made no doubt but they would give that day
more than ordinary proofs of their Valor.

The General finding himself in a great straight, and greatly encouraged by the
generous Prowess of the youthful Prince, told him where he should fall on. And
with that, although the Turks were four to one, resolved to Die or Vanquish, he
broke in among the Turks with so much Vigor, and such a Presence of Mind, that
the old Officers of his Regiment were amazed at such a first Essay of Valor.

It would be a difficult thing to represent the Heat and Fury with which the
Prince fought. For in regard he met with stout Resistance in the second
Squadrons that relieved the former, he was constrained to charge the Enemy
three or four times before he could make them give ground. And he must have
given way at length, had not the Marquis of Coligny, General of the French
Horse, ordered the Count of Fueillade to advance with a considerable
Reinforcement, which assured him an entire Victory. The Prince in this
Encounter did not only perform the Duty of an Officer, but fought himself like
a Common Soldier. He wrested a Colors from the Hands of a Turk, who came with
a Resolution to have run him thorough with the Lance to which his Colors were
fastened. And those Colors, of which the Emperor made him a Present, were sent
to Duke Francis, who caused them to be hung up in the Chapel of the
Burgundians near Nanci, with an Inscription over them, giving an Account of the
Battle, wherein the Turks had above Five thousand Slain.

The Count de Ligneville, who was a Marshal de Camp in the Army, never left P.
Charles all the while: and in regard he was an Eyewitness of what passed in
that bloody Encounter, he wrote a Relation of it to the Duke of Lorrain,
wherein he set forth in proper Language, that the Emperor in some measure was
beholding to the Prince for saving his Army; in regard the daring Courage with
which the Prince fought, had renewed the Combat, from which the Left Wing had
most shamefully flinch'd, and given time to the French, who were ranged on the
farthest side of the Left Wing to come to his Rescue, and assist him to win a
complete Victory.

Some time before, the Emperor, who had some Reasons to conclude the War with
the Turks, had made Proposals of Peace, which had been utterly rejected by
them; but being beaten both in this, and the following Campaign, they found it
their best way to accept them, and now made the Proposals first themselves,
though the Grand Vizier had still an Army of Forty thousand Men in the Field.

The Peace being concluded, all the French, and a great part of the Germans
were sent home. But among the rest that the Emperor kept Standing, the Prince
of Lorrain's Regiment was one, for which he had always a great Value, after
this Fight.

Now in regard that the Toils of the Campaign had been very tedious, and for
that the Prince who was indefatigable, was desirous to see his own Regiment
settled in their Winter Quarters in Silesia, where the Air is very bad in
Summer, especially for Strangers, he was no sooner returned to Vienna, but he
fell Sick of the Small Pox, and a Malignant Fever so dangerous, that for a long
while the Physicians despaired of his Life. However being of a strong
Constitution, he was so well looked after, that when he began to mend, he
recovered his Strength in a little time.

But the Joy which he had for the Recovery of his Health lasted not long; for
no sooner had he vanquished the Affliction of two threatening Distempers, but he
had News that the Princess of Nemours was just about to Marry his Royal
Highness of Savoy, the Father of the present Duke.

The King of France, for the Reasons already mentioned, was so deeply
concerned, least the Prince should Consummate the Marriage of the Princess of
Nemours, that he made it his whole Business to break it quite off. Yet the
Affection which the Princess had for the Prince of Lorrain was an obstacle
which he could never surmount, not thinking it good Policy to interpose his
Royal Authority.

But Madam de Nemours being Dead, a sudden Alteration of the Face of Affairs
ensued. For the King caused the young Princess to be put into a Nunnery, there
to mourn for the Duchess her Mother. During which time, the Nuns, who had the
managing of her, found out so many ways to turn and wind her, and so forcibly
insinuated into her Mind, that the Prince of Lorrain withal his Noble
Qualities, had but a very small Fortune, that she suffered her self at last to
be overcome, and promised to conform her self to the Kings Pleasure.

But it was so lately before, that the Duke of Savoy had lost Mademoiselle de
Valois his first Wife, Daughter of Gaston de France, Duke of Orleance, that he
scrupled to Marry Mademoiselle de Nemours so soon. But they told him those were
Delicacies below the Thoughts of Princes. Neither indeed was that the greatest
difficulty; for in regard that Mademoiselle de Nemours was Married to the
Prince of Lorrain, his Royal Highness could not Espouse her, till he had a
Dispensation from Rome; and the Pope who was Alexander the VII. refused it.

On the other side, the King by his public Minister set forth to the Pope,
That the Marriage not being Consummated, the Princess might be Lawfully
discharged. In opposition to which, the Prince of Lorrain made other
Remonstrances in his own behalf. And thus both sides urged the best and most
potent Reasons that their several Casuists suggested to them. So that
Alexander, as great a Politician as he was, knew not well what to do. He saw
that which side soever he took, he could never content both Parties.
Nevertheless, in regard he could not dispense with taking Cognizance of the
Affair, he referred it to his Nuncio in France, and the Archbishop of Paris.
But the Prince of Lorrain, jealous of the Partiality of those Commissioners,
demanded that the Process might be determined at Rome, and that the Pope might
be Judge himself.

The King was thoroughly persuaded that the Suit, as knotty as it was, would be
determined in his Favor. But fearing delays, and spinning out of time, to
shorten the way, he caused a Petition to be presented to the Pope by
Mademoiselle de Nemours her self. The Princess therefore now absolutely brought
over to say whatever they pleased themselves, protested that she never heartily
consented to Marry the Prince of Lorrain; or if she had declared she had done
it, it was by the overruling Violence of the Duchess of Nemours her Mother. To
which she added, that on the other side it invincibly appeared, that the Prince
himself had never given but an imperfect Consent; since he never sent the
Ratification of the Marriage till a long time after that Duke Francis his
Father Espoused her in his Sons Name: And that if all this were not sufficient
to show, that the Prince was only so earnest at that time to conclude the
Marriage, out of a Politic End, and not out of any real Affection, there
needed no more for her to allege, than that affrontive Act of the Prince, who
having been at Paris would not vouchsafe to see her. And Lastly, that it was a
thing notoriously known that the Prince had no Inclination for her, as she
never had any Inclination for him; and therefore that she humbly besought his
Holiness, in whose Power it only was to discharge her, that he would vouchsafe
to hearken to her Remonstrance.

Now at the same time that this Petition was presented, the Pope was altogether
Embroiled with the King of France, by reason of the affront which had been
offered at Rome to the Duke of Crequi, his extraordinary Ambassador. For it
happened, that the Corsi, who are a sort of Soldiers appointed to Guard the
City, and to secure the Sbirri in the Executions of Justice, having a quarrel
with two or three French Men of the Ambassadors Train, the French Men defended
themselves so well, that they wounded some of their Antagonists. Thereupon the
Corsi, who had received the first Abuse, minding nothing but to Revenge
themselves, gave the alarm to all their Companies, consisting of about Four
Hunderd Men; and no sooner were they got together, but away they marched toward
the Ambassadors Palace, with Colors flying, and Drums beating, as if it had
been in open War. The Duke of Crequi hearing the noise which the Corsi made,
came forth into a Balcony, thinking to pacify 'em; but they made him no other
Answer, than in the Language of Muskets and Carbines; and meeting with his
Dutthess in the Street, they shot several Bullets through the Coach, and killed
a Page that was going by the Coach with his Hand upon the Boot: and several
other Violences of this Nature they committed, too long to repeat. So that the
Duke of Crequi not finding himself safe at Rome, privately withdrew from the
City, together with his Duchess, and some of his Domestic Servants, and
retired to Florence.

The King of France was so enraged at the Affront he had received in the Person
of his Ambassador, that he declared War at the same time against the Pope; sent
Forces into Italy, and seized upon Avignon.

Alexander VII. who feared the Consequences of the War, gave the King to
understand, that he had no Hand in the Action of the Corsi, that he was ready
to punish the Guilty, and to give Satisfaction to his Ambassador, provided he
would recall his Soldiers, and restore the Territories of which he had taken
Possession. But the King would hear of no Accommodation, unless upon his own
Terms.

The Pope used all his Endeavors to draw in the Catholic Princes to make a
League with him. But all refusing, he was compelled to submit to whatever the
King pleased, and so Consented to an Accommodation, that will remain an Eternal
Monument of Infamy to the Sea of Rome. For he was not only forced to disown in
a most shameful manner what the Corsi had done, but his Brother Don Maria, was
compelled to depart Rome. The Corsi were perpetually banished the Town; from
whence the Imperial Cardinal, Governor of Rome, was also exiled, forced to
acknowledge himself Guilty, and to go and submit himself to the King's
Pleasure; and there was a Pyramid also raised over against the Court of Guard,
where the Corsi watched, upon which was engraved in Letters of Gold, an
Inscription, giving an account of the Satisfaction which the King had demanded,
and to which the Pope had submitted.

How ignominious soever this Accommodation were for the Pope, he was so well
contented, that the King of France did not come to burn him in Rome, as he had
threatened, that he had no Mind to embroil himself with him any more. The danger
he had escaped was too great for him to venture any more of those Hazards; and
therefore he thought it his Duty to let France know how ready he was to Espouse
her Interests. So that he had no sooner read Mademoiselle de Nemours Petition,
but he gave the Princess liberty to Marry with his Royal Highness of Savoy.

The Duke of Lorrain was importuned to send to Rome, before Mademoiselle de
Nemours arrived in Piemont; to Remonstrate to the Pope, that he could not grant
the Dispensation he had given, before he had imparted the Princesses Petition
to his Nephew; but the Duke would do nothing in it. Only he consented that Duke
Francis might send one of his Gentlemen, which signified as little. For he was
no sooner arrived at Rome, but he heard the Marriage was Consummated. So that
all the Satisfaction he received from the Pope was only this, That he was sorry
he had not been sooner informed of his Reasons; but the Business was done, and
there was no Remedy.

Now in regard that the Emperor was at Peace, as well with all the Princes of
Europe, as with the Turk, the Prince of Lorrain was constrained to live a
vacant Life for some years at Vienna, while the Count of Vaudemont, and the
Prince of Lislebonne had an opportunity to signalize their Valor every day, in
the War between the Duke of Lorrain and the Elector Palatine, which lasted till
the year 1666. But he endeavored to make the best of that occasion to set his
Affairs in Order, or to raise his Fortunes so as to repair the loss of his
Territories of Lorrain and Bar, in case that Charles the IV. should continue
his Resolutions to cross him, or that he were powerful enough to oppose the
King of France.

So soon therefore as the Marriage of Mademoiselle de Nemours to the Duke of
Savoy was known at Vienna, all People thought that Prince Charles would have
Courted the Emperors Sister, who was a Lady of a great Beauty. This was the
Princess Eleanora Maria. Withal, they believed, that the Emperor would have
been glad of the Match, the Alliance not being to be Contemned, in regaed of
the great Advantages it would produce against France, if ever the Prince came
to be Master of Lorrain. But it did not appear that the Prince was any thing
forward to win the Affections of that Princess. He was so disheartened by the
former ill Successes of his first Amors: And besides he was so taken up with
the care of his own Affairs* and the raising his Fortune, that he never took
notice that the Princess Eleanora was so charming as she was. And therefore, in
regard there was nothing which he thought could more conduce to the
Re-establishment of his Affairs, than to fix himself more and more in the
Emperors Favor, he directed his Addresses to the This was Eleanora de Gonzaga,
Daughter of Charles Duke of Mantona, the Third Wife of Ferdinand III. and
Mother of the Princess Eleonora Maria.
Empress Dowager, whom he Courted with an extraordinary Assiduity; in regard
that Princess had an unexpressible Ascendant over the Emperor her Son.

Much about this time She died at the Louvre in Paris, Jun. 20. 1666 in the
64th year of her Age: And because she was the Daughter of a King, the Sister,
Wife and Mother of a King, this Epitaph was put upon her Tomb, Et Soror, and
Conjux, and Matter, Nataque Regnum,
Nulla unquam tanto Sanguine digna fuit.
Of Crowned Heads to Europe so well known,
Wife, Sister, Mother, Daughter met in one,
Is what to Woman never was yet allowed,
To be thought Worthy so much Royal Blood.



died Anne of Au^^ria, the Mother of Lewis XIV. which was a great loss to the
Prince, for that she had always a great kindness for him.

As for the Duke of Lorrain, Charles IV. of whom we may say, that his Life was
a perpetual warfare, after the Peace concluded between him and the Elector
Palatine, he was forced to take up Arms again against the same Elector. But
France, having at that time Signed the Peace concluded at Aix la Chapelle, in
regard* she had no longer Wars with Spain, and had Disbanded good part of her
Forces, she was willing the Duke should follow her Example.

On the other side the Duke of Lorrain having Intelligence every day, that the
Elector Palatine drew his Forces together, and had certainly some design upon
his Frontiers, he let the King know the danger he was in if he had not an Army
on Foot. But the King making Solemn Protestations, and having likewise given
him his Royal Word, that the Elector had no Thoughts of molesting him, he
dismissed his Army, and dispersed his Men after such a manner, that it was not
easy for him to draw them together again, if necessity required it.

But the Intelligence given the Duke of Lorrain, that the Palatine Elector had
some design upon him, proved too true. For he had no sooner dismissed his Army,
but he understood that the Elector had besieged and taken the Castles of
Landstoaille and Hand, and made his Prisoners the Commander of the Prince of
Vaudemont's Regiment, and several other Officers, who confiding in the Kings
Assurance, that the Elector would not stir, were altogether unprovided to
defend themselves.

The Duke had no sooner received the News, but he rallied a good part of his
Men, and put them under the Command of the Prince of Lislebonne, withal giving
the Count of Vaudemont orders to accompany him with his Regiment of Horse.

Now though the Lorrain Army were nothing near so numerous as that of the
Electors, yet they entered the Palatinate; and after several Skirmishes, the
Princes of Lislebonne and Vaudemont coming to encamp near the Enemy, a Battle
was fought, wherein one part of the Electors Army was cut in pieces, and the
other utterly routed.

But as entire a Victory as it was, the Duke of Lorrain made no Advantage of
it. For the Elector after such an unexpected Misfortune, fearing the loss of
his Country, put himself under the Protection of France; and by his Resident at
Paris, desired the King to interpose his Authority and Power for the concluding
a War which he was no longer able to maintain. Upon which the King, who waited
only for Pretenses to bring down the Duke of Lorrain; and wished besides that
the Duke would delay to obey his Commands, that he might have an occasion to
declare War against him, and seize upon his Territories, sent him Word, That he
should dismiss his Army forthwith; upon pretense that his Army gave him cause
of Jealousy; and therefore letting him understand, that he must absolutely
resolve to lay down his Arms, according to the general Treaty of Peace, which
gave him Power only to retain some Companies of his Guards, and his light
Horsemen, but not to have standing Armies. Promising however to protect him
against the Elector, in case he did not dismiss his Forces, or attempted any
thing against him.

The Duke, who stomach'd the King of France's Control, answered him first
haughtily enough, That the King of France was not his Master; That he had only
a small Army to defend himself against the Attempts of an open Enemy; and that
if the King went about to constrain him, he made no doubt but there were
Princes in Europe that would Infallibly stand by him. But the Kings Messenger
having given him to understand, that Marshal Crequi was upon the Frontiers of
his Territories, with Orders in case of refusal to advance with Ten Thousand
Men, the Duke was so terrified with that same dreadful Menace, that he thought
it his best way to dismiss his Men.

And having taken this Resolution, he began to put it in execution. But whither
it were that he did not proceed to the King of France's Liking, or that Marshal
Crequi, who was sent into Lorrain with some other Commissioners to see the
Dukes Army disbanded, were troubled to see the War so soon at an end, and
started Suspicions on purpose, the Cities of Pent a Mousson, St. Michael, and
some others were surpised, at the same time that the Prince of Vaudemont was
about to enter into those Places, to meet Marshal Crequi on the Dukes behalf,
and perfect what remained to be done for the Kings full Satisfaction. True it
is, that the Duke having made his Complaint of the Violences committed by the
Marshal, the King to show him, that he had no design but for the public
Tranquillity, and not to invade the Dukes Territories, recalled his Garrisons out
of those Places which the Marshal had taken, and all his other Forces out of
Lorrain. So that Lorrain began to enjoy that Peace which it had not enjoyed for
above Five and thirty years before. But this Repose lasted so small a while,
that it could hardly be perceived.

While things thus passed in Lorrain, the Troubles in Hungary brake out again.
There was first a Conspiracy against the Life of the Emperor, which would have
proved fatal to Prince Charles, had the Conspirators succeeded in their Design.
I shall not here repeat the Original of those Troubles, because it is a Thing
so well known, I shall only tell ye, that Count Serini, who till then had
adhered to the Emperors Interests, secretly struck in with the Malcontents,
as did also Count Nadash some time after; upon the score of a Palatine
Employment, which the Emperor had denied him.

These two Counts, blinded by their Fury, and believing it not enough to take
up Arms against the Emperor, laid a design to take away his Life; and the more
easy to bring their Endeavors about, they so well dissembled their
Resentment, that no body perceived that they kept the least Intelligence with
the Malcontents.

Count Serini, more especially was so little suspected by his Imperial Majesty,
that he had entrusted him to take care of fortifying the Frontier Towns. And at
this time it was, that feigning to be wholly taken up in forwarding the Work
committed to his Care, both he and Nadish jointly resolved to attempt the
Emperor's Life, who was preparing to meet the Empress his Wife, that was
expected out of The 25th of April 1666, Leopold Married Margaret Maria Therese,
Daughter of Philip IV. King of Spain, His second Wife was Claudia Felicity of
Austria, Duchess of Inspruch, in the year 1673. And at the end of the same
year he Married a third time with the Princess Palatine of Neuburgh, Elianora
Maria Therese, Daughter of the Elector Palatine, lately deceased.
Spain. To this end, they had contrived to lay Five hundred Men, in a certain
place, through which the Emperor was to ride Post, accompanied only with the
Grand Master of his House, and ten or a dozen Gentlemen; and the Commander of
those Troops had himself engaged to stab the Emperor. But in regard it was a
difficult thing to succeed in so horrid a Design, Cou^^ Nadash had tried an
infinite number of ways which still proved ineffectual. But at length having
corrupted a Carpenter that wrought in a new Apartment which the Emperor was
making in his Palace for the Empress Dowager, the Carpenter set Fire to the
Palace. In the mean time, though the Emperor were upon his Journey, they that
were posted to seize upon his Person or assassinate him, had not the Courage to
execute their Barbarous Orders. However Nadash was nothing disheartened at this;
but believing that Poison would be more successful; some time after he invited
the Emperor and the Empress, the Imperial Princesses, and the Prince of
Lorrain, to see some Fishing-Sport at Pattendorff, which was a Seat of his own.
There he Feasted them Magnificently, and it was none of his fault that the
Poyson'd-Plate that was prepared for him did not come to his share. But the
Countess his Wife, apprehending his Design, caused the Emperor to be served
with a Plate resembling the the other, which broke the Counts Measures, and saved
the Lives of the Emperor, and all the Imperial Guests. Most of these things
happened in the Years 1668, and 1669. And then it was that the Duke of Lorrain
Married the Prince of Vaudemont to the Princess d'Elboeuf, Anne Elisabeth of
Lorrain, a Princess of great Wit and Incomparable Beauty.

About the same time Casimer V. had resigned his Crown, to spend the Remainder
of his Days in Ease and Retirement. Now in regard the Kingdom of Poland is
Elective, the Polonians to remove all Occasion of Jealousy and Civil War, from
the Grandees of the Kingdom, who might have any Claim to the Royalty, have all
along accustomed themselves to make Choice of Foreign Princes.

The Duke of The Elector Palatine last deceased, Philip William, who died at
Vienna, September. 2. 1690, in the Seventy fifth year of his Age.
Newburgh, and the Prince of Conde, were* the first that stood Competitors for
the Election, and had each of them a considerable Party in it. But the Prince
of Lorrain, who had the same Design, put the Emperor upon appearing in his
behalf; and then it was that he found that the Empress Dowager was absolutely
for carrying on his Interests; since there was nothing which she left undone to
procure him the Upper-hand of his Competitors, it being both here is and the
Emperor's Design to Marry him with the Princess Eleanora Maria.

In the mean time, because the Business required a vast Expense, (for these
sorts of Elections are not to be canvass'd without store of Money) and for that
the Prince had only a Pension, which the Emperor and Empress Dowager allowed
him, the Duke of Lorrain told Duke Francis, that he would furnish the Prince
with Money necessary for such an Undertaking, provided he would Sign the
Contract of Marriage between the Prince of Vaudemont, and the Princess
d'Elboeuf, and cause Prince Charles to Sign it also.

The Marriage of that Prince had been celebrated with so much Pomp and
Magnificence of Ceremonies, that Duke Francis made no question but that it was
the Dukes Intention to settle the Succession upon him, to the prejudice of the
Prince, his Son. The Nuptials were solemnized at Bar; after which the Prince of
Vaudemont, and the Princess, being conducted to Nanci, made their Entry with no
less Splendor, then if the Duke had been Married himself. Never did the Duke
of Lorrain express so much outward Joy, as he did upon that Occasion. Besides
the extraordinary Civilities which he paid to the new Bride, he would have the
Princess of Lislebone to yield her the Precedence, though she were Niece to the
Prince her Husband. And as for what he did for the Prince his Son, he made over
to him in Sovereignty a considerable part of his Territories.

These Considerations made Duke Francis always refuse to Sign the Marriage of
the Prince of Vaudemont.

But the Assistance which the Duke of Lorrain promised the Prince, and which he
gave him effectually, to advance him to the Crown of Poland, overruled Duke
Francis and the Prince to Sign not only the Marriage, but also a particular
Treaty, by virtue of which Prince Vaudemont entered at the same time into
Possession of the Principal Places that were assigned him.

But notwithstanding all the Methods which the Emperor had taken, and the large
Sums which the Duke of Lorrain had contributed toward the Advancement of his
Nephew, it was impossible for the Prince to bring his Desires to pass. For in
regard the Duke of Newburgh and the Prince of Conde had each of them their
Faction in the Kingdom as well as he, the Polanders fearing that neither of the
Rivals would give way to him that was Elected, unless constrained by Force of
Arms, as they had openly and severally given out; they cast their Eyes upon a
Prince of their own Nation, to avoid a Civil War, and made choice of Michael
Korobat Wiesnowisky, who was Crowned Sept. 29. 1669.

The Grief which Prince Charles conceived for missing the Election in Poland,
was attended by another Misfortune which he endured with no less trouble of
Mind. And that was the Death of Duke Francis his Father, that happened Jan. 27.
1679. and which was as it were an ill Omen of the Consummation of those
Misfortunes that were to befall the House. For the same year the K. of France
drove Charles IV. quite out of his Dominions, and constrained him to seek out
for Sanctuary among Foreign Princes, which he had much ado to find. It Is true,
that it may well be said, the Duke drew this last Calamity upon himself. For
not being able so to govern himself, as to comply with France, he furnished
Lewis XIV. with so many Pretenses, that he could not believe there was any
Prince in Europe* would blame him, for despoiling the Duke of all his
Dominions. I must confess, 'twas always the Dukes unhappiness to be obliged to
receive Laws from France, notwithstanding his usual vaunting, that being a
Sovereign, he had no dependence upon any but God and his Sword. But in regard,
that as his Affairs stood, the King of France could humble him upon all
occasions, it had been but Prudence to have complied with the Time, and to have
dissembled with a Prince that was so formidable to him. Nevertheless, as if he
had had a sufficient Power to withstand all his Enterprises; he took so little
care to manage him, that he rather might be said to make it his Business to
provoke him, and furnish him with Opportunities to seize upon his Country.

And therefore it was, that out of a desire to have an Army on foot, he levied
Men upon the first occasion that presented it self, quite contrary to his own
Interests. To which purpose the Troubles of Hungary furnished him with one
occasion, which he resolved not to let slip, though he plainly saw that it was
directly contrary to the King of France's Capitulation, by which he was bound
not to levy any Forces, under pretense of giving France an occasion of
Suspicion. But in regard he covered his Design with a pretense of sending
Assistance to the Emperor, he made several Levies, and to show that his only
Aim was to aid his Imperial Majesty, he sent the Prince of Vaudemont to Vienna
with Six thousand Men.

By that time the Prince of Vaudemont arrived at the Imperial Court, the Chief
Heads of the Conspiracy were seized upon; and because the Emperor stood in no
need of Foreign Aid, in regard the Principal Cities which had revolted, had
submitted and sought for Pardon, and for that the Turk was quiet, he returned
the same Thanks to the Duke of Lorrain, which he had done to other Princes who
had offered him their Assistance. So that the Prince of Vaudemont was obliged
to return to the Duke with all his Men, after he had used all his Endeavors to
persuade Prince Charles that he might accompany him into Hungary, whither he
was going to be General of the Horse; a Command which the Emperor had conferred
upon him.

Toward the latter end of the Year 1668. there was a League made between
England, Sweden and Holland, which was called the Triple League; the Hollanders
being desirous by means of that League to stop the Progress of the French
Conquests in the Low Countries, whcih alarmed all Europe, but chiefly the
United Provinces.

Thereupon, while the Prince of Vaudemont was at Vienna, the Duke of Lorrain
had sent one of the Masters of his Requests into Holland; which made all
People, and France particularly, conjecture, that the Duke had a design of
entering into the Triple Alliance: and of this she made her Complaint. But that
which absolutely spoiled all, was this, that the King having by virtue of his
own Authority, settled Courts of Audience in all the Frontiers of Lorrain, and
even in Lorrain it self, upon occasion of a Squabble that happened between the
Duke, and the King's Superintendant in the Country of Messin, the Duke ordered
the Posts to be taken down, upon which were erected the Arms of France: and in
regard the Duke's Commands were but too punctually obeyed, the King of France,
who desired no more than a Pretense of this Nature, was so highly incensed,
that from that very moment, he resolved not only to seize upon the Duke's
Estates, but upon his Person also.

The King had a considerable Force already upon the Frontiers of Champagne and
the Country of Messin; which he made a show of Quartering there to employ them
against Holland. And with these Men it was that he resolved to attempt the
Surprizal of Nanci: and the Marquis of Fueillade was ordered to put that
Enterprise in Execution. Who being enjoined to take all the Care imaginable not
to fail of his Blow, posted himself one Night with some Horse and Dragoons, in
a Wood that lies within a quarter of a League of the City; believing he might
enter the Town the next Morning by Break of Day, before the Duke was up. But in
short, the Duke of Lorrain escaped this surprise.

However the Marquis, who knew nothing that the Duke was informed of his
Design, immediately seized upon the Gates of the Palace, which he broke open
with Axes and Hatchets; at what time the Princesses of Vaudemont and Lislebon
showed themselves from a Balcony, and endeavored to put a stop to so much
Violence. But the Marquis made his way thorough, and entering the Palace like a
Madman, after he had romag'd all the Appartments, was so enraged that he had
missed of his Prey, that he Stabl'd all the Horses of his Cavalry in the Rooms
of State.

Soon after Marshal Crequi entered Lorrain with a considerable Body of an Army,
where he committed unheard of Hostilities; not sparing the meanest Houses of
Pleasure, which were either Burnt or Plundered. He was no sooner arrived at
Nanci, but he caused the Duke's Palace to be Plunder.d, and carried away all
the Movables, all the Papers, and all the Arms which he found there to Metz.
He found little or no Trouble in making himself Master of the small Places,
which he caused to be immediately dismantled: and as for Chase, Espinale, and
some other Fortresses, which the Duke had furnished with the choicest of his
Men, the Marshal no sooner Besieged 'em, but they surrendered; those Places not
being strong enough to withstand an Army of Five and twenty Thousand Men.

The Duke, who saw himself thus stripped of all his Territories, yet knew not how
to stop the Torrent, in regard that all Men were afraid of embroyling
themselves with France, wrote to almost all the Princes of Europe, earnestly
soliciting them, to persuade the King to restore him his Country: But he was
always inexorable, as he has all along to this day continued, though he
Protested in a Letter, that he wrote at the same time to the Diet of
Ratisbonne, That he never had any Intention to advantage himself by the Spoils
of the Duke of Lorrain. For though he would sometimes consent to restore the
Duke or Prince Charles, yet it was always under such severe Conditions, that
both the one and the other chose rather to live deprived of their Dominions,
than to purchase 'em at that Rate.

Prince Charles was astonished, when he understood the deplorable Condition to
which the Duke of Lorrain was reduced. But nothing grieved him more, than his
own want of Power to Revenge the Bloody Outrages which his Family had suffered;
and the thought of that it was, which overwhelmed him with Sorrow.
Nevertheless, in regard it was a Misfortune without Remedy, he endeavored to
dissemble his Despair, flattering himself, that if the Emperor had but once
reduced the Malcontents that so he might be able to turn his Arms upon
France, he should be in a Condition to repair his Losses; and make Lewis repent
of his having not only expelled a Sovereign Prince out of his Dominions, but of
having put upon him Indignities no less Infamous than if he had been an
Usurper, or the worst of Men.

With these Hopes it was that the Duke of Lorrain fed himself, not having any
other better better course to help him in that Conjuncture of his Affairs. And
it is most certain that he would have revenged himself, had the Troubles of
Hungary been once but thoroughly laid. For it was the Design of the House of
Austria to oppose the Progress of France, that for a long time before, was
become suspected by all her Neighbors.

And every thing seemed well disposed to second the Wishes of his Imperial
Majesty. For he had discovered the Conspiracy against his Person. Prince
Francis Ragotski, who was one of the Chief of the Malcontents was returned to
his Obedience, and had Disbanded his Forces: and all the Troubles were looked
upon at an end. But in regard it was the Emperor's Fate, that he must enter
into a War, which after it had brought him almost within a hairs breadth of
Ruin, was to advance him again to be one of the most Glorious Princes of his
Age, he took so little care to comply with the Hungarians, that they brake
forth again into Rebellion; and the latter Troubles of that Kingdom were an
hundred times more pernicious than the Former. We shall here give ye a short
Account of the Original of these Troubles, that have caused the Effusion of so
much Blood for Twenty years together, and the Calling in of the Ottoman
Assistance at the last Extremity; and has been the only Occasion of so many
Calamities and Miseries, which the greatest Part of Germany still bewails.

At what time the Emperor had laid his Design to reduce the Hungarian
Malcontents, after the Discovery of the Conspiracy already mentioned, he sent
an Army into that Kingdom, which committed therein an infinite number of
Hostilities. On the other side, the Hungarians, who had had no hand in the
Conspiracy, seeing the Troubles were wholly appeased upon Prince Ragotski's
laying down his Arms, believed that the Emperor would have drawn off his Forces
that ruined all before 'em; but their Expectations were no way satisfied.
Thereupon they made their Complaints that the Innocent were envelop'd among the
Guilty; and that the Germans, never considering they were not in an Enemies
Country, yet committed the same Disorders they had done some Months before: but
the Emperor would not listen to any Complaints. On the other side, General
Spork, being reinforced with a considerable Body sent him from Bohemia, entered
into the very Heart of the Country; his Infantry being Commanded by the Marquis
of Baden, and the Cavalry by Prince Charles.

Upon this the Hungarians, who never expected to see an Army where no no Enemy
made any Opposition, were in such a Consternation, that they resolved to Arm
themselves against the Emperor: and this they did accordingly in all Parts,
where they thought themselves to be strong enough.

But in regard the Imperial Army was very numerous, the Malcontents were hard
put to it. General Spork immediately seized upon all the Passes to prevent
their flight into Foreign Countries; and advancing to the Principal Places,
with fifteen Regiments, to furnish them with Garrisons, he no sooner appeared
before those Places, but they set open their Gates to him; so that there was
only Muran that made any Resistance. But the Prince of Lorrain coming before
it, with a considerable Detachement of Horse and Foot, and having presently
possessed himself of a Hill which commanded the Town, he entrenched himself,
and summoned the Countess of Wesselini, who was Mistress of the Place, to
Surrender; threatening to give no Quarter, if he took it by Storm. The Countess
who was within the Town that a sufficient Number of Malcontents, who had
betaken themselves thither for Refuge, made a show at first of holding out. But
at length, considering that her resistance would be in vain, since the Prince
was Master of a Post so Advantageous, she resolved to Capitulate. So that all
the strong Holds being filled with Garrisons, General Spork and the Prince of
Lorrain returned to Vienna, to give an Account to the Emperor of their
Expedition.

In the Year 1672. the King of France Declared War against the Low Countries,
and within one Month made himself Master of Two and thirty Towns, that were all
Places of good Defense. For those Provinces at that time were divided into two
or three Factions: and in regard that France, who made the best Advantage of
every thing, fomented those Divisions underhand, it was no such extraordinary
thing to make such considerable Conquests in so short a time; besides, that
there was a great suspicion that Treachery assisted his Successes. However it
were, the French Army no sooner appeared before a Place, but they found the
Gates open, or at least it was not long before they were opened. So that the
French who were in that Campaign, were wont to say, That they rather traveled
through those Cities, than besieged 'em; and that if they had not met with some
Resistance at Nimeghen, they should not have known they had been at War. The
King also who was present at all these safe Exploits, had a particular Eye upon
Amsterdam, and he missed but little of his Design. But the Inhabitants letting
loose their Sluices, rather chose to seek their safety in a Deluge of Water that
environed 'em, and to suffer all manner of Hardships, than to lose their
Liberty: which disappointed the Measures of France.

Now in regard the Country lay under Water, the King finding it impossible for
him to advance his Conquests any farther, returned to Paris, leaving his Armies
under the Conduct of Marshal Turenne. At the same time also the Elector of
Brandenburgh, alarmed by these Victories of the French, and seeing that the
King had got Possession of Wesel, and some other Towns that belonged to him in
particular, resolved to take the Field, and stop so rapid a Progress; as also
to oppose the Designs of the Elector of Cologne, and Bishop of Munster, who had
both likewise Declared against Holland. Nevertheless, because he found himself
not strong enough to drive the French out of his Dominions had they attempted
to enter (for there was all the Probability in the World, that they had such a
Design) he had so sucessfully managed a Negotiation at the Court of Vienna,
that he had persuaded the Emperor to join him with a Body of Fifteen thousand
Men, under the command of Montecuculi. So that the Elector found himself,
toward the beginning of October, in a condition to Encamp above Mayence,
between the Mein and the Rhine, with an Army of Thirty thousand Men.

At the same time, the Duke of Lorrain, joined the Elector with some Regiments
which he had still in Burgundy; and Prince Charles, who had refused some
Propositions, which the King of France had made him, as not being for his
Advantage, served in the same Army, as General of the Horse. But the Prince met
with no opportunity to signalize himself; for besides that Montecuculi had his
Reasons why he would not venture his Army, and for that he had to do with
Marshal Turenne, the Prince de Lokowitz, having delayed the Execution of the
Emperor's Orders, both this and the following Campaign passed over without any
considerable Action; which occasioned the Fall of that Minister.

Toward the end of the Year 1673. the King of Poland, who had Married the
Emperor's Sister, the Princess Eleanora-Maria, died. Now in regard the Emperor
had some thoughts of Marrying Prince Charles to that Princess, could he have
obtained the Crown of Poland, resolved to make up this Match, upon the decease
of King Michael, in regard that now the Prince had new hopes that he might
ascend the Throne of that Kingdom. For there was great Probability, that if he
Married the Queen of Poland, the Polanders would sooner Elect him to be their
King than any other Foreign Prince; for that, besides the Solicitation of the
Emperor, which could not but be of very great weight, as Affairs then stood,
the Grandees of Poland had all along testified a very great Respect and Esteem
for the Queen.

They who aspired to that Crown, at that time, were the Prince of Lorrain, the
Prince of Muscovie, the Prince of Conde, the Duke of York, Prince George of
Denmark, the Prince of Orange, the Elector of Brandenburgh, the Prince of
Vaudemont, and the Eldest Son of the Duke of Neuburgh, who had likewise a
design to Marry the Queen.

Toward the beginning of May 1674. The Grandees of Poland, who were concerned
in the Election of the King, met at Warsaw, the Place where usually the Kings
are Elected. There among the rest, arrived the Grand Marshal Sobieski, first of
all, with a considerable number of Soldiers that were quartered in the Villages
round about; none but his own Regiment being suffered to accompany him into the
City when he made his Entry. Which after he had once made, the Ambassadors of
Foreign Princes had their several Audiences. The Pope's Nuncio who was
introduced first of all, made his Harangue in Latin, and recommended to the
Electors the Choice of a Catholic King. The Emperor's Ambassador had his
Audience the next day; who desired the same thing, but withal desired the
Electors to cast their Eyes upon a Prince who was devoted to the Interests of
the House of Austria, and to favor the Desires of the Queen. The Bishop of
Marseilles, who was but newly arrived, had a most magnificent Audience. That
Prelate, who was a Person full of witty Craft, and dextrous Insinuation, was
sent by the King of France with large Sums of Money to corrupt the Great Men of
the Kingdom, or to offer Assistance to Poland, then at War with the Turks. He
made an Eloquent Speech, wherein, after he had recommended to the Assembly the
Election of a King that would be no Enemy to France, he told them plainly
without any Circumlocutions, that the Prince of Lorrain was not fit for the
Government of a Kingdom. The Ambassadors of the Duke of Neuburgh, the Prince of
Lorrain, and the rest of the Princes, Competitors for that Crown, had every one
their Audience in their Turns, and forgot nothing to incline the Balance in
favor of their Masters. However all People thought that the Prince of Lorrain
would have carried it from all the rest of the Competitors; and the Prince too
thought himself so sure of it, that he went and lay near the Frontiers of the
Kingdom, to give the greater Courage to those that were of his Party. In short,
there was all the likelihood imaginable that he would have been preferred in
that Election. For besides, that the Lithuanians had already declared in his
Favor, he was supported by the Emperor and the Queen, who had a very
considerable Party in the Kingdom. But the Bishop of Marseilles, who presently
saw which way the Bias of Affairs ran, and feared nothing more than the
Election of Prince Charles, labored might and main to hinder him, and put the
Duke of Neuburgh into Nomination; to which purpose he had already won the
Bishop of Cracovia, who presided in the Assembly, instead of the Primate of
Poland, who was then Sick. And in regard that the Bishop of Cracovia had given
the Nobility of the Kingdom to understand that it was far more for their
Advantage to be protected by the King of France than by the Emperor, by reason
of the vast Sums of Money which was flung among 'em with a lavish Profusion, he
had shak'n 'em already in favor of Neuburgh. And indeed the Polanders were the
rather inclined to hearken to the Bishop, in regard they were somewhat angry
with his Imperial Majesty, for having preserr'd the Protection of the
Hollanders before Theirs, notwithstanding their strict Alliance by the Marriage
of the Queen his Sister with the King deceased. Nevertheless, the Lithuanians,
in respect to the Queen's Interests, persisted still to choose Prince Charles:
while the Polanders were divided between the Prince of Neuburgh, and a Prince
of their own Country. Upon which the Bishop of Marseilles endeavored to make
the best of this Division. And seeing 'twas impossible to make them choose the
Prince of Neuburgh, he insinuated into the Polanders, on purpose to put by
Prince Charles from the Crown, that they ought to exclude all the Foreign
Princes, and that they could not do better than to cast their Eyes upon the
Grand Marshall Sobieski, who had so gloriously signalized himself at the
Battle of Choczin, where the Turks had lost above Fourteen Thousand Men, with
all their Artillery and Baggage.

Thus above Fifteen Days were spent in Contests, when at length they resolved
to determine this great Affair. Nevertheless, being willing to understand the
Queens Sentiments before they came to a Conclusion, they sent certain Bishops
to know her final Inclinations. To which the Queen made Answer, That she was
under the Protection of the States of the Kingdom, upon whom she wholly relied:
And that as for what concerned the Election of a new King, she hoped that she
should not be forsaken by her Friends; protesting withal, that she desired no
other King, nor no other Husband, than the Prince of Lorrain, whom the Emperor
had designed her. And when they desired to know the last Resolution of the
Lithuanians, they presently replied, That since the Crown was only demanded by
the Ambassadors for the Princes of Lorrain and Neuburgh, the rest were none of
'em to be thought of; and therefore they had fixed their Resolutions upon the
Prince of Lorrain; adding withal, that they would leave the Assembly if their
choice were denied. This Answer being carried to the Grand Marshall and the
French Ambassador, did not a little alarm the latter. But the Grand Marshall
was so far from being concerned, that with a Smiling Countenance he told some
of the Lords that were with him, That if the Lithuanians left the Assembly, the
Polanders would take Possession of it.

Now in regard that the Grand Marshall was well assured, that they would
exclude the Foreign Princes, and that the Affair would be determined in his
Favor, he repaired himself to the Assembly; where he was no sooner come, but
the Vaivod Ruski proposed him, without so much as taking notice of any other of
the Competitors; and that Proposal being agreed to by almost all the Vaivods,
he was Proclaimed King the next day, being the 20th of May 1674.

Sobieski was no sooner Elected, but the Queen sent the Prince Intelligence of
it. She let him know how extremely it grieved her, that she had mist in
procuring his Election; that if he had not a Crown, it was none of her Fault:
that it was sufficient he was Worthy of one; that she looked upon her self no
less Unfortunate in his loss than he could be: And that she hoped, that one day
a more happy Destiny would befall both the one and the other. The Prince made
Answer to the Person that delivered the Message, That he was really
Unfortunate, in regard that being disappointed of a Crown, he saw himself
deprived of his more pleasing Expectations: That if he desired to be advanced
to the Throne of Poland, 'twas only that he might by that means aspire to a
Happiness which he preferred before all the Empires of the World. Nevertheless,
that he had this to lessen his Despair, that she had been pleased to show him
such an extraordinary Affection in an Affair of so high a Concern. However, he
could not forbear from breaking forth into a vehement Indignation against the
Author of his Misfortune. He told the Gentleman, that it proceeded from the
foul Practices of the King of France, and the subtle Artifices of his Public
Minister, who had frustrated his Design; yet, that perhaps he should not be
always so unhappy, but that one day he might be Revenged of a Prince, that
seemed only to be Born to trouble him and all the World beside.

In short, upon his departure from the Frontiers of Poland, where he lay, he
returned to Vienna, where at the very Moment of his arrival, he besought* the
Emperor to permit him to rejoyn the Imperial Army in Flanders, under the
Command of the Count de Souches. Nor did the Emperor, whom the Prince had
incensed against France after an extraordinary manner, think fit to detain him
that Campaign, as he had purposed to do. So that leaving Vienna with all speed
imaginable, he came time enough to be at the Battle of Seneff, one of the most
memorable that have happened in this Age. The desire which the Prince had to
signalize himself at such a time, and to render himself formidable to France,
caused him to expose himself equally to the meanest Soldier in the Army. The
Signal of Battle was no sooner given, but he threw himself into the thickest of
his Enemies, with a contempt of danger not to be expressed. And his presence
proved fatal to several of the French. But as it was impossible that a Prince
who exposed himself so openly as he did, should escape without a Wound, he
received a Gash in the Head, which forced him to retire out of the Battle.

But how dangerous soever the Wound were, he was in a Condition to act again
the next Campaign in Germany, where Marshal Turenne Commanded the French Army.
Against him the Emperor had opposed Montecuculi; who would not take charge of
the Imperial Army the year before, because he would not be Subservient to the
Duke of Brandenburgh. Now in regard that Turenne and Montecuculi were both
Experienced Generals, that were shie one of another, they only watched one
another Motions at first. Montecuculi passed and repassed the Rhine several
times; making a show as if he intended to sit down before Philipsburgh, which
bridled the Palatinate. Marshal Turenne coasted along the River on Strasburgh
side, during the movements of the Confederate Army. But in regard he mistrusted
Strasburgh, though that City had entered into a Neutrality some time before, he
resolved himself to pass the Rhine with his whole Army.

This was an attempt which the Confederates thought impossible, in regard their
Army was more numerous than the French. In short, Marshal Turenne having laid a
Bridge over the River against a certain place environed with a Wood and Hills,
the Imperialists thought it was only a design to pass over one part, since they
could not see which way he could get his Carriages and Baggage to follow him.
But in regard that Turenne had accustomed his Soldiers to all sorts of Labor,
the obstacle which the Imperialists believed invincible was soon removed. So
that his Army having passed the Rhine, he presently made himself Master of
Wildstat, designing to tire out the Imperialists, who presently marched toward
Offenburgh, Montecuculi fearing least the French should attempt that place. And
indeed, the Imperial Army suffered great Hardships, in regard that they were
deprived of their Communication with Strasburgh. Nor did the French suffer less
for want of Victuals, but chiefly of Forage, which began to grow so scarce,
that the Horses had nothing for above Eight days but Leaves from the Trees.

In the mean time, because the Bridge which Marshal Turenne had laid over the
Rhine extremely annoyed the Imperialists, and that it was of great importance
to make themselves Masters of it; the Prince of Lorrain and Count Caprara
undertook to effect it. To which purpose they resolved to fall upon the French
Army, one on the one side, and the other on the other side, while two other
Detachments made a false Attack upon two other Posts. Thereupon they marched
all Night, having each of them between Three and Four Thousand Horse and
Dragoons. The Prince of Lorrain was to fall upon the Enemies Rear, and
performed his Duty accordingly; but not being seconded by the other
Detachements, who were to Attack the French Camp in several parts at the same
time, as was concluded upon, he was forced to Retreat, because he perceived a
great Body of the choicest of the French Troops advancing toward him. For
Marshal Turenne having lined all the Lanes through which the Prince was to
pass; the Prince was constrained to clear his way before he could pass any
farther. However he made a shift to force two or three Posts of the Enemies,
and to kill about Four Hundred of their Men, and take several Prisoners of
Note, among whom was Traci, Major General of the Infantry. He also brought away
three Colors, and among the rest the Standard of the Kings Dragoons. So that
although the Prince could not make himself Master of the Bridge, as he
designed; yet the Honor which he won in that Conflict was very great, as the
French and Turenne himself acknowledged, as well for the vigorous Attack, as
the orderly and Soldier-like Retreat which he made.

Now the two Armies lying so near each other, there past not a day without some
skirmishes, but they came not to a general Battle, though there were great
scarcity of Victuals, as well in Turenne's as Montecuculi's Army; which one
would have thought should have forced the two Generals to have fought for their
Bread. But being both unwilling to put it to a venture, unless they could have
found their Advantages, which it was a hard matter to do, both Generals being
so well acquainted with each others Conduct, they only contented themselves
with slight Skirmishes for fear of being too precipitate. Nevertheless,
Montecuculi being no longer able to contend with those Distresses under which
his Army labored, made one motion, which caused Marshal Turenne to believe he
had a purpose to give him Battle. And therefore, as he was covetous of nothing
more than of Honor, so he sought all opportunities to acquire it, though never
any General had a more Illustrious, or more dilated Reputation. Desirous
therefore of Victory, he removed, without losing time to a Hill, where he
designed to plant a Battery. But as he was giving directions to St. Hilaire,
Lieutenant General of the Artillery, how to dismount the Imperialists great
Guns, he was shot with a Cannon Bullet; which caused a great Consternation in
the French Army, and forced them to repass the Rhine.

Montecuculi desirous to make his Advantage of the Terror which he judged the
Enemy was in, resolved upon a vigorous pursuit; and first he fell upon
Wildstat, and regained it. With that the Count de Lorges, who together with the
Marquis de Vaubrune had taken upon them the Command of the Army, being informed
that Wildstadt was retaken, and that the Imperialists pursued with a design to
Fight him, drew up the Army to the best Advantage he could; and presently there
began a most terrible Conflict, which lasted from Eleven a Clock in the
Forenoon till Seven in the Evening, to the advantage of the Imperialists: For
though the loss was great on both sides, Count de Lorges was constrained to
give Ground. All Men however agree, that he made his Retreat like an
experienced Captain; and that he did as much at such a pinch, as Turenne
himself could have done. For Montecuculi tried all ways to have engaged him a
second time. But seeing that it was in vain to continue the pursuit, by reason
of the advantageous Posts where the Count entrenched himself, he sat down
before Hagunau; but was constrained in some few days after to raise the Siege,
to meet the Prince of Conde, who Commanded the French Army, and was got as far
as Strasburgh. At this Siege it was, that the Prince of Lorrain was wounded
with a Musket Shot, but so favorably, that it did him little or no harm.

Soon after Turenne was Slain, the Duke of Lorrain his Uncle died upon the 20th
of September. A Prince, who in his Life time had undergone many Severities of
adverse Fortune, and who after he had been in several dangerous Battles, died
in a small Village near Coblentz; in the Seventy Second year of his Age. He was
not so happy as to see himself restored to his Dominions. Nevertheless it may
be said, that he died accompanied with Fame and Honor to his Grave. For he
expired soon after the defeat of Marshal Crequi in a remarkable Battle, and
after the taking of Treves, where Marshal Crequi was made a Prisoner of War,
after he had obstinately refused to Surrender the place, which it was so
impossible for him to keep, that most of the Officers were forced to tell him,
That they did not intend to loose their own Lives to recover the Honor he had
lost at the Battle of Tavern, and so made the Capitulation themselves without
him.

THE LIFE OF Charles V. DUKE of Lorrain and Bar, And Generalissimo of all the
Imperial Forces. THE THIRD BOOK.
SO soon as the Prince of Conde was arrived near Strasburgh with his Army,
Montecuculi marched the Imperialists on the same side, so that both Generals
were almost in view of each other. Never was the Prince of Lorrain so
serviceable to the Imperial Army as at that time. For besides that they were
obliged to send out Detachements every Hour, Montecuculi was resolved to give
the Prince of Conde Battle, so soon as he found a favorable opportunity.
Nevertheless, as necessary as he was in Alsatia, he no sooner understood the
Death of his Uncle, by an Officer which the Prince of Vaudemont sent to him,
but he repaired in all ha^t to the small City of Kymen* seated in Honsr^^k, at
the request of the said Prince, who came thither the Night before his Father
Died, and Commanded the Lorrainers in his Fathers stead. Now in regard these
two Princes lived in perfect Amity together, and that they were assisted by the
Marquis of Grana* who was a Friend to both, they so ordered their particular
Affairs, that both were highly Satisfied. After which Prince Charles took his
leave, and carried the Lorrainers along with him into the Emperors Service.

Prince Charles, whom for the future I am to call Charles V. or the Duke of
Lorrain, received from all parts the Compliments of Condolement and
Congratulation, there being no Prince or State in Europe that did not
acknowledge him for the Successor to Charles IV. and who did not Respect him as
a Sovereign, and a Brother, except the King of France, who usurped his Dukedoms.

However, all People flattered themselves, that the King would be so far from
refusing him h^s Titles, that he would restore to him his Territories. In a
word, Madam de Guise having begged leave to write to the new Duke of Lorrain,
and desiring withal to know what Title she should give him; the King made
Answer, That as for her, she might give him what Titles she thought fitting.
Which presently made many presume, that he had an Inclination to reinvest him
in his Dutchies: So much the rather, because, that when the Count of
Windisgratz, in the Emperors Name, Solicited at Paris the Restoration of
Charles IV. the King told him several times, That he had never seized upon the
Dukes Territories, but because he could put no Confidence in him; but when they
came to Descend to a Prince that would be more Faithful to him, he should never
make any scruple to restore them to him. But the King was far from any such
Intention; and the first Mark that he gave of it, was, that he would not Mourn
for the Duke of Lorrrin but in Black; as looking upon him to be no other than a
Subject of his Crown, and not as a Sovereign Prince; for then he would have put
on Purple, according to the Custom of the Kings of France. But that was not
all. It was about two years before, that the King of Sweden offered his
Mediation of a Peace between the Empire, the Low Countries, and France. The
City of Coblentz was also accepted for the place of Conference; and the
Plenipotentiaries were already met; and the Emperor seemed overjoyed at the
King of Sweden's Mediation. But afterward coming to consider that he had
Signed with Holland, Spain, and the best part of the Circles of the Empire;
more especially with the Protestants, this gave him so much hope of
Re-establishing the House of Austria, that unwilling to loose so favorable an
opportunity, he made an Attempt, that seemed in some Measure to be against the
Law of Nations, on purpose to break off the Mediation, and put the King of
France out of all hopes of any Reconciliation, unless he resolved to make a
Restitution of all that he had Conquered from Spain, Germany, and Lorrain. The
Attempt was to seize upon Of whom mention has been already made in this
History, under the Name of the Count of Furstenberg. This Family derives its
Name from a City of Germany in Suabia; and they that are of this Family are
Princes of the Empire.
Prince William of Furstenburgh, the Elector of Cologne's Plenipotentiary: And
this was Executed in Cologne it self, in the view of all the rest of the
Plenipotentiaries, by the Orders of the Marquis of Grana, Governor of Bon, who
after that caused some Wagons of the Ambassadors of France; wherein were Fifty
Thousand Crowns, to be seized, and brought away from the same City. Upon which
the Plenipotentiaries of the rest of the Princes, not thinking themselves safe
in Cologne after two such Actions as these, obliged the Magistrate to go and
Demand Satisfaction of the Marquis, who had already secured Prince William in
his Garrison. But all the Magistrate could say was to no purpose: For the
Marquis made Answer, That having done nothing but by the Emperors Order, which
he produced in Writing, he could neither set the Prince at Liberty, nor restore
the Money, without a new Order from his Imperial Majesty. This so enraged the
King of France, that he Commanded his Ambassadors to tell those from the King
of Sweden, that they had Order to return, and that he was resolved to be
Revenged by force of Arms for the Injury done to himself and the Elector of
Cologne's Plenipotentiary. Thus the French Ambassadors departed; and then it
was to no purpose for the rest to stay any longer. But the Advantage which the
King of France got by this Rupture, was this, that having over-perswaded the
King of Sweden, that the Confederates had no value for him; That in scorn of
his Mediation they had seized upon Prince William, and refused to release him
at his Request, and that it was himself indeed that had received the Affront,
by these Artifices he engaged him to his Interest.

This Violence upon the Person of Prince William, and the Injury which the King
of France had received in particular, made all men believe, that there would be
no Peace in have in Europe, and that the King of France would never consent to
renew the Negotiation. Nevertheless, at the Request of the King of England,
whose Mediation was generally approved of by all the Princes that were
interested in that War, since the Swedes had declared for France; and at the
earnest Solicitation of the Bishop of Strasburgh, who openly declared, that he
preferred the Advantages of Peace before the Liberty of the Prince his Brother;
the King was prevailed upon to let the Reasons of his Honor give way to those
of his Interest. And having accepted Nimeghen for the Place of Treaty, he sent
thither for his Plenipotentiaries the D. of Vitry, M. Colbert, and the Count d'
Avaux.

Now in regard there was a Necessity for granting Passports on both sides for
the Ambassadors of the Princes concerned, all Germany being up in Arms; and the
King of France also granted a Passport for the Duke of Lorrain's
Plenipotentiaries, wherein he called him Cousin, and barely Prince of Lorrain.
Upon which the Duke refused the Passport, and complained to the King of
England, That the King of France had not given him his Titles of Brother and
Duke of Lorrain. The King of England to remove this Obstacle, proposed to the
Confederates that he might grant all the Passports himself, and to facilitate
the Success of this Expedient, he wrote to the Emperor, and caused a Memorial
to be Presented to the States General; wherein he set forth the Reasons which
had obliged him to propound this Expedient as he had done in his Letter to the
Emperor. But his Imperial Majesty made Answer that the Proposal could not be
accepted; that things were to be done in due form; and that the King of France
could not alter the usual Style of Passports, but must give to every one the
Titles that belonged to 'em. The States General went higher, for they spoke out
in plain terms, and which also served for an Answer to the King of England,
that the Confederates and themselves were very much surpised that the King of
France should not give Prince Charles the Title of Duke of Lorrain, considering
that the Treaty in the Year 1662, by which he was lawfully possessed of the
Dutchies of Lorrain and Bar could not be looked upon but as null and void, as
being in the first place concluded with a Prince who had no Right or Power;
besides, that in the second place, it was notoriously known, that the King had
never performed that Treaty, nor the Clause which Charles IV. inserted, which
was one of the Principal Things contained in it. They added, That the King of
France had made no mention of the Treaty 1662. in that of 1663. And that
having, after the Death of Charles IV. granted Permission to those of his House
to give him the Title of Duke of Lorrain, their Wonder was so much the more
that he should refuse the same Title to the new Duke, and by that means put a
stop to a Peace, which all Europe so vehemently thirsted after. The King
answered all these Objections. But in regard it was his Interest, that the
Peace should be concluded, after he had declared that the Titles either given
or omitted could do him no Prejudice, he caused another Passport to be drawn,
wherein he gave the New Duke the Title of Brother, and Duke of Lorrain. Upon
which the Duke wrote the following Letter to the States General: High and
Potent Lords,
THe Constancy which your High and Mightinesses have shown in the Support of my
Interest till this very time, in Pursuance of the Alliance into which you have
done me the Honor to admit me, having constrained the King of France to allow
me those Titles which God and Nature has given me, I find my self obliged to
testify to your High and Mightinesses my Joy and my Acknowledgment, not only
in regard of my particular Interests, but much more by reason of the
Satisfaction your Highnesses receive, when they find their Designs successful.
Nevertheless, as all your Cares have been of my Interests, I desire you to
believe that I shall acknowledge them to the utmost of my Power as long as I
live, and that if at present any Opportunity should present it self to give you
Proofs of my sincerity, I should be passionately desirous to lay hold of it.
This the sincere Protestation of, etc.

Charles Lorrain.




The French Army that lay in Alsatia, was to be commanded this Year 1676. by
the Duke of Luxemburgh, whom the King had preferred before the Prince of Conde
by means of the Intreagues of Monsieur de Louvois, who was no Friend to the
Prince; and the Imperial Army was to be commanded by the Duke of Lorrain. For
Montecuculi having got leave to retire to Vienna, had resigned his Command by
Order of the Emperor.

Toward the beginning of the Campaign therefore, the Duke of Luxemburgh
departed from Schelestadt at the Head of near Fifty thousand Men, and after
seven or eight days March, Encamped his Army upon fresh Intelligence, that the
Duke of Lorrain was coming against him, with an Army not much inferior in
number to his, and that he was just upon passing the Saar. He could not believe
at first that the Duke had any design to fight him; For in regard he was rather
persuaded that the Duke would Besiege Philipsburgh, which had been blocked up
for some time, he could not imagine he would venture a Battle. But being
confirmed by some Prisoners that the Imperial Army continued their March, he
advanced himself with a numerous Detachement, and gave Orders for the rest of
the Army to follow him. The Duke had already seized upon a Rising Ground, from
whence he poured his small Shot upon the Enemy. So that the Guard which
Luxemburgh had caused to pass beyond a little River that parted the two Armies,
being forced to repass again, he lined the Hedges with his Dragoons and
Infantry, for fear the Imperialists should come on too fast. But that could not
stop 'em; so that there happened a Fight that lasted about two Hours, not at
all to the Advantage of the Duke of Luxemburgh.

Now though it were impossible as well for the Imperialists as the French to
stay long in those Posts where the Battle was fought, by reason of the great
Difficulty of bringing Provisions to the Armies; yet both Generals entrenched
themselves, as if they had not been to stir during the whole Campaign: but in
regard the Posts were not tenable, they were obliged to quit 'em; and the
Marshal was the first that moved. He sent away his heavy Baggage toward the
beginning of the Night, when the Duke least expected it; and having decamped
with all the Silence imaginable, the Marshal left in the Lanes as many Foot and
Dragoons as he thought necessary to favor their Retreat. But the Imperialists
perceiving they had decamped, presently cleared the Lanes of the Enemy, and
having opened a passage for the Cavalry, they thundered with such a Fury upon
the Rear of the French, and the Duke of Lorrain fought with such a steady
Courage, that if Count Hamilton, who had posted himself upon an Advantageous
ground, had not put himself with his Pike in his hand at the Head of his
Regiment, there had been an end of the French Army.

Marshal de Luxemburgh thus delivered by the Bravery of that English Gentleman,
who nevertheless was slain at the same time, after his stout resistance had put
the Imperial Army to a kind of disorder, which obliged the Duke to Sound a
Retreat, got over to the other side of a small River, by the side of which he
encamped and entrenched his Army. But the Duke following him thither, encamped
within sight of him, and plied the Marshal so thick with his Cannon, that the
French were strangely terrified. Nevertheless, in regard they were posted so
advantageously, that it was impossible to force their Camp, the Duke drew off
and bent his March for Strasburgh, which had declared for the Emperor after the
Death of Turenne, and having sent away his Artillery and his Infantry by Water,
marched directly for Philipsburgh, which he had Orders to Besiege.

Prince Frederick of Baden Dourlach, General of the Army of the Circles, was
entrusted with the Management of the Siege* where he met with many
Difficulties, in regard the place was Strong, the Garrison very numerous, and
the Rhine no less troublesome, through the swelling of the Waters, though it
were a Season that Inundations are not very frequent. Nevertheless, the Prince,
who had under him Prince Herman of Baden, General of the Emperor's Artillery,
and the famous Wertmuller, made himself Master of the Place after a vigorous
Defense of Four Months, Luxemburgh not being able to relieve it; by reason of
the Bravery and Vigilance of the Duke of Lorrain, who worsted him several times
during the Siege; and at length forced him to Retreat, though at the Head of
Fifty thousand Men, almost in view of the Besiegers. It is said, that the
Prince of Conde, who understood the Mystery of War much better than Luxemburgh,
being asked by the King what was to be done to save Philipsburgh; made answer,
That he must keep the Duke of Lorrain from Besieging it; but since the Error
was committed, he ought to hazard the Army what e're it cost him, and force the
Enemy in his Entrenchments. But Luxemburgh was so far from doing that, that he
only spun out the time, and gave Ground at last; which rendered him
contemptible: insomuch that a Thousand Lampoons were made upon him in the Army;
and among the Rest this was One, Upon the Rhine a Monster of a Beast
Threatened Prodigious Havoc to his Foes;
Though Lorrain never feared him in the least,
But bravely did the Monster still oppose.
For why? the Monster had no Head at all,
But arms a Hundred Thousand, great and small.


But at last, Luxemburgh ashamed that he had performed nothing considerable
with so brave an Army, bent his March for Schelestadt, with a design to Repair
his Honor in Brisgau. To which purpose, he set his Men to lay a Bridge over
the Rhine below Brissac. But he was so long about it, that the Duke had leisure
to oppose his Designs, and put a good Garrison into Friburgh, the only Place
that was in danger on that side. So that all Luxemburgh's Achievements
terminated in Plundering some few Villages; and putting little Garrisons into
petty Places, to prevent the Duke, that followed him close from falling upon
Him at a Disadvantage, as if he had been only upon the Defensive part. After
which having repassed the Rhine, he encamped between Brisac and Basle, while
the Duke of Lorrain, still observing his Motions, advanced toward the latter
City, fearing lest he might have some design upon it, though it were a City
that stood Neuter.

Now in regard the Weather began to grow very unseasonable, and for that there
was nothing more to be done in those Posts, both Armies resolved to retire to
their Winter Quarters. Luxemburgh sent one part of his Men in to Alsatia, and
the other part into Lorrain and Burgundy, who in the way seized upon the
Country of Montbeillard, which as the King afterward publicly declared, was
done, not that he had any design to make himself Master of Montbeillard, but
only to take it into his Protection; however the Prince and Princess not caring
for such Protectors, retired to Basle As for the Duke of Lorrain, in regard his
Men were very much tired out with the Siege of Philipsburgh, he sent them to
their Winter Quarters in Suabia and Franconia, after he had taken all necessary
care, that they should not be surpised by the Duke of Luxemburgh.

The Success which the Duke had had, put him in great hopes of the same
Prosperity the next year. He thought it would be no difficult matter to break
into his own Country, where he knew himself to be passionately desired by his
own Subjects. So that in the midst of these Thoughts he made it his Business to
be early in the Field; as he was before the end of April. Now in regard he was
assured of Strasburgh Bridge, he ordered his Army to Rendezvous upon the Banks
of the Rhine, while the Prince of Saxon Essenak labored the laying of a Bridge
order the same River to enter Alsatia another way. For this Prince Commanded
the Army of the Circles instead of the Marquis of Baden Dourlach, who fell Sick
and Died presently after the taking of Philipsburgh.

The King of France on the other side, advertised of this Design, and fearing
lest the Duke of Lorrain should force a passage into his own Territories, if
once he got footing in Alsatia, laid that Country waste after so terrible a
manner, to deprive the Imperial Army of all Subsistence there, that he burnt up
all the Villages, demolished the Walls and Fortifications of all the
considerable Cities; except Schelestadt, and two or three other Towns that were
strong enough to stop the Imperialists. And indeed it may be said, that the
King of France had never so much Reason to be afraid as he had at the beginning
of this Campaign. He had to do with a victorious Enemy, at the Head of above
Threescore Thousand Men, and a valiant General, who fought for his own proper
Interests; and who, considering the mildness of his Temper toward his own
Subjects, could not fail, unless he were strongly opposed to make himself
Master of Lorrain, and carry the War into the very Heart of France. So that it
is no wonder, considering the Fears he was in, that he was constrained to take
that desperate course to lay desolate his own Country, and to make a wide
desert of one of the goodliest Provinces of Germany. But this was not the only
care that Monarch took. For misdoubting least Luxembergh should have no better
Success than he had the year before, he opposed Crequi against the Duke of
Lorrain, with this Condition, notwithstanding all the Confidence he had in him,
that he should venture nothing, but shun as much as it was possible, the coming
to a Battle with the Enemy.

Nevertheless, the Duke of Lorrain, who was not ignorant of the Kings Fears,
and saw a fair prospect of new Conquests before him, caused this Latin Motto to
be put in his Colors, Aut nunc aut nunquam, Now or Never: And with these hopes
he passed over Strasburgh Bridge, and bent his march directly for Mets, with a
Resolution to force the Passes of the Meuse, which he believed would be
strongly Guarded; while the Prince of Saxon Essenak marched into Alsatia with
the Army of the Circles.

But the first thing which the Duke of Lorrain took care of, was to erect his
Magazines at Treves, which made Crequi believe that he had some design that
way. After which, advancing along the Saar, he sent out a strong Party, which
coming before the Castle of Illingham, constrained the Garrison to Surrender
upon Discretion.

He sent out another Party to seize the little Town of Sarbruch, to which the
Governor set Fire upon the approach of the Imperialists, and retreated to the
Castle. Which so incensed the Imperialists, that they raised a Battery of Four
pieces of Cannon, and what with their great Shot on the one side, and their
Bombs on the other, the Castle was brought to that Distress in a little time,
that the Governor beat a Parley, but no Capitulation would be listened to. So
that the Governor was carried to Treves, and the best part of the Garrison put
to the Sword. After that the Imperialists also took the Castle of Kitchel. So
that the Duke of Lorrain being thus Master of all the small Places upon the
Saar, pursued the French, who lay near to the Seille.

Upon the approach of the Imperialists, the French passed that River, and not
believing themselves safe enough in the place where they Encamped, they
retreated farther off. The Duke of Lorrain passed the River in five places, and
encamped within half a League of the Enemy: So that there was only a thick
Wood, and a Hill, which hindered the two Armies from being in sight of each
other.

Crequi, who had received at the same time a Reinforcement of Eight Squadrons
of the Kings Guards of his Body, and two others of the Gens d'Armes and light
Horse of the Guards, laid a Bridge over the Seille at Longueville, as if he had
a design to repass that River. But that being only for a Bravado, he marched
directly for Morville, from whence he drove out the Imperialists that kept it,
and then seized upon some Hills, where he planted his Cannon. So that all the
Duke of Lorrain could do was to possess himself of a Wood upon the Right Hand
of the French Army. And then believing the Enemy would have come out of their
Trenches, he drew up his Army in order of Battle. But finding they had no such
design, he endeavored* to bring his Artillery so as to bear upon the French.
But before that could be done in a place Convenient, the Imperialists were
forced to undergo a rude brush, not a little to their Damage, though the losses
of the Enemy were not inconsiderable.

The French were entrenched in a very advantageous Place, so as not to be
forced in their Posts. So that the Duke thought it Prudence to retreat a little
farther, in hopes to draw Crequi into open Ground. But finding that the French
avoided Battle, he repassed the Seille, and being encamped a little nearer to
Metz than he was before, he attacked the Fort of Espli which the Enemy had
raised upon the River. Upon that, Crequi sent out a Party of Two Thousand Men
to succor it; but they were so vigorously repulsed, that a great number of the
Soldiers were forced to throw themselves into the Water to save themselves:
And the rest brake down the Bridge which the Marshal had laid over that part of
the River, that they might have time to Retreat before the Imperialists could
be in a Condition to follow the pursuit.

Nevertheless, the Duke of Lorrain's Forces making daily Inroads into the
Country, made their way to the very Gates of Mets and Thionville to fetch in
Contributions; the Duke being a Horseback Day and Night; and certain it is that
he exposed himself too vent'rously for a General: Insomuch that having passed
the Saar with the Marquess of Grana, and Twenty Horse, to view the Place where
the French Army, commanded by Crequi, was beaten in the Year 1675. by the Duke
his Uncle, he had like to have fallen into an Ambuscade of Three Hundred
French: But being luckily informed by certain Peasants of the Danger which his
unseasonable Curiosity had like to have brought him into, he had the leisure to
'scape, and send out a Party which utterly dispersed the Ambuscade.

It would be too tedious to recount the Particulars of this Campaign; which, to
say truth, consisted only in a great many inconsiderable Skirmishes. For
Marshal Crequi still retreated, when there was any probability of coming to a
Battle. So that the Imperial Army, whatever Advantages they might have till
then, began to suffer very much for want of necessary Provisions; which being
to come from Treves, were with great hazard brought to the Army. For besides
that Crequi had always Parties abroad to intercept the Wagons, the Governor of
Thionville sent out such Numerous Detachements, that many times their Vittles
cost 'em dear. And therefore the Duke, considering that these Difficulties were
almost insurmountable, resolved to decamp from the Place where he lay. To this
purpose he passed the Moselle, in hopes to compel the French to fight, in
spite of their Teeths. But finding it was absolutely impossible, because they
still retreated, he thought it the best course he could take to march toward
the Meuse, on purpose to find the Enemy Employment on that side. And having
taken this Resolution, he presently possessed himself of certain Hills which he
found in his way, by that means to secure himself. Upon which, Crequi, believed
that he only sought to pass the Moselle, but finding himself deceived by the
Dukes false March, did what he could to follow him: But finding it impossible
to overtake him, he retreated into Lorrain, while the Imperial Army continued
their March toward Ponta Mousson.

The King of France therefore, who apprehended the Dukes Design, had sent
Marshal Schombergh with Twenty Squadrons of Horse, and some Foot, to secure
Sedan and the Neighboring Places. And caused all that could be removed to be
carried away from Mousson: So that when the Duke arrived there, he found the
Place deserted. However, the Army pillaged and plundered several Villages, and
exacted heavy Contributions. But the Duke being unwilling to venture any
farther into an extreme Woody Country, returned with a Design to join the
Prince of Saxon Essenach, in Alsatia^; though there were some misunderstanding
between those two Generals, that did not a little prejudice the Emperors
Affairs, and frustrated all the Hopes of that Campaign: And yet never had any
General more need of succor than he had.

This Prince, who some Days before had coup'd up Monclare's Army in such a
Place, where of Necessity they must have starved or yielded, if Marshal Crequi
had not relieved them, was at length penned up himself in an Island in the
Rhine, between the Bridge of Strasburgh and the City; which Crequi with Ten
Thousand Horse and Dragoons had forced him to betake to, with Three or Four
Thousand Men, to secure himself. Now in regard that he expected either to be
relieved by the Duke of Lorrain, or that the City of Strasburgh would use their
Endeavors, he was resolved to subsist in the Island as long as it was
possible; and during that time he fought with so much Fury, that Crequi in
several Skirmishes lost whole Regiments, and several Officers of Note. But the
City of Strasburgh, afraid of Crequi's Menaces, and desirous to Negotiate some
Accommodation between the Two Generals, the Prince of Saxon Ess^nach was
obliged to Capitulate and yield himself, upon Condition, that he should not
take up Arms again, during the remaind^r of that Campaign. A Condition
nevertheless which Crequi was very unwilling to consent to, as severe as it was
upon the Prince of Saxony; for his aim at least was, that the Prince should
have yielded himself Prisoner with all his Army. But fearing, lest while he
spent time in Disputes, the City of Strasburgh should play him some unlucky
Trick, or lest the Prince should be relieved some other way, he accepted the
Terms.

And indeed the Duke of Lorrain marched Day and Night to relieve the Prince; so
that he had certainly been delivered within a Day a two: But the News of his
Misfortune reaching the Duke upon the Road, afflicted his very Soul. Nor was
this the only Vexation that befell him before the end of the Campaign. For
believing there was no more to be done, in regard that Crequi still avoided a
set Field, unwilling to tire out his Men, and being resolved to take up his
Winter Quarters betimes, he drew off. On the other side, Marshal Crequi made a
show of doing the same. But so soon as the Duke was far enough off from the
French Army, Crequi Invested Friburgh with his Horse, while his Infantry
marched slowly after to lay a formal Siege to the Town.

The Duke was strangely surpised to hear of this; and indeed he would hardly
believe the News. But finding it confirmed by several Couriers, he dispatched
away a Messenger to the Governor, to assure him of Relief, and bid him not be
dismayed. But the Ways were so bad by reason the Season was so far advanced,
that notwithstanding all the haste he could make, he was hardly got half way,
before he understood that the Governor had surrendered. This News surpised him
more than the former; in regard he looked upon the Place as too strong to
Capitulate so soon. For it was environed with a double Wall, defended by a
Citadel with four Bastions, and the Garrison was sufficiently numerous, as
consisting of above Three Thousand Men. But Marshal Crequi carried on the Siege
with so much Vigor and Diligence, that the Governor was at a stand,
notwithstanding all his Shows of Resolution at the beginning of the Siege. The
same Day also that the Place was begirt, Marshal Schombergh with Three Hundred
Men, seconded by some Brigades of Foot, attack't the two Redoubts upon the Hill
where the Citadel stands, and carried them by main Force: After which, the
Trenches being opened, were advanced as far as the Moat; and all the while the
Cannon played so furiously upon the Walls, that they made a Breach about
Eighteen Yards wide. Whereupon the Marshal sent a Summons to the Governor. To
which he answered, That having learned his Trade among the French, he should
show himself a Scholar unworthy the Lessons they had taught him, if he did not
practice them, when there was a good Occasion. This was the Martial Compliment
Major General Schultz (for he Commanded the Place) sent back to the French
General. For finding at first, that the Breach was not easy to be entered, by
reason it was very high, and for that the Moats were no less deep, he thought
that before the Enemy could fill 'em up, and make their Approaches, he might
very well endure a little more Hardship; and this was that which forced Crequi
to drive on the Siege the more vigorously. And therefore perceiving that the
Besieged did not mind the Breach, he resolved to lodge some of his Men upon it,
which notwithstanding the danger of the Enterprise, was effected with a most
daring Resolution. In the mean time Marshall Schomberg having carried an
Outwork that secured a Redoubt which very much annoyed the Besiegers, the Enemy
fired from thence so thick into the Redoubt it self, that they who defended it
were forced to yield themselves Prisoners. So that the Besiegers having got
thus far forward, and Crequi resolving to bring the Siege to a speedy
Conclusion, ordered all things to be prepared ready for a Storm. Which so
terrified the Governor, that he desired to Capitulate. And so the Place was
Surrendered after a Siege of Seven or Eight days. Which made many People
believe, that there was Treachery in the Main. In a word, the Imperial Officers
complained, that they had never any Orders given them; that a Council of War
had never been called; and that the small Resistance which the French met with
made them the more bold to venture. And for a farther proof of a suspected
Correspondence in the Place, his Imperial Majesty caused the Governor to be
Arrested some time after: but not being able to Convict him of any thing but
want of Courage, he gave him his Liberty again; saying only this, That he had
very ill performed his Duty, and that the Duke of Lorrain could not be every
where.

However, in regard that People make their Judgments of things by the Success,
the Duke of Lorrain was blamed for leaving the Field so soon, and not
foreseeing the Siege. But those that judged more discreetly of the Affair, were
of opinion, that it was only a piece of ill Luck that attended the Duke: and
that though he had foreseen Crequi's Design, yet he could not foresee that such
a strong Hold as Friburgh should Surrender within a Week. That he was not to
omit the giving rest to his Army for that, since he might have come soon enough
to relieve the Place, had he been farther off than he was, would the Governor
but have ventured the utmost Extremities of a Siege, rather than have
Surrendered, almost before any harm was done him.

But the French pufft up with this Success, would not stop here, but away they
marched to Walkrick, which together with some other Castles in the
Neighborhood, they laid level with the Ground; and finding that was all they
could do, they repassed the Rhine, and betook themselves to their Winter
Quarters.

During these Transactions in Germany, the Negotiations for Peace went on,
though very slowly, at Nimeghen. For the Mediators were along time before they
could regulate the Ceremonies, and manage the Concerns of every Prince;
besides, that the Ambassadors of the Princes interested, were not so punctual
in meeting at the Place appointed, as the French Ambassadors were.

The President-Canon, and the Baron of Serinchamp, who were the Duke of
Lorrain's Plenipotentiaries, did not arrive till toward the beginning of May
1677. And his Interests, as being a Prince, whose Territories were unjustly
usurped by the French, gave the Mediators a great deal of Trouble. For the King
of France's Ambassadors refused to admit those two Ministers: pretending that
they were not to hearken to their Proposals nor Demands. That the Bishop of
Strasburgh's Agent was not formerly admitted to determine the Business touching
Prince William of Furstenbergh his Brother; which the Imperialists opposed,
alleging that the Duke of Lorrain was a Sovereign Prince, whereas the Bishop
of Strasburgh was no more than one of the Emperor's Subjects, whose Differences
and Suits could no where be determined but within the Empire, and before Judges
that had the proper Cognizance of them. And then another thing was, that the
French Ambassadors would not acknowledge the Duke of Lorrain's Ministers to be
Ambassadors.

The President-Canon discoursed a long time in Private Conferences, to prove
that they had a Right to be acknowledged under that Character. But in regard it
all signified nothing, upon the 16th of May he presented a Remonstrance to the
Mediators, wherein he so substantially set forth the Interests of the Duke his
Master, that the French Ambassadors were at a loss what Answer to make. He set
forth, after he had laid open all the petty Litigious Niceties of the French,
more especially in the business of Passports, that when they knew not how to
avoid giving the Duke the Titles of Duke and Brother, yet they had bethought
themselves of refusing the Character of Ambassadors to his Ministers: and that
in the mean time, when they could not but agree that it was the Right of
Sovereigns, which was never denied them; yet to elude the Matter; and spin out
the Brabble, they persisted in a Nicety of their own framing, that it behooved
the Duke of Lorrain to prove that his Predecessors ever sent any Ministers to
the Courts of Foreign Princes under that Character.

He confessed that such a proof indeed would be a means to shorten the decision
of the Controversy, but that the French had carried away all the Papers and
Records belonging to the Duchy, and partly sold them to the Grocers of Mets
and Nanci, and partly given 'em among the Soldiers to kindle their Fires in the
Corpse du Guard; which although they could not produce for those Reasons; yet
there were other sufficient Proofs why that Right should not be denied them. In
short the President alleged the Treaty made in a full Diet of the Empire at
Norembergh, August 26. 1642. between Charles V. and Ferdinand King of the
Romans on the one part, and Anthony Duke of Lorrain on the other, who had there
four Ministers under the Character of Ambassadors. He farther showed that the
same Title was given to others that were present at the Contract of Marriage
between Duke Francis the Son of Anthony, and Margaret of Austria, Charles the
Fifth's Sister. And to omit nothing to prove that the Duke of Lorrain had a
Right to send Ambassadors, he cited several Alliances of the Dukes of that
Family, among which there were no less than four Marriages with the Emperor's
Daughters, besides that of Duke Francis, the Son of Antonie.

All this manifestly proved the Duke of Lorrain's Right to send Ambassadors to
Nimeghen, as well as the French. But in regard the French would not submit to
these Reasons, and for that the Duke who was unwilling to obstruct the Peace,
thought it better to pass by the Nicety of the word Ambassador, as long as they
were allowed the Title of Plenipotentiaries, more especially since the Emperor,
the King of Spain, and the States General gave them the Character of
Ambassadors, the President insisted no farther upon that Dispute.

So that now the Chief things of which, that Minister complained of in his
Memorial, were the Delays of the French Ambassadors, who had not vouchsafed to
give any Answer to the Propositions and Demands of the Duke of Lorrain, though
it had been six Months since they were presented. He added, that the French
Ambassadors refused to Answer, in regard the Duke had no Ministers at Nimeghen;
and afterward they denied to do the same thing, because they were come
thither. He complained of the little Inclination which he found in France to
restore the Dutchies of Lorrain and Bar, though she knew well enough, that
without that Condition the Peace could never be concluded. And after he had set
forth in a most Pathetical and insinuating manner, that the Duke of Lorrain
demanded nothing but his Patrimony, and the Inheritance of his Ancestors, which
Six and fifty Dukes from whom he had the Honor to be descended, had possessed,
he earnestly desired that they would press the French Ambassadors for an
Answer, and in the mean time, prepare themselves to do the Duke his Master
Justice. But notwithstanding all the Importunity of the Mediators, it was above
Nine or Ten Months before the President could get a positive Answer. But at
length the King himself, having drawn up the draught of a Peace which he sent
to his Ambassadors, and which was delivered the 15th of April 1678. to the
Ambassadors and Ministers of the Confederates by the English Mediators, the
Duke of Lorrain's Plenipotentiaries after they had read what concerned the rest
of the Princes interested, found the King of France's Declaration, That to give
the most undoubted Testimony imaginable of his Desires of Peace, what Reasons
soever he might have to keep the Possession, yet he was willing to restore it
to the Duke of Lorrain, under one of the two Alternatives which he left to his
Choice. The first was to resettle him, according to the Articles of the
Pyrenean Treaty, without any Alteration at all. The second was to restore him
generally to all his Territories except the City of Nanci, which should remain
to him in Sovereignty; and the High Road according to the Treaty 1661. to pass
through his Frontiers into Alsatia, as also such other Roads as should be
necessary to pass from France to Nanci, and from Nanci to Mets, Brisac, and
Franche Conte: upon condition nevertheless, that for the loss of Nanci, he
would give him Thaoul. The King demanded also in the same Draught, that Lonwick
and the Provostship belonging to it, should be delivered up to him; but with
this offer, to recompense the Duke with another Provostship of equal Value in
the three Bishoprics. And as for Marsal, in regard that Town was now no more a
Part of Lorrain, it was not to be mentioned in the Articles of Restitution.

The King, when he sent this Draught, had declared withal to his Ambassadors,
that he would not be obliged to stand to the Conditions upon which he offered
Peace, beyond the 10th of May, and therefore the Princes with whom he was at
War were to determine what they would do by that time at the farthest. The
Ambassadors of the Confederates cried out against this, and said it was
impossible, that an Affair of that Importance as the Conclusion of a Peace
could be determined in so short a time. But at length it was found that Spain
and Holland after some little Negotiations of the French Ambassadors were
inclined to accept a Peace upon the Conditions offered by France. Which made
the Imperialists, and the Ministers of the Northern Princes exclaim against the
Hollanders and Spaniards; declaring openly, that the King of France would
delude 'em; and that the Peace which he made with 'em, was only to bring 'em
under a greater Subjection. The other Ministers were indifferent; but the
President-Canon utterly rejected the Conditions proposed by the King. And
enlarging upon the Severity of the Alternatives, he set forth, That the first
swallowed up all his Country, by dismembring the Half of his Territories. And
the other, by taking from him his Capital City, and the Sovereignty of the four
Roads which the King demanded, denied him the Commerce of one part of his
Territories with the other: Concluding with a Protestation, That if the Faith
of Three Treaties made with the Confederates signified nothing toward his
Master's Restoration, he would renounce his Country, and rather willingly
Banish himself, than return to it upon such hard Conditions.

After the Death of King Michael, the Emperor, as already has been intimated,
had a design to Marry the Queen of Poland, his Sister, to the Duke of Lorrain.
The Princess also had declared in favor of him, when the Election of the new
King was in dispute: and had positively said, that she looked upon the Prince
as her Husband. And the Duke of Lorrain, though indifferent at the beginning,
was become so enamored of her, that the only trouble which he felt for the
loss of the Crown of Poland, was for her sake, believing the loss of that would
also defeat him of her Person. However, notwithstanding all the Prince's
Misfortunes, and his being despoiled of his Territories, neither the Emperor
nor the Queen of Poland altered their Sentiments, so that upon his departure
from Vienna for Flanders, the Emperor did in a manner positively promise him,
that it should be none of his fault, if they were not more nearly Allied: and
on the other side he received from the Queen so many Marks of Affection and
Esteem, that he could not but depend upon 'em.

However, though it were a Match almost made, yet four or five years were
already spun out before the Emperor ever spoke of concluding it. His design was
first to have seen the Prince re-settled in his Throne. Which, according to all
outward appearance, could be no long time: the Negotiations for Peace still
continuing at Nimeguen, and the most part of the Princes of the Empire being
inclined to accept it. But the Negotiations going on but very slowly, and he
having long delayed to recompense the good Services done him by the Duke, at
length toward the end of the Campaign he dispatched a Courier to him, with
Orders to return to Vienna, and conclude the Marriage.

This News was so pleasing to the Duke, that he could not contain his Joy. So
that after he had read the Emperor's Letter, with a smiling Countenance he told
the Messenger, that his sorrow was in some measure atton'd for the loss of
Friburgh; and that the Honor which his Imperial Majesty had done him, was so
certain a good Omen, that his bad Fortune began to forsake him, that he doubted
not, but so soon as he took the Field, to make himself Master of it again, and
cause Marshal Crequi to remember the Valor of the Dukes of Lorrain. But as the
greatest Joys are those which are most frequently intermixed with the sharpest
Pangs of Trouble and Vexation, there befell him an Accident at Philipsburgh,
that had like to have put an end, together with his Life, to all his Hopes and
Designs. For as he was going over a Bridge that belonged to that place, one of
the Planks not being well fastened, unluckily gave way, so that he fell to the
bottom of the Moat. But though the danger were very great, yet he came off with
only a Bruise upon his Shin, that did not a little trouble him for some time.

People discoursed of this Fall variously in the World. For some looked upon it
as an Accident unforeseen: but some affirmed, it was a Trap laid for him by the Sea a Letter-Book, Entitled, The Emperor and the Empire betrayed, by whom, and
how.
Governor of the Town, with a design to have sacrificed him by an untimely end,
to France. In short the Governor was Arrested, and carried to Vienna, but he
could not be convicted by all the Inquisitions that were made. However it were,
the Duke was no sooner in a Condition to undertake a Journey, but he departed,
leaving Prince Herman of Baden to Command the Imperial Army; of which the
greatest part was quartered about Offenburgh, and the rest dispersed into other
Winter Quarters. Now in regard his Fall had very much disordered him, he could
not travel far in a day; so that with all the haste he could make, he could not
arrive at Baden, between Vienna and Newstadt, till the 4th of February. There
he rested for some days, to take the benefit of the Baths, and was also met by
the Marquis de Grana, the Count of Bauquoi* and several other Noblemen, to
accompany him to Newstadt, where the Emperor then kept his Court. The last days
Journey he was met half way by the Emperor's Grand Squire, accompanied by Count
Wallenstein Captain of Horse, and the Counts Mansfeildt and Schaffenbergh, who
alighting out of their Coaches, paid him their Compliments, and so went
altogether to Newstadt, where they arrived in good time. The Duke was received
without the Castle Gate, at the foot of the Stairs, by the Master of the
Household and the Chamberlains, and at the top by the Grand Chamberlain, who
conducted him to the Emperor's Chamber; which is an extraordinary Honor. The
Emperor presently caused him to be admitted to his Presence; ordered a Chair to
be brought for him to sit down; and after a short Discourse together, the
Emperor himself lead him to the Empress Regent's Antichamber. Presently after
that the Duke went to the Apartment of the Empress Dowager, where was the Queen
Dowager of Poland, and the Arch-Dutchess her Sister. After a short Discourse,
the Empress Dowager, and the Arch-Dutchess retired, leaving the Duke alone with
the Queen of Poland till Supper-time.

It is not to be expressed how great the Honor was which the Emperor showed
him. His own Gentlemen, and all the Foreign Ministers that were at Court
conducted him to the Arsenal, where there was an Apartment ready prepared for
him, and where he was waited on at Supper by the Officers belonging to his
Imperial Majesty.

But in regard he was somewhat tired with a long Journey, he was unwilling to
Eat publicly; besides that he kept himself upon a Couch till Seven of the
Clock in the Evening, at what time he went to the Empress Dowagers Chamber,
from whence he was to go to the Chapel in the Palace, where the Ceremony of the
Marriage was to be performed.

As he made his Progression from the Empress Dowagers Chamber to the Chapel, a
great number of the Officers of the Court went foremost. After whom followed
the Emperor's Principal Ministers of State; and next to them Twelve Knights of
the Golden Fleece in black Habits with their Order. Then followed the Duke of
Lorrain himself, preceded by the Prince of Lixhim, his Marshal, and the Baron
of Chaunivech Captain of the Guards of his Body. Soon after appeared the
Emperor, before whom went the Count de Lamber, Grand Marshal, the Counts of
Baden, Wilsterne, and Mansfeild. The Two Grand Marshals of the Two Empresses,
the Queen of Poland's Grand Marshal, and one of the Eldest Chamberlains led the
two Empresses, the Queen of Poland, and the Arch-Dutchess, who were attended by
several Ladies, Maids of Honor, and some Foreign Princesses. In the Chapel was
erected a Scaffold, thirty foot high, and about ten or twelve Paces Broad; but
because there was not Room for all the Ladies, some were forced to stand upon
the Stairs.

Over Against the Altar was another Scaffold covered with a Crimson Velvet
Carpet, Fringed with Gold, upon which were placed two Elbow Chairs, where the
Queen and Duke sat. By the side of this was another Scaffold, where the
Emperor, the Empress, the Empress Dowager, and the Arch-Dutchess seated
themselves. The Ceremony was performed by the Bishop of Newstadt, assisted by
two other Bishops; and no sooner was it ended, but the Bishop addressing
himself to the Duke and and Queen to ask their Consents, the Queen let him
know, that he must address himself to their Imperial Majesty's; who thereupon
making a Sign, that they Consented to the Marriage, the new Married Couple
received the Benediction. This done, Te Deum was sung; and after that, the
Emperor went to embrace the Duke, but the Duke bowed himself down so low, that
his Imperial Majesty could not give him that mark of his Affection. All the
Ceremonies thus concluded, they returned in the same Order as they went to the
Chapel; the Trumpets Sounding, and several other Instruments Playing all the
while. The following days were spent in Feasting and other Divertisements. But
in regard the Duke was to Command the Emperor's Army in Germany, after he had
past over Lent with the Queen at Inspru^^, he departed in the amidst of all
the Pleasures of his Marriage to join Prince Herman of Baden, not much unlike
Marshal Bouillon, Marshal Turenne's Father, who was forced to put on his Arms
upon his Nuptial Night to surprise Stenai. So that before the end of April
1678, the Duke arrived in the Neighborhood of Worms, where he had appointed
his Headquarters.

The Duke was not yet well recovered of his Bruise, besides that he was tired
with a long Journey; nevertheless, such was his Impatience to take the Field,
to the end he might be before hand with Crequi, and endeavor the retaking of
Friburgh, that he caused his Army to march at the beginning of May. He had Four
and Twenty Regiments of Horse, Five of Dragroons, and about Sixteen Thousand
Foot, which made up Forty Thousand Men, without counting in the Three Regiments
of Treves and Luxemburgh, which were to join him. The French Army at first was
nothing near so numerous, but afterward Crequi received so many
Reinforcements, that the Armies were very equal, whatever the French Report.
The Duke also on his march took along with him Count Koningseek, whom the
Emperor had chosen to assist him with his Counsels. And first they agreed upon
the erecting their Magazines, and securing their Provisions from Strasburgh.
Which being done, they encamped between Offenburgh and the Fort of Kell, which
secured Serasburgh Bridge on Germany side.

The great Design of the Duke of Lorrain was to hinder the French from getting
into Brisgau. To which purpose he resolved to lay a Bridge over the Rhine, and
march into the upper Alsatia with a good part of his Army, to draw off Marshal
Crequi, while the rest of his Forces besieged Friburgh. To this purpose he past
Three Hunderd Horse over a flying Bridge near Ruperschau, with orders to post
themselves between Blosheim, and Altenheim, to secure the Bridge which he had
laid over that part of the River; and at the same time Prince Herman of Baden
had orders to Summon in Two Thousand of the Country Peasants to repair the
Highways, through which the Cannon was to be drawn to the Siege of Friburgh.

All things seemed to favor the Dukes Enterprise. But Marshal Crequi desirous
to preserve the Reputation he had acquired the last year, had begun about the
Tenth of May to draw together a Body of about Twenty Thousand Men. And
understanding that the Duke was busily employed in making a Bridge at
Altenheime, he encamped himself in a place, from whence he might either oppose
the passage of the Imperiali^ts into Alsatia, or fall into Brisgau through
Brisac. However, considering that it was more necessary for him to fall into
Brisgau, before the Imperialists were ready to make any considerable attempt,
he passed the Rhine with his whole Army over Bris^c Bridge, and another Bridge
which he laid over the River, above a League below that place. Upon which the
Duke followed him, and encamped within Six Leagues of him, with a purpose to
fall upon him, or force him to repass the Rhine, perceiving well that all his
Methods were disappointed, and that he could neither pass into Alsatia, nor
secure Friburgh. On the other side Crequi, who perceived the Dukes design,
encamped within half a League of Rhinefelde; and at length, through the several
Movements of both Armies, they came within sight of each other, being only
separated by the River Eltz, which was every where Fordable. However, neither
of them would begin first; in regard of the narrow Lanes that were between 'em,
extremely to the disadvantage of them that should be the first Assailant. Only
the Imperialists sent out some Parties that took some few Prisoners, and
frequently alarmed the French Army. Thus the two Armies separated for a time,
but soon after came in view of each other again, upon the Banks of the same
River. And they lay so near one to the other, that there was not a day that
past without Skirmishes, wherein sometimes the French, sometimes the
Imperialists got the better. And this was all that the Movements of those two
Armies produced. For it was in vain for the Duke to torment himself to bring
Crequi to a Battle: His design being only to tire out the Imperialists, as he
had done the year before, to prevent their designs upon Friburgh, and still to
seize upon some advantageous Post from whence he could not be forced; his
business being only to stand upon his Guard.

The Duke of Lorrain was vexed to the Soul to see all his Measures thus broken,
and that he could not force the Enemy to Fight, finding there was no way to
bring about his designs but by beating the Enemy out of the Field. So that not
knowing what course to take, he passed the River Eliz, and posted himself
between Brisack and the French Army, believing that to be the way to force
Marshal Crequi to decamp, and reduce him to a necessity of giving Battle.

It Is true, Crequi decamped the same day, but he so strongly fortified himself
upon a Hill within half a League of Friburgh, that it was a difficult thing for
the Imperialists to attack him with any advantage. However, the Duke lying
between them and Brisack, he thought want of Victuals would force the French
Camp to alter their Ground; for that they could have no Provisions but from
Friburgh, and that it was not likely he would starve a place which was at the
same time threatened with a Siege. On the other side the Duke flattering
himself, that while his Army was able to subsist in their Post, he might be
able to approach Friburgh, he began to be full of new hopes. But the want of
Provision being no less in the Imperial Army than in the French Camp, he was
himself constrained to dislodge, and see the disappointment of all his
Expectations.

It would be too tedious for me to set down the several Movements of both
Armies; the care that Crequi took to prevent the Decision of the fate of
Friburgh by a Battle; the great endeavors of the Duke of Lorrain, and the good
and bad Successes that befell him this Campaign. Two or three times he defeated
considerable Parties of the Enemy; he took several Prisoners, some Colors, and
in several Encounters put to flight great Detachements of the French Army, as
in that which happened near the River Kintz, where the Marquis of Rannes,
Colonel General of Dragoons was Slain while he was endeavoring to Rally his
routed Men. On the other side the Enemy took several Prisoners, some Colors,
and two pieces of Artillery, and defeated Count Starenburgh in the Plain of
Rhinefeildt, and having forced him to Retreat with the rest of his Party, that
had made a most noble Defense, pursued the Imperialists with so much vigor to
the Bridge of Rhinfeildt, so that if the Governor had not pulled up the
Drawbridge, and Sacrificed some of the Emperors Men, Crequi might have entered
the Town, and made himself Master of it, as he did of the Castle of Ottanburgh,
the Fort of Kell, the Star Fort, and the Island and Castle of Lichstenbergh.

By which Successes of the French Army this Campaign, it is apparent, that the
Duke of Lorrain was much deceived in the great Expectations, with which he
flattered himself at the beginning of the year. However it was neither want of
Courage, or through any rash and ill consulted Act of his own, that he failed
in his designs. But there were two things that very much contributed to his ill
Success. The first was, That he never received so much Money as was necessary
for the subsistanee of his Men, as he highly complained; and for that the
Emperors Ministers, either through Treachery, or want of Foresight, not having
provided sufficient Magazines, he was constrained to quit those Posts, wherein
if he could have subsisted but three or four days, he might have laid Siege to
Friburgh, as he sent Word to the Emperor by Count Mansfeldt. The Second thing,
was, the little Vigor and Heart which he found in the most part of the
Officers; which made him lose the only opportunity that he had of giving
Battle, which happened some time after the Encounter, wherein the Marquis of
Rennes was Slain.

For Brisgau, where the two Armies lay, was so wasted, that there was no
Provision left either for Horse or Man. Therefore Marshal Crequi, whose Army
was in great want of both, resolved to pass the River Kints, beyond which there
lay a fertile Plain, where he might subsist for some time. So soon as the Duke
had notice of his design, he encamped himself upon the River side to hinder his
passage, but not being able to prevent him, he removed to an advantageous Post,
where he could not believe the Enemy durst have Attacked him, or that he had
any such design. Nevertheless the French General, who thought himself the more
numerous, and was desirous to make the best of some disorder then in the
Imperial Army, resolved to hazard a Battle. And having rested his Men for some
time after their passing the River, he marched directly toward the Imperialists.

The Duke, who perceived the Marshals design, and desired nothing more than to
Fight, presently called a Council of War; where were present the Principal
Officers of the Army; to whom he urged all the Reasons he could, why they ought
not to refuse giving Battle. But there was not one of his Opinion; every one
affirming, that it would be a great piece of Imprudence to do it, and that he
must wait another opportunity, which he would certainly find more favorable
upon the first remove of the French Army. Adding withal, that if he would
venture a Battle, it would be better to do it on the other side the Rhine, than
in their own Country, which would become a Prey to the Enemy, should they loose
the Victory; more especially since Crequi could not avoid repassing the River
for want of Provision. So that he was forced to retreat under the Cannon of
Offenburgh; which fell out ill for him. For it being long before they came to
this Result, he had no sooner given Orders to Retreat, but Marshal Crequi was
at hand, and fell upon the Imperial Guards. Nevertheless how great soever the
disorder were at first in the Imperial Army, by reason they were in a quandary
whether to Fight or Fly; however, at length they made good their Retreat to
Offenburgh, and there secured themselves with the loss of about Eight Hunderd
Men. The French also lost as many; but notwithstanding the equality of the
losses, the Duke of Lorrain was strangely dejected to see such a failure of
Resolution in his Officers; believing that if his Advice had been followed,
they had cut the French Army to pieces. But in regard the French had burnt the
Bridge of Strasburgh, and that there was a necessity of making a new one, it
was impossible for him to undertake any thing more, though he had passed the
River near Philipsburgh. All that he could do was to defeat some Parties, and
to seize upon Landau, which in regard it was not tenable, he quitted, after the
Soldiers had sufficiently Plundered it. But these were petty Exploits in
Comparison of the Brushes which he received, and no way answerable to the great
Hopes with which he had filled his Mind at the beginning of the Campaign:
Insomuch, that he acknowledged he had done nothing all the year; though it was
none of his Fault that things happened so unluckily: Of which his Imperial
Majesty was fully convinced.

Nevertheless, in regard that at the same time, the Spaniards and Hollanders
tired out with the Hardships and Expenses of the War, had accepted and Signed
the Peace upon the best Conditions they could get, and for that all the rest of
the Princes and States were just ready to do the same, the Emperor seeing that
whatever Assistance he had received from the Allies, it was impossible for him
to prevail on this side the Rhine, resolved to follow the Example of Spain, and
the States General. Thereupon he sent the Duke Word to repass the Rhine: upon
which Crequi, not understanding his Design, yet fearing he had still an Eye
upon Friburgh, crossed the River after him: but finding him bend his March
another way, he returned back with his whole Army; and after he had Garrisoned
the Castle of Lichtenbergh, and demolished the Star-Fort, and that of the
Island, both Armies took up their Winter Quarters, in expectation of the
General Peace, which by this time all the Princes had Signed, except the Duke
of Lorrain, who disdaining the Conditions, to which the King of France would
have subjected him, rather chose to live a Private Life then Sign a Treaty so
Dishonorable: and all Men were of Opinion that he took the best way.

Now in regard the King of France would not acknowledge the Duke of Lorrain's
Envoys for Ambassadors, he never would treat with them. In short, the French
Ambassadors had only Power to treat with the five Principal Confederates, who
were at War with that Crown. So that the Duke of Lorrain, after several
Contests, being constrained to put himself, as it were, under the Wings of some
one of the Five, referred all his Business to the Emperor's Ministers. Those
Ambassadors therefore were to Stipulate for the Dukes Pretentions, and to
procure a Ratification of such Articles as should be agreed on; because they
were inserted into the Draught of the Peace between the King of France and
their Master. But they were at a loss, when they found that the President-Canon
had protested that the Duke of Lorrain would never Sign the Peace upon the
Conditions imposed upon him by France, without such a Moderation as might
render them acceptable. And therefore they declared, that since the Conditions
were so hard, if the King of France would remit nothing of their Severity, they
ought to be razed out of the Treaty, or a Declaration made, that they were not
to be adjudg'd as comprised therein, in regard the Emperor could not Sign them
as agreed by him. But this raised a new Difficulty; for that the Ambassadors of
France made answer, That the King their Masters Ratification which they had in
their Hands, was plain and clear, and so the Emperor's also ought to be. So
that after several fruitless Cavils and Contentions, they condescended to
declare, That his Imperial Majesty was no farther obliged in reference to the
Articles which concerned the Duke of Lorrain, then the King of France had
declared himself to be. After which they desired that the Peace between France
and the Duke might be reserved till another time; protesting they were ready to
Sign the Peace upon those Conditions; which was done accordingly Febr. 5. 1679.

The Duke of Lorrain, having no more to do in Germany, after the conclusion of
the Peace, retired to Vienna, where the Queen of Poland his Wife was at that
time, with a design to serve the Emperor in Hungary, if he should deem it
necessary. For the Troubles of Hungary were never yet so well extinguished, but
that there still remained some Coals of Discontent that wanted only blowing up.
In the mean time, the Duke had been so generous, that when he protested, by his
Ministers, against the Articles propounded to him by France, he caused them to
declare at the same time, that his meaning was not thereby to be accounted an
Enemy of France, much less of the Most Christian King. For he had yet some
glimmering Hopes, that the Haughty Monarch, overruled by the persuasive
Dictates either of Honor or Conscience, would at length surrender back his
unjust Usurpations. But in regard the King of France, when he vouchsafed that
Peace to Europe, had his Designs, which since have too notoriously appeared,
the Duke of Lorrain's Territories lay too conveniently for him, to restore them
back under other Conditions, then those which he had made himself. His design,
if he could have brought it about, being to have made himself Master of all
Germany, after that by the Peace of Nimeghen, he had broken the League that was
entered into against him: and therefore of necessity he was to keep Lorrain; or
if he did restore it to the Duke, it was to be done in such a manner, that he
might drive him out again when he pleased, as he had done the Duke his Uncle.
So that the Duke of Lorrain was deceived, to expect as he did the Restoration
of his Country, unless he would resolve to be as great a Slave in France, as
Charles IV. after several Treaties which he had Signed.

I shall not spend time to show that one of the Designs of France in the
General Peace, was in conclusion to surprise the Empire. For the Public
Rejoycings at Vienna were hardly over, before the King of France seized
Strasburgh, which he dismembered from the Empire, and incorporated into the
Crown of France. And by what was soon after discovered, Monsieur de Nantoil's
Embassy to Constantinople in the year 1673, was only to make an Alliance
between the Most Christian King and the Turk, to oblige the Grand Signior to
invade Hungary.

However it were, the Emperor having irreconcilably embroiled himself with the
Protestants of that Kingdom, by depriving them of their Churches, and the
Exercise of their Religion, had recourse to Prince Abaffi, who sent them
Assistance at the same time under the Command of Count Teckeley, who had
withdrawn himself into Transylvania, where he had so wrought himself into the
Favor of that Prince, that in a short time after he became his Prime Minister.
After the death of Count Paul Wesselini, General of the Malcontents, Teckeley
was advanced in his Room; and he became no less Formidable then Wesselini had
been, while the Malcontents got ground at a very great rate. But in regard
that after the Peace with France, the Emperor bent his whole Force against
them; fearing therefore to be overwhelmed with numbers, they put themselves
under the Protection of the Turks; not being able to find a safer Shelter from
the Impending Storm, then to Shroud themselves under the Wings of the Infidels.

Thereupon the Turks, who have always had a greater desire to enlarge their
Empire on Hungary side, then any other way, and who upon Nantoil's Embassy, had
in their Eye the Troubles in Hungary, and looked upon 'em as Accidents of which
they might make great Advantages, made answer presently to the Malcontents,
That since they looked upon them as their Protectors, they would never suffer
'em to be Oppressed. In short, although they had then a Truce with the Emperor,
and that Truce were yet in force for some years, they forbore not however
privately to assist the Hungarians, promising them withal, that for the future
they would not fail to do it openly, and that under their Dominion they should
enjoy their Rights and Privileges with so much Ease and Mildness, that they
should have no cause to repent the Change of their Fortune.

The Emperor, who had some suspicion at first that the Malcontents held
Correspondence with the Turks, made several Proposals to the Port to renew the
Truce, which was not yet expired by many Years; imagining by that means, that
he should make a full Discovery of their Intentions. On the other side, the
Turks made a show of being willing to renew the Truce; so that there seemed to
be a perfect good Understanding between the Two Empires. Nevertheless, at the
beginning of the Year 1672. the Emperor's Resident at Constantinople gave
Advice, That the Grand Signior made such vast Preparations for War, as could no
longer be concealed, and that it was to be presumed that though those
Preparations were pretended only for the Succor of the Malcontents, yet the
Turks had a farther Aim. Thereupon the Emperor, desirous to be fully informed
of what was transacted at the Port, sent thither the Count de Caprara, under
the Character of his Ambassador, who in a short time after wrote word that the
Conditions upon which the Grand Signior was willing to consent to a
Prolongation of the Truce, were so unjust, and so unreasonable, that there was
no question but the Turks had proposed them to hinder any Accommodation with
the Malcontents, of whom they had declared themselves to be Protectors, and
from thence to derive a pretense to make War upon Hungary. Nor was this all:
For the Turks sent New Propositions, which the Emperor found less proper to be
received than the former. And while they were Negotiating the Renewing of the
Treaty, the Turks sent considerable Forces to the Malcontents, who made
themselves Masters of several Places, and Teckeley was by the Grand Signior
declared Prince of Hungary.

In short, the Emperor was assured at last, that the Preparations which were
made at Constantinople, and other parts of the Ottoman Empire, exceeded all
that had been made against Christendom for above these Hundred Years before;
that the Grand Signior had declared War against Hungary; that he was to go
himself to Belgrade; that to give Notice that his departure was resolved upon,
he had given Order for the Horse-Tails to be set over the Gates of the
Seraglio; and in a short time after he received certain Intelligence that the
Ottoman Army was upon its March. So that it was concluded at the Emperor's
Court, that the Turks had some extraordinary Design, if it were not to besiege
Vienna it self.

The Duke of Lorrain, who was newly recovered from a Fit of Sickness, which had
held him all the Winter, could not go the Year before into Hungary, where his
Presence would have been highly necessary. But being now in a settled Condition
of Health, he had Orders to prepare for the next Campaign, and to join the
Imperial Forces at Presburgh, where there was to be a General Muster. The
Emperor arrived there the Sixth of May 1683. where he had caused the whole Army
to be drawn up in Order of Battle in the Plains of Kitts, and after a General
Review, conferred the Command of all his Forces upon the Duke: which drew upon
him the Envy of many, in regard there were several other Princes who flattered
them selves that the Emperor would have honored Them with that High Dignity,
before the Duke.

The Turks were already advanced as far as Belgrade, when the Emperor declared
the Duke of Lorrain General of his Army. Now therefore in regard the Turks were
tired with a long March, and that it required some time to rest themselves, the
Duke having above Forty Thousand Men at his Heels, resolved to attempt the
surprise of some considerable Place, before the Infidels were in Condition to
oppose him; knowing well, that afterward he should be forced to be upon the
Defensive part only; and considering besides that if he proved Fortunate in
gaining such Places as he had an Eye upon, they would be serviceable to secure
Vienna, or at least to put a stop for some time to the Siege.

Now there was only Gran or Newhausel that the Duke could Attack. He therefore
resolved upon the first Place, which he looked upon as the more easy
Enterprise. And so marching at the same time toward Raab, he prepared to sit
down before Gran, of which he had before taken a view in Person. But then he
was informed that the Turks had not only reinforced the Garrison with fresh
Succors, but that the Grand Vizir bent his March toward Buda with a
considerable Army. So that fearing the success of that Enterprise, he gave it
quite over. Nevertheless it being requisite that he should begin the Campaign
with some Remarkable Action, he had no sooner altered his Resolution as to
Gran, but he laid siege to Newhausel.

The Bassa who commanded in that Town had sent away such numerous Detachements
to strengthen Gran, that he began to question his Ability to resist the
Imperial Army. Being therefore at a puzzle himself, he resolved to try whether
he could put the Duke to a stand. Thereupon he sent him word, that if he
undertook the Siege of Newhausel, he must be answerable for the Rupture of the
Truce between the two Empires. But the Duke laughed at his Contrivance: So that
the Bassa seeing his Stratagem would not take, presently hung out white and red
Colors, to signify an offer either of Peace or War; yet withal to show, that
he was rather inclined to Peace than War. But all these Devices proved
ineffectual: for the Duke advancing with his Army, laid close Siege to the Town.

The beginning of the Enterpize was successful enough; for three or four days
after the Imperial Army had passed the Neckar, the City was begirt; the great
Guns were upon the Battery ready to Play; and the Duke had sent the Bassa a
Summons. To which the Bassa returned a haughty Answer, That he should
understand what Persons they were to whom the Grand Signior entrusted his
Garrisons; and having taken some Prisoners in a Sally which he made to his loss,
after he had immediately put them to death, he hung up their Heads over the
Walls of the Town. Nevertheless, that was so far from discouraging the
Besiegers who had served the Turks which they took Prisoners after the same
manner, that they had carried on their Works so far, that they were just ready
to open their Trenches. But then it was that the Duke received Orders to raise
the Siege, upon certain Intelligence which the Emperor sent him, that the Grand
Vizier was advancing with all the speed he could toward Newhausel with an Army
of above Two hundred thousand Men; so that the Duke was constrained to rise
from before the Town.

Most certain it is, that the Duke was very much troubled to abandon a Victory
of which he thought himself secure. But it was a Misfortune, for which there
was no Remedy. For in short, the Grand Signior himself came to Belgrade; where
the Grand Vizier received from his Hands the Standard which the Turks believe
was given to Mahomet by the Angel Gabriel. And then it was that the Ottoman
Army, consisting of several sorts of Nations march^d with so much speed, that
the Duke was in danger of being surpised. All that he could do in the
Extremity to which he was reduced, was to lodge as many of his Foot as it was
possible in certain Houses about a quarter of a League from Newhausel, to
favor his Retreat: after which, he beat a March, and retreated toward
Comorra; which he reinforced with a considerable Relief. Nevertheless, in
regard the Turks advanced, he continued his March to the Island of Schutt, and
having passed the Raab upon a Bridge which he caused to be laid over the River,
he encamped in a very Advantageous Post. Which he had no sooner done, but the
Enemy appeared, and encamped between Alba Regalis and the City of Raab, there
being only the River from whence the Town derives its Name between both Armies:
which caused a very great Consternation at first among the Imperialists.

While the two Armies lay looking one upon another, the Tartars, who made up a
Body of Thirty thousand Men under the Command of their Cham, having drawn out a
very numerous Detachement, swam the River, and ravaged all before 'em with Fire
and Sword as far as the River Leithe, which separates Hungary from Austria.
Which Incursion of those Barbarians, together with the Horrible Cruelties which
they committed, sparing neither Age nor Sex, put the Duke into a deep study
what course to take. For besides, that the Forces which he had remaining with
him, after so many great Detachements which he had been forced to part with, to
reinforce the Garrisons of Raab and Comorra were reduced to no more than Four
and twenty Thousand Men, he could not without imminent Danger expose himself to
be environed by the Enemy, and Attacked on every side: and therefore after he
had called a Council of War, he dislodged from his Post, and retreated toward
Vienna, though not without some difficulty.

The Army was upon its March toward the Island of Schutt, when the Duke
received Intelligence, that the Turks had also Decamped, and that Six thousand
Hungarians of the Emperor's Forces, commanded by the Counts of Dralkowitzs and
Budiani, who guarded a considerable Pass, were gone over to the Malcontents,
and had left the Pass open to the Turks. This News struck an extraordinary
terror into the Imperialists; but that which augmented their Consternation was
this, that besides that the Parties which were sent out to discover the Enemy,
returned in great disorder, and sometimes without half their number, they heard
that the Turks Burnt all before 'em, and exercised unheard of Hostilities. And
the Consternation was so general, that the Duke had much ado to get his
Detachements to venture out, to observe the Enemy. Nevertheless his Army still
advanced, and marched in very good order. But upon advice that the Enemy was
within a League of a River which the Army was to cross, the Cavalry retreated
to avoid the Fury of the Turks and forsook the Foot, notwithstanding all that
the Officers could do to hinder 'em. The Duke did all that could be expected
from a Person of his Courage and Experience to bring back the Cowardly
Fugitives; but while he was using all imaginable Persuasions to make them
sensible of their Honor and their Duty, the Enemy had already overtaken and
fallen upon his Rear-guard, so that all he had now to do was to save his Foot.
And first of all the Baggage belonging to the Duke of Saxon Lawenbergh, Prince
Louis of Baden, Count Caprara and Montecuculi were Plundered, and the Waggoners
and Guards cut to pieces; and the same Troops animated with their number, and
the flight of the Imperial Cavalry, began to fall upon the Imperial Infantry,
and make a most horrible Slaughter. But the Duke, who gave himself over for
lost, and was resolved to die like a Great General, or save his Infantry, after
he had encouraged the Officers to follow him, made his way through the thickest
of his Enemies to their Relief; upon which the Infantry, that were just ready
to give ground, and to which some of the Horse had by this time joined,
animated by the Example of their General, fought with that fury, that the Turks
who never expected such an Alteration, and were for the most part busy in
packing up the Booty which they got, were so amazed, that they betook
themselves to flight; and the Duke having brought off his Men, let 'em go, not
thinking it safe to pursue them; but pursuing his March, got safe at length to
the Island of Leopolstadt under the Canon of Vienna, where the rest of the
Cavalry waited for him.

And now the first thing which the Turks did after the Duke's Retreat, was to
lay Siege to Raab. But the Grand Vizier, looking upon the winning of that
Conquest not to be worth his while, left the Care of that Siege to the Bassa of
Buda, and marched directly for Vienna. But the Siege of that City was a thing
of too great Consequence to be undertaken without considering well beforehand.
The Grand Vizier therefore called a Council of War to consult upon this
Enterprise; where most were for deferring the Siege of Vienna till the next
Campaign, and continuing the Siege of Raab, the winning of which would reduce
Comorra, while the Tartars wasted all Silesia and Moravia, that the Christians
might have no subsistence in those Countries. This Counsel proceeded from a
wonderful Prudence, and Foresight; and might have proved fatal to Christendom
had the Grand Vizier followed it. But he, being desirous to make himself famous
by this Enterprise, and confiding in the number of his Men, was of a quite
contrary opinion. His Officers did all they could to dissuade him from this
Design, but nothing would prevail. The several Detachements which he had been
forced to send abroad to observe the Enemy, the Forces which he had left before
Raab, the Volant Camp which he had in Upper Hungary, and the Losses he had
sustained in several Encounters had very much weakened the Ottoman Army. But
neither the wary Counsel of his Officers, nor the Diminution of his Forces
could move him from his first Resolutions.

And now no sooner was the Grand Vizier set forward, but the Tartars advanced
within two Leagues of Vienna, where they defeated some Regiments, and set fire
to several Villages. And this News of the Turks March, together with the
continual Ravages committed by the Tartars, caused the Emperor to quit Vienna.
Which he did, together with all his Court, and retired to Lintz, from whence he
departed for Passau, so soon as he heard that the Turks had formally Besieged
Vienna.

The Duke of Lorrain, who lay encamped till then in the Island of Leopolstadt
with his Horse, and thought not to have stirred from thence, altered his Mind,
and resolved to pass his Men over four Bridges that were next Moldavia. This
Resolution was no sooner taken, and he already upon his March, but a great Body
of Turks and Tartars approached the Bridges, and began to follow him at the
Heels. But the Duke would not be so surpised. He immediately sent away General
Schultz, with a considerable Detachement, which after an obstinate Fight,
repulsed the Enemy. After which he encamped beyond the Bridges of the Danaw.
Now they that did not see to the bottom of the Duke's Designs, cried out, That
the Prince ought not to have quitted the Island of Leopolstadt, and that it
behooved him to have preserved the Bridges which he was forced to break down. In
regard that by that means he had preserved a Communication from Vienna with the
Emperor; and that it had been easy, had that Place been preserved, to have
relieved the City with Succors of Men and Provisions at any time. But there
was a Necessity that the Duke should betake himself to the Plain Country with
his Horse.

And now the Emperor seeing the Turks so eagerly press on the Siege, and not
finding himself in a Condition to relieve the City, in regard he had not a
sufficient Strength, he dispatched away several Couriers to the King of Poland,
to desire his Assistance, and to come himself at the Head of his Army. This
Noble and Great Prince, the Terror of the Ottomans, importuned by the Pope's
Nuncio, but much more spurred on by his own vast Courage and Generosity, wrote
back to the Emperor that he might depend upon him, and that though at present
he were not in War with the Turk, he would march to his Aid, and endeavor to
be at Vienna by the end of September.

Though this were but a short time, and that it was impossible for the King of
Poland to make more haste than what he promised, it would be too tedious to
relate the Progress which the Grand Vizier had made, who had already opened his
Trenches in three several Places, and threatened the Count of Starenbergh,
Covernor of the City, to put all to the Sword, young and old, unless he
Surrendered.

In the mean time, while the Besieged made most desperate Sallies, and hindered
as much as in them lay, the Enemy from advancing his Works, the Duke of Lorrain
lay not idle. He wrote Letters to Count Starenbergh, which he received the 22d
of August, wherein he assured the Governor, who signalized himself to a wonder,
during the Siege, that the Forces designed for his Relief, were drawing
together with all speed; that the Bavarians, Saxons, Franconians, Polanders and
Imperialists, were come as far as Krembs. That the King of Poland in Person,
together with the Electors of Bavaria and Saxony, made all the have that was
possible to be with him; that the Emperor himself, to be near Vienna, was
removed to Lintz; and that he had nothing more to do but to make a stout
Resistance till the Succors could come up to his Relief; which would certainly
be toward the end of the Month; That he would expose himself to all manner of
Dangers; and endeavor all that lay in his Power, rather than abandon Vienna;
That he had defeated Count Teckeley near Presburgh, taken all his Baggage, and
Burnt and Sunk all the Boats that were prepared for the laying Bridges over the
Waag; that he had reduced Presburgh under the Emperor's Obedience; and that he
had obtained another Victory over Count Teckeley, taken six Colors, and routed
the best part of his Army.

It is impossible to relate the extraordinary Actions which the Duke performed,
while he staid for the Succors that were advancing toward Vienna: his Vigilance
to frustrate the Designs of the Malcontents who endeavored to way-lay the
Polonians; and the Advantages he won over the Turks and Tartars, whenever he
came to any Engagement with them, as he frequently did. It may be said that he
was in a kind of perpetual Motion; that he struck Dread and Terror into the the
Enemy wherever he appeared; and that it was he indeed, who delivered Vienna, by
distracting the Enemies Forces in such a Manner, that he could never reinforce
his Camp. For the Duke either kept the Principal Passes, or else constrained
the Ottomans and Hungarians to defend their own Posts, and wasted their Numbers
with continual Skirmishes.

But while thus the Duke kept the Turks and Hungarians in continual Employment,
the Grand Vizier used all his Endeavors to make himself Master of Vienna, and
the Besieged on the other side defended themselves as Bravely. So that although
the Turks had layn a long time before the City, they were so weakened by
Diseases, that swept away great Numbers of their Men, so distressed for want of
Provisions, so annoyed by the continual Rains, and had been so consumed by the
frequent Sallies which the Count of Starenbergh made, that they almost
despaired of Success. And the Principal Officers carried away with an Opinion
of Predestination to which the Turks are extremely addicted, were become so
sottish and insensible, that though they had Intelligence every hour, that the
King of Poland was advancing, and had joined the Duke of Lorrain's Army, yet
they took little notice of it; and they had suffered themselves to have been
surpised, if the taking of two Messengers which the Emperor dispatched to
Count Starenbergh, to let him know, that the Polanders were within three days
March of Vienna, had not awakened the Grand Vizier, who always flattered
himself that he should take the Place before any Relief could come; but began
to be out of heart upon the Approach of the King of Poland.

The Bassa of Buda, at a Council of War which the Grand Vizier called, was of
Opinion, that they were not to stay till the Polanders came to force their
Camp; but that it was the best way to draw off the Janisaries out of the
Trenches, to cut down the Woods adjoining, and lay the Trees cross the
Highways; to make a deep Entrenchment covered with Earth, wherein to lodge the
Foot, and raise a great Battery; that there was no other way to stop the King
of Poland; and that then the Besieged would immediately Capitulate; but that it
was a vain thing to hazard the Storming of the City, when they had no
expectation of any Reinforcement, to supply the loss of their Men. And indeed,
what the Bassa said was spoken like a wary and judicious Captain, but the Grand
Vizier opoos'd his Advice.

In the mean time the King of Poland receiving News every Moment of the bad
Condition of the City, hastened his march with that extraordinary Diligence,
that he arrived toward the beginning of September at Helbrune, which is not
above Four Leagues from Vienna. And the Duke of Lorrain had so ordered his
Affairs that the Polanders, and his Army joined without any opposition. All
this while the Count de Starenbergh finding himself pressed upon by the
Besiegers, gave notice to the Duke by the continual throwing of Squibs, of the
necessity he was in; and the Duke Answered by other Signals agreed upon, that
Relief was at hand. In short, all the Forces designed for the Succor of
Vienna, being joined, the King of Poland marched at the Head of the Christian
Army, with a Resolution to force the Infidels in their Camp; for all the
Christians being joynd together, made up an Army of about a Hunderd Thousand
Men.

On the other side, the Grand Vizier, who expected no less than to be assailed
by the King of Poland, and the Duke of Lorrain, with a more than ordinary fury,
and who prepared to make as desperate a Resistance, found he had no Resolution
to spare, when he understood the strength of the Christians, and saw their
Vanguard appear upon a Hill. He then began to repent that he had not followed
the Bassa of Buda's Advice; but it was then too late. But the Bassa of
Adrianople, observing his perplexed and dubious Countenance, adviz'd him to
raise the Siege, and to Retreat with his Men toward Newhausel; as Solomon the
great had formerly done upon the same occasion. But the Grand Vizier, whether
out of Presumption, or Despair, would not listen to his Counsel. He told the
Bassa, that the Besieged were reduced to the last Extremity, and that it was
impossible for them to hold out three days; and as for the Relief which
appeared, he said Haughtily, That they were not to be feared: That besides
that, the Polish Army could not but be extremely tired, the Polanders had more
of the false Bravado, than true Courage: That for the Imperialists, he already
understood 'em well enough, and that there was no Body among 'em but the
General of the Christians, speaking of the Duke of Lorrain, who had any Wit or
Courage: And in a Word, That he would rather choose to Die with his Sword in
his Hand, than be bow string'd by a Mute, or live in Ignominy and Disgrace.

With this Resolution he put himself into a posture to meet the Christians; and
having left about Twenty Thousand Men before the City, that made continual
Attempts upon it, he set forward with his Army in Three Bodies, to make Head
against the Christians, who came on also in Three Lines.

For the King of Poland had entrusted the Duke of Lorrain with the Conduct of
the whole Army; who guided it so safely, leading his Men through places where
they were still secured from the onsets of the Enemy, that might have easily
stopped their Advance, but for the extraordinary Prudence of the General, that so
soon as they were got down a Hill, at the foot of which the Grand Signiors Army
was drawn up in Battle Array, they were presently in a posture to Fight. The
Conflict for three Hours was sharp and Bloody; for all the Christian Officers,
as well as common Soldiers, fought with no less Emulation than Courage: Only
this applause was given to the Duke, That he exceeded all the rest.

Thus at length, the Ottomans were forced to give Ground, and had not Night
come on too fast, which favored their Retreat, they had been utterly defeated:
However, they returned to their Camp so disordered and shattered, that not
believing themselves safe there, so soon as it was dark they betook themselves
to a total flight. And their Consternation was so great, and their flight so
precipitate, that they left behind 'em all their Tents, the greatest part of
their Baggage, all their Ammunition, all their Artillery, and the Standard of
the Ottoman Empire, with the Horse Tails, which are the Marks of the Grand
Visiers absolute Power in the Turkish Armies. For they relate a Story, how that
the Turks having lost their Chief Standard in a Battle against the Christians;
the Vizier perceiving, that upon that loss, his Army began to fly, with his
Scimitar presently cut of a Horses Tail, and holding it up fastened to a half
Pike, cried out, See here the Chief Standard; upon which the Soldiers
recovered new Courage, and rallied again to a second Charge. Since which time
the Grand Visiers have always a Horse Tail fastened to the Banners which are
carried before them, or else set up over the Doors of their Tents, as a Mark of
their Authority. Be it as it will, the Turks left the Chief Standard behind
them, the loss of which is looked upon by the Superstitious Turks as an
infallible Omen of the decay of their Empire: And the Grand Vizier, who was
left almost alone, was fain to make his escape without his Vest, while his Men
fled all before to Raab, without looking back, till they had rid Five and
Twenty long Leagues in a Night and Day; and joined themselves with the rest of
their Army that blockt up that place.

The next day the Duke of Lorrain sent to Congratulate the King of Poland for
the Victory which the Christian Army had won from the Infidels; ordering withal
the Messenger to tell him, That the Success of that memorable Battle was
entirely due to him, and that it was not the first time that his Presence had
been a Terror to those Barbarians. But the King of Poland, who had been a
Witness, as well of the Dukes Performances, as of the Actions of the other
Generals, returned him for Answer, That it was a Victory wherein the whole Army
had a share; but nevertheless, that the Honor of it was due to his Conduct,
and the Resolution of the Germans, who were the first within the Camp and
Trenches of the Enemy. Nor was it any of the Dukes fault, that the Turks were
not immediately pursued. But the King of Poland found his Army so tired, that
he thought it but requisite to rest 'em for some few days. In a Word, the
Polanders entered the Grand Visiers Camp the same day the Turks quitted it, and
began to Pillage; and then the Imperialists following their Example, they
continued Pillaging all the next day. And indeed there were few People in
Vienna that did not go out to see what purchase they could meet with in a Camp
where the Turks had left infinite Riches behind 'em. The King of Poland went in
to view the Grand Visiers Tents, which took up as much Ground as the City of
Warsovia; where you might also see Gardens, and large Canals, and whatever else
could be desired in a great City. The King also lay there one Night; and from
thence it was, that he wrote a Letter to the Queen, wherein after he had given
her an account of what he had met with most costly in those Magnificent Tents,
he merrily added this Expression. You shall not say to me as the Tartarian
Women say to their Husbands when they return home from the Army with empty
Hands; You are no Man, you return without Booty; For I shall return with so
many costly Spoils, that you shall acknowledge I was in the Fight.

THE LIFE OF Charles V. DUKE of Lorrain and Bar, And Generalissimo of all the
Imperial Forces. THE FOURTH BOOK.
HAD the Opinion of the Duke of Lorrain been followed, the Turks were in such a
Consternation, and in so ill a Condition to Defend themselves, that they had
been all cut in Pieces. But during the two or three days, that the Christian
Army lay and did nothing, and that the King of Poland and the other Generals
lay in Vienna, or else were visiting the Grand-Visiers Tents, the Ottoman
Forces who were fled in disorder, having had time to recover and rally
themselves, put Relief into other Places that might have easily been surprised,
and at length secured themselves from the farther Enterprises of their Enemies.

All Men agree, that the Victorious Army knew not how to make the best of their
Advantage; since they might have secured all Hungary to the Emperor, and pusht
on their Conquests to a far larger extent. The Duke of Lorrain was vexed to the
very Soul to see himself constrained out of Complaisance, to submit to the
Advice of a Prince who had left his Kingdom, exposed his own and the Lives of
his Subjects for the good of Christendom, and who in the last place had put to
flight a numerous and formidable Army, who was almost within a hairs breadth of
Victory, and entering Triumphant into Vienna. On the other side, the King of
Poland, who perceived by the Event, that the Duke had Reason of his side, could
not forbear letting the Emperor see how much he was troubled for the
Miscarriage. For after he had told his Imperial Majesty at their first
Enterview, what time the Emperor returned him Thanks for the Signal Victory he
had won, that all the Honor of that Victory was due to God, and that he had
done nothing upon that Occasion but what became a Christian Prince; He added,
that he was much troubled that he could not prosecute his Victory by a vigorous
pursuit of the Enemy; but that the continued March of his Men for three days
and three nights together over steep Mountains and deep Valleys, through
unfrequented and craggy Ways, without Baggage, which he was forced to leave
behind, had so wearied and worn out his Army for want of Victuals and Forage,
that he was constrained to give them a repose of two or three days to refresh
themselves, and enable them for farther Service toward the entire ruin of the
Infidels.

In the mean time, the Duke of Lorrain's Measures, who aspired to nothing less
than the utter Destruction of the Ottoman Forces, were broken; and that which
put them totally out of order, was this, That some of the Confederates,
believing that they had done enough in contributing toward the Relief of
Vienna, began to talk of returning home, and the Elector of Saxony drew off in
good earnest with his Men; and some other Princes were just upon following his
Example, which would never have so fallen out, if by a speedy March all the
Christian Princes had been engaged to pursue the Victory.

And indeed the Duke of Lorrain, rightly apprehending and fearing that his
Designs would all miscarry, if the Confederate Princes should forsake him,
labored so indefatigably to engage those Princes not to abandon the Emperor at
such an Important Conjuncture, that excepting the Elector of Saxony, all the
rest of the Princes were determined to continue the Campaign. However Things
fell out quite otherwise.

At first they talked of Dividing the Army into several Bodies, to be employed
at the same time upon several Expeditions; and there were several Meetings and
Conferences to this purpose. But in regard there was nothing concluded upon,
the Duke, whose thoughts were wholly bent to make his best Advantage of the
remaining part of the Summer, made all the Proposals which he thought most
favorable either for Reducing of Hungary, or laying Siege to some strong Town.

It was impossible to foresee where the Turks designed to make a stand; and
therefore the Duke was of Opinion, That the Christians should go and find 'em
out. And his Advice being approved by his Imperial Majesty and the King of
Poland, the Polish and Imperial Armies set forward upon the 18th, and two days
after encamped near Presburgh, there to stay for the Confederate Forces which
had promised to join them. But they having altered their Resolutions, while
their Captains for particular Reasons of their own, lay demurring whither they
should stay in their Camp near Vienna, or return home; the King of Poland and
the Duke of Lorrain, having agreed among themselves for the Undertaking some
considerable Enterprise, without the rest of the Confederates, in case of
delay, or their retiring Home, resolved to continue their March, and Encamped
the 2d of October at Weswar, which is not far distant from Comorra. There they
had Intelligence, that Count Teckeley, with the Forces of the Malcontents,
was at Levents. That the Body of the Turkish Army lay near Buda; that the Grand
Vizier had sent a considerable Detachment toward Gran; and that he had put Four
Thousand Men into Newhausel, to strengthen that Garrison. But the Season was so
far advanced, and the Country withal so bare, and consequently in so bad a
Condition to afford Subsistence for the Army; the Garrisons in both those Places
so numerous, and in a word, the Enterprise so hazardous, by reason that the
Confederates did not come up, that the Duke, after mature Deliberation, was of
opinion, that to assure himself of Gran and Newhausel, it was the best way to
Attack the Fort of Barcam, which stands at the Head of the Bridge belonging to
the first of those two Places; to which the King of Poland readily consented.

While they were preparing to put this Design in Execution, Prince Lewis of
Baden joined the Army with the Duke of Bavaria's Infantry: which Reinforcement
giving them fresh Life and Courage, they began to cross the Waag. The Cavalry
encamped the same day upon the Banks of that same Arm of the Danaw, staying for
those other Troops which had not yet passed the River. The Duke also waited for
the Infantry, to the end the Army might march in a Body toward Barcam, and
perform some remarkable Achievement. And he reckoned upon it, that the next
day, which was the 8th the whole Army would be ready to set forward, in regard
Count Starembergh, who Commanded the Infantry, had Orders to join the Army that
day. But the King of Poland anticipated the Time; for he sent word that he was
alrea^^ upon his March to Attack the Place, which they had agreed to Assail,
and therefore d^^^'d him to follow with all expedition. Which alteration of the
K. of Poland's Resolution did not a little surprise the Duke: and though he
prepared himself to March, nevertheless he sent before the Count de Dunewald to
the King to let him know the Necessity of staying for the Infantry, and the
Danger they should bring themselves into by seperating their Forces, when they
were so near the Armies both of the Turks and Malcontents and almost at the
Gates of their strong Holds. But the Count found the King already on Horseback,
who gave him this Answer, That being assured that the Detachement of the Turks
toward Barcam, was not considerable, he saw no Inconvenience that could happen
by continuing his March. So that the Duke perceiving the King's Resolution, was
constrained to follow, leaving only a Regiment of Croats to attend the Foot.

But the King of Poland was sooner advanced within an Hours March of Barcam,
but he was informed by some of the first Troops of his Vanguard, that some
Squadrons of the Enemy appeared. Upon which, he ordered a Detachement to repel
them; which was vigorously done, while the Turkish Cavalry gave ground; but
being seconded by a greater Number, the Polish Troops that fell on first were
repulsed themselves; to whose relief the King at the same time sent some other
Squadrons. And now the Fight being equal, he advanced himself with all his
Horse: But then it was, that the Body of the Enemies Cavalry, to the Number of
between Seven and Eight Thousand Men, which till then lay covered behind a
great Hill, appeared when the King least dreamt of their being so near. So that
before the Polanders could put themselves into Order of Battle, they were
Charged so briskly both in Front and Flank, that they were constrained to fly,
and leave behind them their Baggage, and some Colors.

The Duke of Lorrain being informed that the Enemy was Engaged with the
Polanders, hastened to their Aid. But he soon found upon his Arrival, that the
Polish Horse were utterly Broken, and that the Turks pursued them close at the
Heels. The first thing therefore that he did, was to range the foremost of the
Imperial Troops; which he had no sooner done, but he advanced toward the Enemy,
and his appearance put them into such a Consternation, that they immediately
betook themselves to flight, and retired under the Guns of Barcam. The King of
Poland was so far advanced, and in many places so openly exposed, on purpose to
encourage his Men by his own Example, that for some time 'twas thought he had
been taken by the Infidels; for he was one of the last that retreated, and that
a long time too after the Duke of Lorrain had routed the Ottoman Troops. And
indeed such was the Terror that still continued among the Polanders,
notwithstanding their Fortunate Rescue, that the Presence of the King, who was
thought to have been taken Prisoner, could not quite recover 'em out of the
Amaze they were in. The Losses they had sustained, and the Hazards they had
run, had so terrified their Senses, that the Principal Officers of the Army
began to persuade the King to alter his Design of Attacking Barcam, and to
bethink himself of taking up his Winter Quarters. Upon which the Duke of
Lorrain, who had some Intimation what Counsel the King had given him, presently
hastened to his Quarters, where the Reasons he alleged for the easy making
themselves Masters of that Fort, were so prevalent and convincing, that a
Resolution was taken to Attack the Fort, and to that purpose to March the next
day.

But the same Night, his Majesty of Poland having received Intelligence, that
the Turkish Detachement had been reinforced by some Bodies Commanded by the
Bassa's of Aleppo, and other Places, and fearing that those Troops were
followed by the rest of the Ottoman Army, began to deliberate anew upon the
Enterprise so lately resolved upon. Till the Duke having made it manifestly
appear to him, that the Enemies whole Army could not possibly be arrived before
Barcam, and that though it were, yet there was no reason for that to alter the
Design, they determined at last to Attack it, and marched toward the Enemy, at
the Head of both Armies. Nor did the Turks, who were Drawn up in a Plain, stay
till they were Attackt themselves, but briskly gave the first Charge upon the
Left Wing of the Polanders with so much Bravery, that the whole Wing began to
give ground. But the Duke of Lorrain having quitted his Lines, to fly to their
Succor, rallied them with so much speed, and bring himself at the Head of some
German Horse, fell upon the Enemy with that fury, that being well seconded by
the Polanders, he put them to a total Rout, and Count de Dunewald having Orders
to pursue them, they were chased to the Gates of Barcam, with a Loss far
greater than that which the Grand Vizier sustained at Vienna. For besides the
dreadful Slaughter of the Turks in the Battle, one of the Bridges over which
the Fugitives crowded to get into the Fort, falling down with the weight of the
Throng, an infinite Number were Drowned in the Danaw.

This Opportunity was too favorable, not to make the best of it immediately.
Therefore the Christian Army advanced, and the Duke caused a Battery to be
raised, from whence the Christians played so furiously upon the Fort, that the
Garrison hung out a white Flag, desired to Capitulate, and Surrendered upon
Composition However that could not prevent the Polonians from cutting the
Garrison in pieces, which very much troubled the Duke of Lorrain, who had
received the Capitulation.

It Is thought that of Fourteen or Fifteen Thousand Turks that were advanced for
the Relief of Barcam, there hardly Escaped Four Thousand, and that there were
above a Thousand Prisoners taken, among whom were two Bassa's, and some Aga's
of Janisaries The Fort of Barcam Surrendered to the D. of Lorrain the 9th of
October, 1683. within less than a Month after the Siege of Vienna.
.

After this, the Duke of Lorrain, perceiving the Success of the Emperor's Arms,
resolved to Besiege Gran, before he put an end to the Campaign, to which the
King of Poland also agreed. And all things being prepared for that Enterprise,
they began to cross the Danaw over Bridges which were laid for that purpose.

When that Resolution was taken, all the Grand Visier's Army lay encamped about
Buda; not any of the Enemies Forces appearing near Gran. But then the Turks
apprehensive by the March of the Christians, that they were going to Besiege
that Town, sent some Detachements to relieve it in case of Necessity; which,
together with the Report that the Ottoman Army was above Fourscore Thousand
strong, made the King of Poland resolve to quit his Design of the Siege; which
was a very great Affliction to the Duke. For though he thought himself strong
enough alone with the Emperor's Forces, and those of the Confederates under his
Command, to reduce that Place in a short time, yet he was willing to Caress the
King of Poland's Assistance. For in short, besides that it would have been a
too Scornful opposing the Advice of a Prince, to whom the Emperor was so many
ways obliged, the Turks and Malcontents could not but have made a great
Advantage of such a Separation of the two Armies.

In this Confusion of Thoughts, there was no Stone which the Duke left unturned
to regain the K. of Poland, and those of his Council to the Approbation of his
Design. Wherein at first he met with some Difficulties; but he managed his
Business so Prudently, and alleged such convincing Reasons, that at length the
King consented to concur with him in his Desires.

Now in regard it was a Matter of the highest Importance imaginable not to lose
time, because the Season was already far advanced, and for that besides; there
was a necessity of taking the Advantage of the King of Poland's kind
Inclinations, while he was in the Humor, the Duke of Lorrain caused his Forces
to advance forthwith, and ordered them in the first place to possess themselves
of three Posts, from whence they might batter the Castle. The Polish Army
lodged it self on the other side, and both Armies raised their own Batteries;
by which means, within two days after the Siege was laid, they pressed with so
much Vigor, and so close upon the Enemies, that they were constrained to quit
the City, and shut themselves up in the Castle; which Capitulated three days
after, though the Gran was Besieged the 22d of October 1683. and Surrendered
upon Composition the 27th of the same Month, five days after, and fifteen or
sixteen days after the taking of Barcam.
Garrison consisted of above Three Thousand Men, under the Command of two
Bassa's.

This Famous Expedition being thus at an end, and the Armies too much tired to
think of any other considerable Action, the Duke of Lorrain repassed the Danaw,
and both Armies set forward to take up their Winter Quarters.

After the taking of Barcam, the Count d'Humanai, and some other Chieftains of
the Malcontents, had been sent to the King of Poland by Count Teckeley, to
desire him to Mediate their Peace with his Imperial Majesty, upon certain
Propositions that were at first rejected. But the King of Poland, who
passionately longed for an Accommodation with Teckeley, desired the Duke of
Lorrain to call a Council to Consult upon the Interests of the Malcontents,
before the Separation of the Armies. Which the Duke excused at first,
alleging, That he had no Order from his Imperial Majesty to treat with
Rebels. But the King of Poland's Importunities were such, that a Council was
called, wherein the Vice Chancellor of Poland, after a long Discourse of the
Great Advantages which Peace procures to a Prince, set forth the Pretentions of
the Malcontents, which he reduced to these Heads: I. The Preservation of the
Privileges of the Kingdom, and especially of their Religion. II. The
Restitution of Confiscated Estates. III. The Summoning of a Diet. IV. To grant
them Winter Quarters, and a Truce during the Negotiation. V. To Declare Count
Teckeley to be a Prince. VI. To grant him those Counties which formerly he was
put in hopes should be resigned to him.


But the Duke of Lorrain returning answer, That it behoved the Male Contents to
quit the Turks, and lay down their Arms before they could be heard; the Council
proceeded no farther. And now it being necessary to think of the Preparations
for the next years Campaign, the Duke left the Command of the Army to the Count
de Rabata, and departed for Lints, where the Emperor then kept his Court, and
arrived there the 3d of December.

As for the King of Poland, he had designed to spend the Winter in the Quarters
which he had made choice of; nevertheless he changed his Mind, and returned
with his Army into his own Dominions; which was no small Trouble to the
Emperor. But the Duke of Lorrain giving him great Hopes that he should be able
to reduce Hungary without the Assistance of his Majesty of Poland, and those
other Confederates that were already gone home, he put his Confidence in the
Duke, who in the midst of the Divertisements of the Court, and the Caresses of
the Queen of Poland his beloved Spouse, neglected no time, but took care for
all things that might contribute to his being early in the Field the next
Campaign; and enable him to strike new Terrors into the Armies of the Turks and
Malcontents.

The raising the Siege of Vienna, the taking of Barcam and Gran, the reducing
of several of the Free Towns of Upper Hungary, of which the King of Poland had
made himself Master in his March, and several other Victories which the
Christians had won, so strongly allarum'd the Grand Seignior, that during the
Winter, he made extraordinary Preparations, to endeavor the repairing of so
many Losses which he had sustained. And in regard the ill Success of his Arms
in Hungary was attributed unanimously to the ill Conduct of Cara-Mustapha (that
was the Name of the Grand Vizier) the first thing he did, was to Strangle that
Minister, and to set up another in his room to Command the Armies. In short,
the time being come to take the Field, Cara Ibrahim, who succeeded the former,
having received the Batoon of Command, departed from Adrianople, June the 16th,
1684. and went to join the Ottoman Army.

Now if this same New Vizier made use of all his Abilities to defend himself
the best he could, the Duke of Lorrain was no less indefatigable to put himself
into a Condition to assail him, and make new Conquests. He was already in
Hungary, where all his Forces were met at the General Rendezvous, at the same
time that the Grand-Visier arrived there. He had also besieged and taken This
City was besieged the 15th of June 1684, and capituluted two days after.
Vicegrade.

This City was formerly famous for being the Residence of the Kings of Hungary;
and the reducing of it was of great importance; for that being a very strong
Hold, built upon a Rock at the foot of the Danaw, whoever was Master of it, was
also Master of the River, and hindered all Provisions going to the Turks. The
New Vizier therefore proud of the Eminent Dignity to which he was elevated, and
unwilling to neglect any thing for the effectual supply of this Place, had no
sooner joined the Ottoman Forces, but he caused a Body of the Army to march
toward Buda, for the security of that Place. On the other side, the Duke of
Lorrain, who had already repassed the Danaw, and had intelligence that the
Bassa of of Buda was advanced at the Head of Fifteen thousand Turks, went
himself to meet the Bassa, and force him to a Battle. And having met him near
Weizen, he fought him, defeated him, took his Cannon with several Colors, a
part of his Baggage, and a great number of Prisoners, and then made himself
Master of the Place, which yielded at Discretion, after a vigorous Resistance
of three or four hours. Weizen or Vaccia was taken June 28. 1684, and Pest some
few days after; These 2 Towns are seated upon the Danaw; the latter so near
Buda, that it is commanded by it, as being within the reach of the Cannon of
that Town.
Pest, which he afterward attacked, ran the same fortune with Weizen, for the
Duke began to throw in his Bombs so furiously at first, that the Place was
constrained to open to him her Gates. But the Duke stayed not there. Some few
days after he routed the Ottoman Army near Buda, where it was ranged in Battle
Array, and then laid Siege to the City, which before the Invasion of the Turks,
had been the Metropolitan of the Kingdom.

By these ill Successes there was such a Terror spread among the Ottoman
Forces, that though their Army was as strong as that of the Duke of Lorrain's,
they durst not make any Detachement to oppose the Siege. At the beginning of
which the Imperialists possessed themselves of the Suburbs, and some other
Advantageous Posts, from whence they drove the Enemy. And after some days that
the Siege had been laid, they had so terribly battered the Town, that there was
a considerable Breach made in the Wall. And these prosperous Beginnings begat
great Hopes of a Fortunate Issue. But the Grand-Visier, being wakened out of
his Slumber, sent an Army of Twenty thousand Turks under the Command of a
Serasquier, to Relieve the Place. Of this the Duke of Lorrain had Intelligence,
and therefore fearing that if those Forces should advance too near, he should
be forced to raise his Siege, he resolved to go and fight them. To which
purpose, with a Detachement of Fifteen thousand Men, he fell upon the Enemy at
such an Advantage, that no less than Four thousand were slain upon the Place,
and a great part of the rest were either wounded or taken Prisoners, and those
that escaped the hands of the Christians betook themselves to flight with so
much dread and precipitation, that they left behind 'em all their Baggage, all
their Ammunition, all their Cannon, and the Grand-Visiers Standard, as at the
raising the Siege of Vienna.

All this while, they that were left in the Siege played furiously with their
Great Guns upon the City; and the Duke of Lorrain being returned to the Camp,
after the defeat of the Serasquier, continued the Siege with great violence. On
the other side, the Besieged for above two Months together, made such bold and
vigorous Sallies every day, that the Imperial Army began to waste very much.
However all their Losses were no such hindrance, but that they had gained a
great deal of Ground, that they had advanced even to the Rampart of the Town,
that they had sprung several Mines, which had wrought wonderful Effects,
insomuch that the Breach which they had made was about thirty paces wide; and
that the Duke was inclined to have ventured a general Assault; but falling sick
at the same time, he was constrained to retire, and leave the Care of the Siege
to the Count of Rabata, who was a Person of great Knowledge and Experience, and
would by no means give his Advice to hazard any thing.

During the Duke of Lorrain's Indisposition of Body, the Duke of Bavaria
arrived at the Camp with a considerable Reinforcement, and no sooner had he
visited the Works, and observed the Situation of the Place, but he sent a
Summons to the Governor to surrender the Town, with a Promise of good
Conditions. And there was some hopes that the Governor, finding himself so
closely pressed upon, and without any hopes of Relief, while the Christian Army
had received fresh Succors, would not have refused so fair an Offer. But he
only answered the Duke of Bavaria with continual Sallies, which much diminished
the Christian Army, though the Besieged in like manner sustained great Losses.

Upon this the Duke of Lorrain, although he had not quite recovered his Health,
returned to the Camp, impatient to be Master of Buda. But the face of Affairs
was altered during his Sickness, for the Serasquier was again approached the
Place with new Forces, and while the Besieged made continual Sallies on the one
side, the Ottoman Army attacked the Christian Camp with numerous Detachements
on the other, so that the Duke of Lorrain's Army was not a little distressed, as
having to contend with Enemies before and behind at one time; besides, that by
the favor of these Sallies which the Besieged made every day, they several
times received considerable Succors. Nor could the Duke of Lorrain, do what he
could, prevent the Enemy from putting in several times into the Town great
quantities of Ammunition and Provisions. So that at length, after several
Assaults, several Bloody Sallies, several Endeavors in vain, and the loss of
above Ten thousand Christians that perished in this Siege, which lasted three
months and a half, the Serasquier having received a Reinforcement of Ten
thousand Tartars, and marching up directly to the Imperial Army, made such
desperate Attacks, and they that were assailed defended themselves with so much
disadvantage, that the Duke of Lorrain found it high time to think of
retreating. The Relief put into the Place, the diminution of his Army, the bad
condition of his Men for want of Forage and Victuals, the inconveniences of the
Season, and the little misunderstandings which were crept in among some of the
Generals, the flight of some part of the Hungarians, and the extreme hazard of
a general Storm, at what time there would be a necessity of fighting at the
same moment with the Garrison, and against the Serasquier, who was not far
distant from the Dukes Entrenchments; all these Considerations made the Duke
determine to raise the Siege, and to suffer his Courage to give way to his
Prudence and good Conduct Buda was besieged the 14th of July 1684. and the
Siege was raised the 1st of November. of the same year.
.

Nevertheless it was not without a more then ordinary Violence upon himself,
that he consented to this Retreat; However it was so Honorable, that it
redounded greatly to his Fame. For notwithstanding that the Enemies Army was so
numerous, they never durst so much as fall upon his Rear; so strangely was the
Serasquier terrified with the Advantages the Duke had gained over him during
the Siege. Thus ended the Campaign, of which the successful Beginnings proposed
a quite contrary Conclusion. The Serasquier marched off to take up his
Winter Quarters, and the Duke his; after he had furnished Weizen and Vicegrad
with strong Garrisons, and ordered the demolishing of Pest, as being impossible
to be preserved.

During the Winter, some little Excursions were made on both sides; some few
Castles were taken and retaken, and the Imperial Army blocked up Newhausel, in
order to begin the next Campaign with the Siege of that Place. However that did
not prevent the Turks from putting in fresh Relief into it several times, nor
from committing several Ravages upon the Country.

The raising the Siege of Buda, the continual Incursions of the Turks in a
Season when Armies are usually at rest, and the great Preparations which were
making at Constantinople, made the Emperor to judge that the Duke of Lorrain's
Army could not be strong enough to undertake any new Enterprise; and therefore
He thought it necessary to have recourse to the Electors, and other States and
Princes of the Empire, to prevent the danger of receiving a Check in his
Affairs. And indeed as it was their Interest to bring down as low as it was
possible the Common Enemy of Christendom. They engaged therefore against the
next Spring to send an Army into Hungary of above Sixty thousand Men, while the
Pope on the other side, promised to open his Treasuries, and contribute as far
as he could toward the payment of the Armies that were to march against the
Infidels.

It would be impossible to relate the hardships which the Emperor's and the
Duke of Bavaria's Soldiers suffered in their Winter Quarters. They wanted both
Victuals and Forage, which the Armies had already devoured in a wasted Country.
And that same little Nourishment which they could get, or the bad Sustenance
which they were glad to make use of, begat so many Diseases and Distempers,
that they were all in danger of perishing. However, as much lessened as the
Imperial Army was, they were in a condition to march, so soon as the Spring
approached, and to enterprise something till the Auxiliary Forces came up.

The Emperor therefore resolved to begin the Campaign with the Siege of
Novigrade, which is a little City, seated about a League from the Danaw,
between Gran and Weizan, and has a Castle belonging to it, which is built upon
an inaccessible Rock. His Imperial Majesty's Design being by that means to
deprive the Turks of their Communication between Buda and Newhausel; and after
that, to lay Siege again to the first.

Some days after this Resolution was taken, the Duke of Lorrain departed from
Vienna, and arrived in the Army that lay encamped near Gran, consisting of
about Five and twenty Thousand Men. This Prince, to whom the Emperor had given
a full Commission to act according as Occasions presented, after he had well
considered the Resolution taken to Besiege Novigrade first, and then Buda,
found such great Difficulties in the Execution of this Design, that he almost
dispaired of better Success than he had the Summer before. In short, besides
that the Fortifications of Buda were in a much better condition than the
Emperor imagined; besides, that the new Bassa, who Commanded in that Place, had
utterly demolished the Houses that had been ruined during the Siege, to the end
he might be in a better condition to defend himself, the Garrison consisted of
above Ten thousand Men. There were also Ten thousand Turks that lay between
Buda and Alba Regalis, and Twelve thousand more had passed the Bridge of Esseck
to join Ten thousand Tartars. So that the Duke of Lorrain found he had to deal
with an Army of no less than Threescore thousand Men, besides great
Detachements which they could draw out of the Garrisons adjoining. All these
Considerations made him out of conceit with the Siege; nevertheless he sent
away the Count of Caprara with a Detachement of Three thousand Horse, to take a
View of Novigrade. At what time, although that Garrison had received a
reinforcement of Five hundred Janisaries, they quitted the City, and flung
themselves into the Castle, upon the sight of that Detachement. However,
because the Count had no Order for a Siege, he returned without attempting any
thing. And upon the Report which Caprara made of the Condition of the Place,
the Duke gave over the Design which he had to Attack it, and resolved to
Besiege Newhausel: which was approved by the Emperor, to whom the Duke
signified his Resolution by a Letter.

The Imperial Army therefore invested Newhausel, upon the 7th of July 1685. and
the next day the Duke of Bavaria's Forces, with those of the Dukes of
Brunswick, Lunenburg, and other Princes of Germany, being arrived at the Camp,
the Duke of Lorrain, attended by some Volunteers, and Principal Officers of the
Army, went to View the Place, and laid his Design to Attack it, in the same
manner as the Turks had attackt and taken it before, in the year 1663.
Accordingly, the Design was put in Execution, and the Siege was prosecuted with
so much Vigor, that though the Besieged made continual Sallies from the very
first day they were invested, and made as Brave a Defense as any Men in the
World could have done, nevertheless they despaired of being able to sustain the
violent Efforts of the Christians.

In the mean time, while the Christians Besieged Newhausel, the Turks surprised
the lower Town of Vicegrade, which they first Plundered, and then set on Fire,
after they had put the greatest part of the Inhabitants to the Sword, and taken
the rest Prisoners. Which done they went to Besiege Gran, in hopes to make
themselves Masters of that Place, or else to raise the Siege of Newhausel.

To which the Duke of Lorrain was upon the point of giving a General Assault,
when the News was brought him, that Gran was in extreme Distress, that the
Tartars carried on their Trenches amain; and that the Serasquier, whose Army
was above Sixty thousand Strong, had already given two Assaults.

Upon this, the Duke, no less resolved to Succor Gran, than to fight the
Serasquier, role from the Camp before Newhausel, with the Elector of Bavaria,
and some other Generals, at the Head of Thirty thousand Men, leaving only
Twenty thousand to make good the Siege, under the Command of the Count of
Caprara. The same day the Army encamped at Comorra, and the next day having
passed the Danaw over two Bridges, which were made in the Night they began to
march in Battle array, and ^o continued their March till they came in view of
the Enemy, who advanced forward to meet the Christian Army. For the Serasquier
afraid of being beaten by the Duke, as he had been the Campaign before, no
sooner understood that the Duke was advancing toward him with his Forces, but
he raised the Siege of Gran, and drew up all his Forces together. So that the
Duke found him ranged in Order of Battle, with an Army of above Sixty thousand
Men in a very advantageous Post. For he had of each side, Mountains covered
with Wood; before him a Marsh, that extended as far as the Danaw; upon the
Banks of which, he had begun his Entrenchments, which he had carried on from
the River to a rising Ground, where he had Planted his great Guns. The first
days were only spent in Skirmishes; while the Turks extended their Camp to the
same Distance from the Marsh, as that of the Christians lay, stretching out
their Right Wing along the Danaw, and their Left upon the rising Grounds.

Now in regard that upon the News which the Duke of Lorrain had received that
the Enemy had raised the Siege of Gran, and that the Relief which he had sent
to the Town was got in, he was not obliged to pass the Marsh that lay between
him and the Ottoman Army, he thought it rather his Business to force the
Serasquier to pass it himself, and to draw him on to begin the Fight, without
being obliged to tire his own Soldiers; but which way to do this, he could not
devise. Thereupon a Council of War was called, and then it was resolved that
the Duke should counterfeit a hasty Flight, to draw on the Serasquier to follow
him. Thereupon the Baggage was immediately sent away before, toward the close
of the Evening, and the Imperialists about two hours after decamped. No sooner
was the Army upon their March, but they heard a most hideous noise of Turkish
Exaltation, which made them conjecture that the Serasquier would be at their
heels. In short, the Turkish General upon false Intelligence, that the
Christian Army was not above Twenty thousand Men, had labored might and main
to fill up the Marsh, and had passed it, with a Design to give the Duke Battle,
and then to relieve Newhausel.

On the other side, the Duke of Lorrain, who had compassed his Design, prepared
for Battle, and having caused his Army to face about, he marched it all Night
in Order of Battle toward the Enemy: And by break of day there arose such a
thick Fog, that it was impossible for the Serasquier to observe the Number of
the Christians, nor the Order of their Army; which did not contribute a little
to the Victory which the Duke of Lorrain gained; for he knew how to make his
Advantage of it. So soon as the Mist cleared up, both Armies drew near one to
another, with a slow pace at first: But at length the Turks coming down from
the rising Grounds, which they possessed, flew upon the Right Wing of the
Christian Army commanded by the Prince of Baden, with an incredible Fury; but
that Wing stood immovable: and immediately after the Left Wing commanded by
the Elector of Bavaria, was Charged with no less Resolution: Which also with a
superior courage repelled the Infidels, who then despairing to break into the
Body, assayed to force their Flank: but that same Attempt deceiving their
Expectations, as being secured by the River Danaw, they fell again upon Prince
Louis of Baden. Thereupon the Duke of Lorrain, who perceived what the violent
Attempts of the Turks aimed at, ordered the Wing which he commanded to march
with a slow pace, with Instructions to receive the first firing of the Enemy,
without so much as discharging a Gun. The same Directions were also given by
the Duke of Bavaria to the Left Wing, which he commanded. So that after the
Turks had discharged their first Vollies, the Imperialists fired so thick upon
them, that they were forced to give ground. Upon which the Duke of Lorrain, to
take the Advantage of their Disorder, commanded his own Men to bear hard upon
the Enemy, yet not so furiously as to break their Ranks, and at the same time
ordered the Hungarians to follow the pursuit; who being better acquainted with
the Turkish manner of Fighting, rally themselves more easily. Upon that, the
Turks who had betaken themselves to flight, so soon as they were out of reach
of the Imperial Artillery, began to rally again, and turning Head against the
Hungarians, put them into some disorder; and encouraged by this Advantage, they
returned to make a second Charge, but were received with that Resolution by the
Imperialists, keeping their Ground, that the greatest part of them that carried
the Colors were slain at the Head of their Squadrons; which put them again
into disorder, and obliged them to a second Flight.

In this hurly-burly and Danger wherein the Turks beheld themselves, they threw
themselves all on one side, and flew upon the Duke of Lorrain's Wing, with a
Resolution to Flank it. But the Duke, perceiving their Design by their first
Motions, rendered it altogether ineffectual, by redoubling the fire of the
first Line, as he saw the Turks come on. At the same time also he gave Order to
the Count de Dunewald, to march on that side, with the Squadrons and Batallions
that were nearest the second Line. And all his Orders were so exactly and so
successfully obeyed, that the Duke of Bavaria advancing at the same time with
the Left Wing, there began a most terrible confusion among the Turks; who at
last betook themselves to flight, with so much consternation, that they
entangled themselves among the most difficult Passes of the Marsh. Immediately
the Duke ordered the pursuit to be made by a Detachement of Hungarians and
Croats, and some Squadrons of Dragoons and Horse; which so much increased the
disorder of the Turks, that they lost above Two thousand Men before they could
repass the Marsh. The greatest part of the Janisaries who were engaged upon a
rising Ground, being forsaken by their Horse, were all cut to pieces.
Nevertheless, the Turks endeavored to rally. But the Duke of Lorrain having
passed the Marsh with his Army, by the same Passes through which the the Turks
had Escaped, as having made them passable themselves; this put the Enemy into
such a terrible consternation, that they abandoned their Camp, and sought their
Safety in the nimbleness of their Heels. And in this disorder, impossible to be
described, it was, that the Janisaries made no scruple to cut the Spahi's
Throats, for the sake of their Horses; so that it may well be said, that the
Serasquier lost more Men, through the Fright and Confusion that was among them,
then in the Fight; where not above Three thousand were slain upon the Place,
with the loss of only Three hundred on the Dukes side. In the Camp were found
Four and twenty Pieces of Cannon, some Mortars, above a thousand Bombs, a great
Quantity of Ammunition and Provisions, and a good number of Colors.

While the Duke of Lorrain was thus employed at the Battle of Gran, the Count
of Caprara had so far advanced the Siege of Newhausel, that seeing the Besieged
made no show of any inclination to Surrender, he resolved upon a general Storm.
To this purpose, Three thousand Men were at first commanded to attack the two
Bastions, where they had made considerable Breaches. This Party being
encouraged by the Example of Count Schaffenburgh, the Baron d'Assi, and Colonel
Kalets, who commanded the two Attacks, and were the first at the Breach, in a
moment cut to pieces all the Turks that made any defense, so that the rest
being terrified as well by the Slaughter, as by the extraordinary firing of
above seventy great Guns, and twenty Mortar-pieces, hung out white Colors, and
beat a Parley. But then it was too late; no Capitulation would be accepted; so
that after the Town was carried by Newhausel was invested July 7. 1685, the
11th it was formally besieged, and the 19th of Aug. following it was taken by
Assault.
Force, they put all to the Sword.

As for the Serasquier, after his being defeated, he retired under Buda, where
he caused some of his Officers to be Strangled, under pretense, that they had
not done their Duty in the Fight. But the Bassa of that Place, having let fly
several Cannon at his Men, and withal sending him Word, That the Grand-Signior
sent him to fight the Christian Armies, and not to run away. That bitter
Reproach touched him so nearly to the quick, that he presently roused himself
up, and set forward with his shattered Troops to find out the Imperial Army;
but that was only a flourish that came to nothing; for quite contrary to this
Bravado, having sent some days after a Chiaus to the Duke of Lorrain, with the
Ransom of an Aga that was taken in the Battle, he also wrote a Letter at the
same time, wherein, after he had made some Propositions of Peace in the
Grand-Signior's Name, he desired him to agree to a Cessation of Arms, till he
could have an Answer from his Imperial Majesty. It Is true, the Serasquier's
Aim, after he had obtained a Truce, was to have spun out the Negotiation in
length, and so to have managed the Affair, that an Ambassador should have been
sent to the Port; believing that in all that time, the Grand-Signior having the
opportunity of raising new Forces, he might be in a Condition by that delay to
recover a Strength sufficient to chase the Emperor out of Hungary.

But the Duke laughed at his Propositions; and being retired to Weizen, where he
lay encamped with his Army to observe the Serasquier's Motions, returned to
Newhausel. After this every body thought they would have been marching to their
Winter Quarters; but the Duke of Lorrain, before he would think of leaving his
Army, took care for repairing the Fortifications of Newhausel, and to block up
the City of Agria.

They who understand the Story of the Serasquier, well knew that he had
Signalized himself in Poland, in several Campagnes; and we saw that it was he
who raised the Siege of Buda; but notwithstanding all his Bravery and
Stoutness, the Grand-Signior condemned him to Death. Not that it was believed
at Constantinople, that the Serasquier was guilty, or that all Men were not
convinced that he had done his Duty, but it was enough to be thought unworthy
to Live, that he had been unfortunate in two Campagnes. For the Turks are so
superstitious, as to believe, that the Misfortunes of particular Men, may be
communicative to all the Empire; and therefore they think it a piece of Justice
to Sacrifice them to the Public Good.

However, upon the Debate of Electing a new Serasquier, the Grand-Signior was
at a great loss, not knowing upon whom to fix his Eyes, that was capable to
oppose the Duke of Lorrain, whose Name alone was enough to terrify the most
undaunted of the Ottomans. But the Grand-Visier having nominated Solomon.
Bassa, who commanded at that time in Poland, the Grand-Signior pitched upon
him, and immediately ordered him to be sent for. Solomon was no sooner arrived
at Court, but the Sultan told him, that he had made choice of him to command
his Armies in Hungary, and that he could think of none so Worthy as himself for
that Employment. And this would have been looked upon as an extraordinary
Advancement in a Nation less Barbarous then that of the Turks. But considering
the Condition of their Affairs, it was no more then the Sentence of his Death
at the end of the Campaign. But notwithstanding the Bassa's inward Sorrow for
his new Preferment, he dissembled his Vexation, to be Revenged of the
Grand-Visier, who had Sacrificed him to the Necessities of the Time. In short,
having prostrated himself at the Feet of the Sultan, some days after, he
besought his Highness to dispense with his Non-Acceptance of the Employment
which he had conferred upon him. He told him, that the Ottoman Forces were all
in a very great Terror; that the General of the Christians fought with so much
extraordinary Fortune, that he needed no more then appear, to vanquish and put
an Army to flight; that his Victories had rendered him undaunted; and that
foreseeing that his good Fortune would not so soon forsake him, and that the
Campaign could not be ended without the loss of his Head, he therefore besought
his Highness rather to put him to death, than send him into Hungary, where the
Affairs of War were in so bad a condition, as not to be recovered, but after
greater Losses then had been already sustained. To this Solomon, at the same
Instant, added, That the ill Successes of the last Campaign proceeded from the
Grand-Visiers fault, Who had failed in several Things, which the Bassa
enumerated at the same time. Nevertheless he offered to accept of the Trust
which his Highness had Honored him withal, if his Highness would appear in
Person at the Head of his Armies in Hungary, as his Predecessors had always
done, and not leave them to the Disposal of the Grand-Visier. Which Discourse
so feelingly struck the Sultan, and wrought so effectually in his Mind, that he
discharged the Grand-Visier from his High Dignity, put Solomon in his Room, and
resolved to take the Field in Person.

While these things were thus transacted at Constantinople, great preparations
were making at Vienna against the Spring. And in regard it was mainly designed
to follow the Blow, and take advantage of the Consternation with which the
Christian Victories had stupefied the Ottoman Forces, several Councils of War
were held, wherein it was debated, whether they should besiege Agria then
blocked up, and Alba-Regalis, at the same time; but nothing was determined.
Till at length the Duke of Lorrain, who persuaded the Siege of Buda, being
arrived the 20th of May with the Elector of Bavaria at Newstadt, where the
Emperor then resided, it was fully concluded, that the Campaign should begin
with the Siege of that Place. But in regard the success of the Conquest
appeared very doubtful, there were many long Debates about the putting this
Enterprise in Execution. The Duke had granted at first, that the Siege could
not be made without a great deal of trouble, in regard the Fortifications of
the Place had been repaired, and that several Bulworks had been added to
strengthen the Outworks all along the Danaw to the Mountain, and that the Moat
was made much deeper and wider on the other side of the City. He farther added,
that he knew well, that the Turks had Countermined those parts where he had
prepared Mines, when he besieged the Town in the year 1684; That they had
contrived false Sally Ports underneath; that they had unpav'd the Streets,
until'd the Houses, and covered them with Earth, to prevent the Effects of the
Bombs and Carcasses; that the Garrison consisted of Ten thousand chosen Spahi's
and Janisaries; and that the Bassa Abdi, who commanded in the Place, was a
Person perfect in the Mystery of War, a Resolute Renegado, who had a long time
been an Officer in the Christian Armies, and that he had under him six Aga's,
who were all Men of great Experience. In a word, the Duke of Lorrain omitted
nothing to set forth the Difficulties which he had to surmount in undertaking
the Siege of Buda. But at length, having brought the Emperor, the Duke of
Bavaria, and the rest of the Generals that were present in Council, to be of
his Opinion, that they had never seen so brave an Army as that which they had
ready to take the Field, and that the Turks were never weaker, nor in a more
daunted Condition; and showed them where he would correct the Errors committed
in the last Siege, and alleged all the Reasons that he could, that it was not
impossible to carry the Place, the Siege was at length resolved upon, and two
Armies were ordered to march; the one, that was most numerous, to be commanded
by the Duke of Lorrain, and the other by the Elector of Bavaria.

So soon as this Resolution was taken, there was no time lost in making all
Preparations that might contribute to the good Success of the Enterprise. The
Plains of Barcam were appointed for the General Rendezvous upon the 30th of the
same Month, and both Armies set forward accordingly. But in regard the
Brandenburgers, and Regiments of Suabia, could not March far in a day, because
they had taken the Road of Silesia, and the narrow Passes of Jablunka, it was
impossible for them to meet at the time prefixed. And besides, a slight Fit of
an Ague, having detained the Duke of Lorrain at Edemburgh, therefore the
General Muster was deferred till the 8th of June. Never was Enterprise desired
with so much Ardour; nor ever did men prepare themselves for an Expedition with
more Joy or greater Courage. Volunteers came thronging in from all Parts, to be
present at that famous Siege, their Number being reckoned to be above Six
thousand. And all the Troops and Regiments in general, gave such Testimonies of
their Eagerness to Signalize their Valor, that the Duke of Lorrain could not
forbear saying aloud and openly, That he was assured of the Conquest.

The 18th of June, the Armies arriving before Buda, the Town was invested: and
the same day they labored in raising the Lines of Circumvallation. The next,
the City was more closely surrounded on all sides where it was accessible. The
22d, after they had begun to open the Trenches, by the Overture of three large
Places of Arms, much nearer the Town than before, they resolved upon three
Attacques, the first commanded by the Duke of Lorrain, the second by the
Elector of Bavaria, and the third by the Brandenburghers; to which some
Imperial Regiments, and some other Auxiliary Troops were to be joined. I shall
not stay to relate the Circumstances of the Siege. All the World knows with
what Vigor it was carried on, from the first to the last day, and with what an
undaunted Courage the Christians fought.

However the Bassa of Buda was nothing dismayed, notwithstanding the vigorous
Attacks of the Christians, and the bad Entertainment which his Soldiers
received every time they Sallied forth, which they frequently did. For as he
was resolved to defend himself bravely, so he Published an Order of the Grand
Seigniors, by which all were Condemned to Death that did but speak of
Surrendering; and some of the Janisaries he also put to Death, for only speaking
too favorably of the Strength of the Christian Army. He put forth all the
Country People and unprofitable Mouths out of the Town, that they might consume
the Provisions that were laid in for those who were to sustain the Siege. And
as one that was resolved never to Capitulate to whatever Extremity soever he
were reduced, he sent out of the City whatever he had of Value, with a Design
to send it to Belgrade, though it fell into the Enemies hands by the way.

But the loss of that, how considerable soever it were, did nothing abate the
Bassa's Courage: and though the Besiegers had advanced their Trenches, and
planted their Batteries; though they had Bomb'd and Battered the Town after a
most terrible manner, and that he had lost a great Number of his Soldiers in
several Sallies, and Endeavors to repel the Christians, yet he failed not all
along to make a most Incredible Resistance. In short, about a Month after the
Place was Besieged, the Duke of Lorrain having resolved upon a General Assault,
if a Mine which was ordered to be sprung had taken Effect; and thinking it
convenient first to Summon the Besieged before he was forced to that Extremity;
the Bassa returned this Letter.

Grand Vizier of the Christians,
YOU are very Presumptuous to come a second time to Besiege Buda, which has
cost Christendom already so many Men, and so much Money. It Is very true, this
Siege has surprised us, because neither You nor We did ever expect it. But by
the Assistance of God, and our Prophet Mahomet, You have been 'twice shamefully
repulsed, and You shall not need to Assail us so many times as You imagine. We
shall hope the same Fate will befall You, as You have hitherto experienced. As
for what remains, if Your Emperor have Commanded You to Assault us, we have
Orders from Ours to Defend our selves.

ABDI BASHA Vizier of Buda.


This Answer so Proud and Haughty, constrained the Duke of Lorrain to Play with
all his Cannon from the three Attacks, and to Bomb the Place, with greater
Fury, if it may be so said, than before. After which he caused the Mine to be
sprung, which he had brought to Perfection before he Summoned the Bassa: but
the Mine not producing that Effect which was expected, but rather the contrary;
as having overthrown the foremost Posts of the Imperial Trenches, there was a
Necessity of deferring the Assault till another time. Which was done
accordingly three or four days after, upon the 27th of July, about six of the
Clock in the Evening. At what time there was most desperate firing on both
sides. If the Cannon, and Bombs, the Carcasses, the Granado's, and small shot
of the Besiegers caused on the one side the most Prodigious Noises of Havoc
and Destruction, sufficient to astonish the most undaunted; on the other side,
the continual Peals of Cannon and Stone Mortar-Pieces from the Besieged,
accompanied with Showers of Arrows, Darts, Bombs and other Instruments of
Death, which they rolled from the top of the Breaches, where they stood with
their Bodies exposed, without any shelter, to all Varieties of Death, gave the
Christians to understand that they had to do with Men fully determined to sell
their Lives at a dear rate.

The Imperialists were they that advanced the farthest, and lodged themselves
where the Besieged were entrenched: but they had much ado to preserve the Posts
which they had won, by reason of the Mines which the Enemy continually Sprung;
so that you might see two or three Hundred Men blown up into the Air at a time.
And the Resistance which the Besieged made was so great, that the Imperialists
that came on to the Assault were repulsed no less than three times with
considerable loss. Which the Duke of Lorrain perceiving from the place where he
gave his Orders, advanced himself to the foot of the Breach, with fresh Succors
to relieve the rest. And his Presence animated the Soldiers in such a manner,
that seeing their General exposing his Person like the meanest of them, to the
most apparent Dangers, and a^ hand to give a Testimony of their Actions, they
forced the Infidels out of their Lodgments, and gained a Roundel, upon which
depended in a manner the taking of the Town.

Nor had the Elector of Bavaria and the Troops of Brandenburgh less success in
the Assaults which they made, then the Duke of Lorrain on his side. This
Assault, which was the second that was given, lasted about three hours; at what
time Night coming on, would not permit them to advance any farther. The Duke
himself was also wounded the last time in the Leg with a Stone, and his
Assistant Camp-Master-General was killed close by him. And now all things were
ready prepared to carry the Place by Storm. But the Duke of Lorrain, deeming it
convenient for the Service of the Emperor, to avoid that Extremity, sent a
second time to Summon the Bassa to surrender. And then the Bassa, who began
already to fear the worst, was grown somewhat more humble in his Language then
formerly. Thereupon he wrote two Letters, one directed to the Duke of Lorrain,
the other to the Elector of Bavaria. Wherein, after he had represented the
Importance of the Preservation of Buda to the Ottomans, as being both the Key
of Constantinople and Jerusalem, so that he could not resolve to surrender it
into the Hands of the Christians, he proposed to the two Generals the choice of
any other City in Hungary, which he would deliver into their Possession,
provided they would at the same time raise the Siege, and make a general Peace.
But that Proposal being rejected, they prepared for a third general Assault,
which was accordingly given three days after; at what time the Imperialists
advanced their Lodgments to the Foot of the third Wall, which environed the
City, though not without the loss of a great many Men.

But while the Town was thus streighten'd, and the Besieged reduced to the last
Extremity, the Ottoman Army came boldly on, with a purpose either to put Relief
into the Town, or force the Christians in their Lines. And it was believed that
Mahomet IV. would have appeared at the Head of that Army. But Solomon whom he
had wholly engaged, by conferring upon him the Charge of Grand Vizier, which
was That he gaped after, diverted him from the Expedition, by laying before
him, that he could not march, without a numerous Train of useless Persons; and
by consequence a great Number of his Forces that were to be otherwise employed,
would be taken off from all other Service, but that of Guarding his Person. So
that his Highness submitting to those and some other Reasons which he alleged,
retired to Constantinople; and the Grand Vizier took upon him the Command of
the Army, with a new Serasquier, whom he sent before with Twenty thousand Men;
and followed him with Thirty thousand more, and Forty Pieces of Cannon,
expecting some other Recruits to join him. So that the Ottoman Army, upon the
Conjunction of the Tartars, which happened in a short time after, was about a
Hundred thousand Men.

With this Army the Grand Vizier presented himself several times in view of the
Enemies Camp, sent several of his Detachements of the choicest of his Men, and
by surprise put in some small Succors into the Town. But in regard it was not
the Bassa's design to come to a Battle, he only fought in Parties for several
Months; insomuch that his Army, as numerous as it was at the beginning, being
much weakened and discouraged, and by degrees brought to so sad a Condition, as
not to be able to make any attempt upon the Lines of the Christians, who on the
other side were greatly encouraged by the continual Advantages which they daily
won over the Detachements which the Grand Vizier exposed to their Victorious
Swords; the Duke of Lorrain resolved to try the Issue of a 4th Assault, for the
Mastery of the Town. It Is true, the Advice of some of the Generals was to give
the Grand Vizier Battle, for fear least while they were busied in the Assault,
the Turks should endeavor to force their Lines, and they be in danger of being
themselves Besieged. But the Duke of Lorrain making it evident by several
Reasons, that there was nothing to be feared on that side; That besides, there
was a kind of Confidence in the Christians, which did in a manner assure them
of Victory; and that moreover, the hope of Pillage would make them Fight with
more vigor against the Town than against the Enemy in the Field, where there
was nothing to be got but Blows; his Advice was immediately followed, and all
things prepared ready for the Onset.

Immediately Thirty thousand Horse and Foot were drawn out of the Lines, and
put in Order of Battle in a Plain opposite to the Front of the Ground which the
Enemies possessed. The Duke of Lorrain's Design being to amuse the Enemy, by
making as if he intended to Attack them, and by that means to put them out of
hopes of making any Advantage of the Time spent in the Assault, or of
endeavoring to force the Christians Lines; and it fell out as was intended:
For the Vizier, whether he were secure of any Success in the Assault, or
whether he were afraid to fight the Christian Forces, never budged out of his
Camp.

The next day therefore the Besiegers gave the Onset, after the Duke of
Lorrain, the Elector of Bavaria, and General Schoning, who commanded the
Brandenburgers in their several Attacks, had given all such Orders as they
thought Necessary. Never was any Assault pursued with more Vigor and undaunted
Courage, and never did Garrison better defend it self than that of Buda at that
time. Several times the Imperialists were constrained to recoyle, but, at
length after many bloody Struglings on both sides, the Besieged having lost
their Courage through the Death of the Governor, who was slain upon the Breach,
the Infidels were repulsed and forced out of their Entrenchments on that side
next the Duke of Lorrain's Attack. At the same time also the Brandenburgers
entered the City, and piercing forward into the Streets, put all to the Sword.
One of the Bassa's who defended the Place next the Duke of Bavaria's Attack
with an incredible Courage, was constrained to give Ground, and seeing all lost
next the Attacks of Lorrain and Brandenburgh, retired into a Roundel, between
the Castle and the City, where he yielded at Discretion, with all that were
with him. Thus was Buda taken by Storm in every of the three Places where the
Assault was made; only those that were in the Duke of Lorrain's Attack were the
first that entered. This Conquest was the more Glorious in regard it was made
in view of the whole Ottoman Army, who without daring to make any Attempt to
relieve it, suffered the taking by Storm of so important a Place as that was,
and of which the Infidels had been in Possession near a Hundred and fifty
years. There was found in the Place between Three and Four hundred Pieces of
Cannon, Sixty Mortar-Pieces, and an Incredible Number of Bullets, Grenades,
Carcasses, Bombs, and other Warlike Engines; besides about Two thousand
Prisoners taken. For the Turks that were in Buda fought like Men in despair, so
that the greatest part were destroyed before the City was won. And for the
Christian Generals, they signalized themselves in this Siege by so many Actions
of Courage and Prudence, that the Enemies of the Duke of Lorrain have been
constrained to acknowledge, that he performed at that time all that could be
expected from a Great and Experienced Captain.

I tremble to relate the Actions of the Soldiers after the taking of the Town.
During the first Agitations of their Fury, they committed unheard of Cruelties.
And though the Generals used all their Endeavors to prevent them from defiling
their Victory with Acts of bloody Inhumanity, yet they put all to the Sword,
without distinction of Age or Sex: nothing at all moved with the Cries and
Tears of an infinite Number of Miserable People, who begged their Lives upon
their Knees. And in hopes of finding Gold or some small Jewels they rumaged the
very Bowels of those who they suspected to have swallowed them. And some there
were so inhumanely Brutish, that meeting Women with Children of two or three
Months old, they cut open their Bellies, and crammed the Innocent Babes into
their Wombs. Such are the Calamities that attend the Sacking of Cities taken by
Force: which therefore the Christian Generals would have avoided, had not the
Obstinacy of the Governor been such, as to hold out to the last Extremity.

But to return to the Ottoman Army, which lay not above a League from the
Christian Lines, in regard they did not imagine that the Town was carried in
that manner as it was, they no sooner received the News that the Christians had
Possession of the Place, but they displayed a thousand ridiculous Marks of
their Despair, and in the midst of those Fears wherein they were, lest the
Christians should force their Camp, they retreated in the Night.

It is said that the Duke of Lorrain's Joy for the taking of Buda, wrought so
extremely in him, that he never thought of pursuing the Enemy, whose Forces he
had entirely defeated in that Consternation wherein they then were; and that
this was an Error which neither Monsieur Turenne, nor the Prince of Conde would
have committed. But if we overlook the Lives of the greatest Captains, we shall
find perhaps, that they did not always make the best of those Advantages which
they might have drawn from their Victories. I have already shown you one
Example in the Person of the King of Poland, after the raising the Siege of
Vienna: so far it is from truth, that Hero's are always infallible. Therefore
as it is not my Business to make a Panegyric upon the Duke of Lorrain, I must
acknowledge, that he forgot himself at this time, and knew not how to set
Limits to his Joy. But it is certain, that they who have upbraided him for this
Slip, would have been no less discontented, had he not performed it; and would
not have failed of crying out, had he been repulsed by the Turks, That two
Victories were not to be won in one day; that it had been a rash Attempt; and
that those other Great Men whom they favored more than him, would have been
contented to have won the Town, without hazarding an Overthrow, after so
fortunate a Success.

Some time before the taking of Buda, the President Canon, whom the Duke of
Lorrain had sent to Paris, returned to the Camp. This Minister had Orders to
demand the Restitution of the Dutchies of Lorrain and Bar; or to manage some
Accommodation, upon Conditions less severe than those which the King of France,
exacted by the Peace of Nimeguen. But he returned without effecting any thing.

Therefore to go on with the Series of the History, the Emperor was no sooner
informed of the happy Success of the Christian Arms, but adjudging rightly of
the Consternation that had seized the Grand Vizier, and all the Ottoman Forces,
he was desirous that the Duke of Lorrain should go and Attack the Bridge of
Esseck; and the Fort which lies beyond the River. This Bridge which perhaps is
the Biggest that is in the whole World, is in length 8565 German Paces, and 17
broad. It is built part over the Danaw, part over the River Fennes, and part
over a vast Marsh: it was built by Solomon the Magnificent, in the year 1521.
after which, a great part of it was Burnt by the Turks and Christians.
The Duke having received the Emperor's Command, laid before him the great
difficulty of performing his Orders without the Ruin of his Army; for that he
had a vast deal of Ground to cross, where there was neither Victuals nor
Forage; but all these Remonstrances signified nothing. So that after the Army
had refreshed themselves for two or three days, he Embarked Ten thousand Foot,
together with Twelve Pieces of Cannon, Twenty Mortars, and great Store of
Ammunition and Provision, to fall down toward the Bridge of Esseck, where the
Forces of Croatia had Orders also to meet him. And the next day the Duke of
Lorrain and the Elector of Bavaria, followed by Land with Four and twenty
Thousand Horse, 6000 Hungarians, Twelve thousand Foot, and Three thousand
Heydukes. The Army suffered extremely in their March; and upon the Road they
received Advice that the Turks had blown up the Fortifications of Harwan, not
finding them in a Condition for Defense; that their Ammunition and Provisions
were Transported to Agria, and that the Grand Vizier was advantageously posted
on this side the Bridge of Esseck, upon the little River Saubits, having a
Marsh behind him, and that his design was to lie in that Post, and observe the
Motions of the Imperialists. At length the Army being arrived near Tolna, from
whence the Enemy lay not above three Leagues; the Duke of Lorrain ordered a
Bridge to be laid over the River Saubits, that he might engage the Grand Vizier
to fight if it were possible. But not being able to subsist in that Post for
want of Forage, he thought it not convenient to cross the River; understanding
besides, that the Turks were retreated on this side the Drove, near to Darda,
where they had a very Strong Castle built, on purpose to secure the Bridge of
Esseck.

Therefore the Duke of Lorrain, taking another course, divided his Army into
two Bodies, of which one was commanded by Prince Louis of Baden, with Orders to
join the Croatian Troops, under the Command of Count Scherffenberg, and so to
Attack Five Churches, which Town was taken, and afterward Darda and Capuswar;
the latter upon Articles; the two first Surrendered at Discretion.

During this Expedition of Prince Lewis, the Duke of Lorrain crossed the Drove
at Tolna, over a Bridge of Boats, and returned to Pest with his Army. From
whence he sent a Detachment of several Regiments, that marched slowly toward
Upper Hungary, and the Teysse, where Count Caraffa, and General Heusler were to
take the Command of them, and attack Segedin. Which place Surrendered after
Count Veterani had twice beaten* the Infidels that attempted to relieve it.

The taking of Buda; the Conquests of the Venetians in Dalmatia, and in the
Morea, which had been no less considerable than those of the Imperialists in
Hungary; and certain Jealousies that the King of Poland had a design to declare
War against the Port, occasioned such hot Allarums at Constantinople, that the
People began te murmur against the Grand Signior. There were the Imans, which
are the Preachers in the Mosques, who upbraided him, that instead of being at
the Head of his Armies, after the Example of his Predecessors, he kept himself
shut up in his Seraglio, and never stirred out but to go a Hunting; and
generally all Men complained of his being unsensible of the common Good. But
these Complaints were little regarded by the Sultan. Nevertheless, reflecting
upon the Consequences, as such that might prove unlucky to him, he degraded the
Mufti, accusing him to have been the Cause of all the Misfortunes that had
befallen the Ottoman Empire, out of his Complaisance, at the Request of the
Grand Vizier, Cara Mustafa, to Sign the Resolution taken to begin the War,
before he had Remonstrated the ill Consequences of it, as it was his Duty to
have done. He was afterward Banished, and his Dignity conferred upon another.
After which, the Sultan made great Reformations in the Seraglio; he retrenched
himself the vast Expenses of his Hunting, and the Retinue that belonged to it:
He assembled diverse Extraordinary Councils, to find out a way how he might
recruit the Army in Hungary, and by his great Preparations, prevent the
Misfortunes that threatened the Empire. In a Word, he omitted nothing that might
conduce to his own Defense, and to repel the Enemy. But all these Precautions
could not hinder the People from continuing their Murmurs; which increased to
that Degree, that they cried out aloud in the midst of the Public Streets,
That the Enemy was always Victorious, and that the General of the Christians
was Born to be the Scourge of the Musselmen, so long as the Government and the
Places of highest Trust, and Honor were in the Hands of such Effeminate
Persons.

But if the Grand Signior were under such Disturbances at Constantinople, the
Grand Vizier was no less turmoild in his Thoughts at Belgrade, whither he had
retired himself. Deeply apprehensive therefore of the loss of his Head, he got
a Writing Signed by all the Officers of his Army, which he sent to the Port, in
Justification of himself to the Sultan, that nothing had been done during the
Campaign, but by their Advice, and according to the Resolutions that had been
taken in the Councils of War. To this Testimonial he added, That the Affairs of
Hungary were in such a desperate Condition when the Ottoman Forces arrived
there; besides, that they arrived too late, that it seemed as if they had been
only sent to be witnesses of the loss of Buda. Lastly he promised the Grand
Signior, That if he would vouchsafe to continue the Trust of his Forces in his
Hands, and give orders for their necessary Supplies, he would so order his
Affairs, as to recover in one Campaign, perhaps, what all the other Visiers had
lost, ever since the raising the Siege of Vienna. It Is true, he had caused a
Report to be spread abroad, that he was going for Constantinople, and that he
had already sent away his Equipage before, but that was the thing which was
farthest from his Thoughts. On the other side he made it his whole Study to
avoid a Journey, which he could not choose but look upon as that which would
prove mortal to him. And indeed, he knew so well how to persuade the Sultan,
that his Presence was absolutely necessary upon the Frontiers; that he obtained
a Letter from his Highness, wherein after he had graciously given him to
understand, that it was his real Opinion, that the unfortunate Success of the
last Campaign did not proceed from any Suspicion of his Fidelity or Conduct,
but that he attributed the loss of so many strong Holds to the Pleasure of God,
on purpose to punish the Ottoman Empire; he ordered him to stay in Hungary, and
go on with the Fortifications of Belgrade and Esseck, and diligently to attend
the Motions of the Imperialists till he could send him fresh Recruits, that
might enable him to undertake some considerable Enterprise the next Spring,
before the Christians could be in the Field. The Vizier, who by this had got
what he aimed at, left no Stone unturned to put himself into a Condition to
repel the Christians, and to perform some considerable Undertaking before the
Imperialists were ready for him. It lay so much upon him that the Face of
Affairs should change that there was nothing which he omitted during the Winter
to gain Fortune on his side at the beginning of the Spring. He used all the
Endeavors imaginable to engage the Muscovites and the Prince of Transylvania
to continue the Peace between them and his Highness. He sent an Aga to the King
of Poland, who being got as far as the Black Sea, seemed to threaten the Turks,
that he intended to open a passage to Constantinople. He made several
Propositions of Peace to the Court at Vienna, on purpose to lull the Emperor a
sleep. But finding that all his Negotiations and Stratagems could not prevent
the States of Transylvania from concluding a Peace with the Emperor, nor hinder
the League which the Polanders and Muscovites had made together against the
Turks; and lastly, perceiving that there were no preparations at Vienna for the
beginning of the Spring, he labored with so much diligence to have his Forces
ready, that his Army had taken the Field before the Duke of Lorrain's could be
in a Condition to march. But all his Industry availed him nothing; for still
the Parties which he sent abroad were continually beaten. And we may safely
say, that unless it were the Castle of Mohans which he surpised, and some
Villages which he plundered and burnt, he got no other Advantage over the
Imperialists.

As for the Christian Army it was not so numerous as it had been the preceding
Years, in regard a great part of the Men were Destroyed and Dead, and for that
the Forces of Saxony, Brandenburgh, and Swedeland, were returned home. But in
regard that Army, as much lessened as it was, had the Superiority of being
Victorious, the Duke of Lorrain was assured of their Fighting with Confidence;
that the Grand Vizier would be beaten notwithstanding all his Precautions, and
tho his Men were so fresh and lusty. And therefore full of hopes he departed
from Vienna, where he had been to confer with the Emperor, and arrived at Buda
the Fourth of June. Where after he had given Orders for the finishing of
certain new Works which were already begun, he marched toward the Drove with
one part of his Army, and so to the Bridge of Esseck, whither the Count de
Scherffenbergh was to follow him with Nine Regiments. At the same instant that
he arrived he possessed himself of the Fort near the Bridge, where he raised
some new Works, and then burnt all the Bridges that were upon the Moore, and
continuing his march up the Drove, he arrived at Siclos the First of July,
after several Skirmishes, and the loss of some Men. The next day the Infantry
got within half a League of a Fort, which the Imperialists possessed upon the
Drove; but it was impossible for them to advance any farther, in regard the
Waters were out to that degree, that the Bridges were all Drowned, and the Fort
surrounded with such an Innundation, that the Garrison was forced to lie upon
the Parapets. Which was no small trouble to the Duke, who thought to have
passed his Army over in that place. In this perplexity therefore, to see the
fair season waste, before he could do any considerable Action, he laid a design
to Besiege Sigeth; but the continual Rains, and the Innundation of the Rivers,
having rendered the Moras's which encompasses that Place inaccessible, he was
forced to alter his Resolution. Thereupon he determined again to pass the
Drove, as having no other course to follow; and so resolved, notwithstanding
the many difficulties which he met with, he crossed the River within a few days
after, being followed by the Duke of Bavaria. As for the River Walpo, not so
difficult to be crossed, both Armies past it the 16th of the same Month. Which
done, there being a small Fort upon the same River, of the same Name, the Duke,
designed to have reduced it, believing he should meet with little or no
Resistance. But the Garrison consisting of Four or Five Hunderd Turks, fired so
terribly upon the Imperialists, that he not deeming it worth his while to loose
time in Besieging it, continued his march toward Esseck. And after two or
three days march, pestered with continual Skirmishes, after he had made his way
through a thick Wood, by cutting down the Trees on both sides, the two Armies
came to Face the Enemy. But the Christian Forces were far inferior to those of
the Grand Vizier, who was above Fourscore Thousand strong, whereas the
Imperialists were not above Five and Fifty Thousand. Nevertheless, whether it
were, that the Duke was ignore of the full strength of the Enemy, or that he
relied upon the Bravery of his own, and the Duke of Bavaria's Men, he was no
sooner entrenched upon the Ground where both Armies lay encamped, but he
advanced toward the first Line of the Turks Entrenchments, which was Twelve
Hunderd Paces in Front, fortified with a double Ditch extremely wide, and a
Pikes length in Depth, with two rows of rampir'd Pallisadoes, and a Battery of
Fifty great Guns. This precipitate Action cost the Lives of above Eight Hunderd
Christians, among whom were some Officers of Note. For besides, that the Turks
upon the approach of the Christians, sent forth a numerous Body, that cut in
pieces the foremost of those that advanced, they discharged in less than Three
Hours above Four Thousand Cannon Shot. However, after this loss, the Duke of
Lorrain having drawn up his Men in Order of Battle, about half a League from
the Turks Camp, did all that he could to provoke them to Fight, though all to
no purpose. For he saw by their Countenances they had no mind to leave their
Entrenchments to hazard a Battle; as deeming it more proper to play their
Artillery, and ply him with continual Detachements. So that the Duke,
perceiving that the Turks, who had had a long time to Post themselves the most
advantagiously they could desire, and had levelled all the rising Grounds, and
cut down all the Woods that could shelter the Christian Army, by that means
every way exposed to the Enemies great and small Shot; thought it not
convenient to Attack them in their Post; where it was impossible to get any
advantage over them, as he had found by Experience. So that after Four and
twenty Hours facing the Enemy, within the reach of the Cannon of their Camp,
and that of the Fortress of Esseck, it was resolved at a Council of War, not to
expose the Army to any farther Inconvenience, but to wait a more favorable
opportunity to Fight the Enemy, and immediately to decamp. However, the Duke of
Lorrain made his Retreat in view of the Grand Vizier, who durst not budge out
of his Camp to disturb him. The same day the Imperial Army arrived at Walpo,
and two days after crossing the River; the day following encamped within a
League of Mohats; from whence he sent a Detachement of Five Regiments to
reinforce the Blockade of Agria. The Duke of Lorrain was thought too
adventurous to pass the Drove, and expose the Army without any necessity, to so
many Hardships; and that it was too dangerous a Hazard. But these were
Reflections after the thing was done, and grounded only upon the ill Success of
the Enterprise. For the design of the Duke was to have drawn the Grand Vizier
to a Battle; and if he had the ill luck not to succeed, and be obliged to a
Retreat, all that can be concluded from thence is, That no Man is always
Fortunate. However it were, we must acknowledge, that no Man could have
Retreated with more Honor and Prudence than he did. And I would fain know,
whether it be not an Action as much deserving Applause, to understand how to
Retreat with Honor and Discretion, as to gain a great Victory.

However after he had made his Retreat, besides the Detachement which he sent
to reinforce the Blockade of Agria, he sent another to secure Siclos and
Five-Churches; and then resolved to have besieged Sigeth. But the same Reasons
that frustrated his Design before he had passed the Drove, caused him to give
it over the second time. After which, he had a purpose to have passed the
Danaw, over the Bridge which had been built near Mohats. But that March was put
off, upon fresh Intelligence, that the Grand-Visier had passed the Bridges near
Esseck with his whole Army. So that now he resolved once more to march toward
the Infidels, and try if he could provoke 'em to an Engagement.

After the Retreat of the Duke of Lorrain, the Grand-Visier was once in a mind
to have pursued the Imperialists; but then again believeing that this Retreat
was but feigned to draw him out of his Entrenchments, he let them retreat
without any disturbance. But then again as firmly believing, that the Retreat
of the Christians was a real Flight, he quitted the Fastness where he lay, and
encamped near Darda. Nevertheless, there being nothing which he dreaded more,
then to come to Handy-Stroaks with the Christians, he took great care to
entrench himself, and kept himself very quiet in his Camp. On the other side,
the Duke of Lorrain, who saw that the Vizier avoided fighting, and that there
was no probability of drawing him out of his Trenches, unless he made use of
some Stratagem, caused his Army sometimes to advance, sometimes to retreat, as
if he had been afraid of the Enemy. He made several Detachements, some of which
passed the Danaw, others marched toward Siclos and Sigeth, with Orders however
not to remove from the Camp above a Leagues distance. But all these Counterfeit
shows proving fruitless, and the Duke, besides, seeing that his Men could not
subsist in the Place where they were, he resolved to retreat in good earnest,
and the Resolution was no sooner taken, but he began to decamp. The Vizier not
being able hitherto, to penetrate the meaning of so many Motions of the
Christian Army, began to believe at last, that the Duke thought himself too
weak to attack him, and that his flight was a sign that he had no desire to
fight. So that being eager to make the best of the Advantage which he thought
he had, he hastened out several Detachements to fall upon the Rear and Baggage
of the Imperialists; and afterward causing a greater number of Men to advance,
the fight began insensibly.

Presently Ten thousand Spahi's, and five thousand Janisaries appeared, who
marched directly against the Left Wing of the Imperialists, where the Duke of
Bavaria commanded, with Prince Lewis of Baden. And these two great Bodies of
Turkish Horse and Foot were preceded by another great Body of Cavalry, whose
charge was vigorously received by General Dunewald. In a moment after that, the
Janisaries posted themselves upon a rising Ground with some Pieces of Cannon
charged with Car-touches, which very much endammag'd the Left Wing, at what
time the Ten thousand Spahi's began to come on. But then the Duke of Bavaria,
who saw that now the Turks had a design to fight, extended the Front of his
Wing proportionably as he saw that the Enemy extended theirs. And indeed the
Turks fell on briskly and vigorously. But the Duke of Bavaria stood the Shock
like a great Captain; and though he exposed himself as much as any Common
Soldier, and flew about from one place to another, he received only a slight
Wound in the Hand with a Musket Bullet.

While the Left Wing was thus engaged, the Duke of Lorrain drew up the Right
Wing in the form of a Half Moon, the right Horn of which extended to the
Enemies Flank, with whom they were already in close fight; and the left Horn
extended toward a Body of Spahi's and Janisaries that were thundering down upon
'em. The Combat was long and Bloody; and it was observable, that the Turks
fought in much better Order than they used to do, and with much more Courage;
but for all that, they were forced to give ground. The Grand-Visier, who never
thought the Fight would have begun so soon, or that his Detachements would have
charged the Christian Army with so much precipitancy, had not drawn up all his
Men in Battle Array; or rather, not imagining that the Christians would have
made that Resistance which they did, was in such a hurry, such a strange amaze,
and gave his Orders so confusedly, that it was impossible for those that
received 'em, to put 'em in execution; which caused such a disorder among the
Turks, that the Duke and the Elector, knew well how to make their best
advantage of it. So that while they were in that Confusion they overturned
whole Squadrons one upon another, and while Friends routed Friends, made a
miserable slaughter among 'em. On the other side, the Grand-Visier, who was
afraid of what he saw, and could not prevent it with all his Precautions, flew
from place to place where there was most danger, to rally his Men, which he did
in some measure; but in regard it was impossible he should be every where, the
Turks gave ground in many places, and the Field was soon cleared by the
Christians: for those of the Turks who had made the stoutest resistance, and
fought with most fury, lost their ground by degrees, and at length betook
themselves all to flight. They were pursued to their Camp, where the greatest
part were cut to pieces, and they that escaped the Victor being chased from
their Entrenchments, were driven like Sheep as far as the Drove; where they had
been all cut to pieces, had not the night been more favorable to them. This
Battle was fought very near the same place where the famous Battle of Mohats
was fought in the year 1526, at what time Soliman the Second slew about Twenty
thousand Christians, among whom was Lewis the Second King of Hungary. All the
Enemies Artillery, consisting of Fourscore Pieces of Cannon, and twelve
Mortars, became a Prey to the Victor, with all their Provisions and Riches. The
Turks so little expected this defeat, that their Wagons were found without
Horses, their Elephants and Camels in their Stalls, and their Tents standing.
The Duke of Bavaria who entered among the first into their Camp, pusht on
forward to the Grand Signior's Tent, which was easily known by the Richness of
it, and other Marks particular to the Generals of the Infidels; where he found
a little Chest, wherein were about Two Millions in Gold and Jewels. And in this
Tent it was that Te Deum was sung two days afterward for joy of the Victory:
and so they decamped the next day for fear of infection from the stench of the
dead Bodies. For it is verily believed the Turks lost near Twelve thousand Men
in this Battle. At the same time also that the Christians gained this
considerable Victory in Hungary, the Serasquier of the Morea was defeated by
Count Coningsmark, and the Rout of that General occasioned such a Consternation
among the Turks, that they quitted Patras, the Castles of the Morea and
Rumelia, and the City and Castle of Lepanto.

The Grand-Visier, who two days before, had intelligence of the Victory and
Conquest of the Venetians, was at his wits end, to see himself vanquished in
his own turn. For he foresaw, that so many Losses one after another could not
but prove fatal to him: and he had all the reason in the world to be assured of
it; for the whole Army murmured against him, and was ready to Mutiny.
Nevertheless being retreated toward Esseck with about Forty thousand Men, and
rousing up his Courage, that he might not altogether sink under his bad
Fortune, he endeavored to pacify his Men, and to hearten 'em up at the same
time. He told 'em, that the Misfortune which had befallen 'em ought not to
deject their Courage; that the chance of War was uncertain; that the mischief
was not so great as was imagined; that there was no City or Town lost; and
supposing that the defeat were greater then it was, the season was so far
advanced, that the Christians would not be able to undertake any thing
considerable. This Discourse and some Money which he caused to be distributed
among the Soldiers, gave them a little new Life, and for the time dispelled
their Fears, so that they resolved to defend themselves; and the Grand-Visier
found himself in a Condition able in some measure to make head against the Duke
of Lorrain. However it was not the Resolution of the Turks that stopped the Duke
in the Carcer of his Victories. For in regard that his Men were animated by
Success, it is most certain they would have continued Victorious, could they but
have had an opportunity to fight; but the season hindered them from farther
falling upon the Enemy.

It Is true the Duke of Lorrain did all he could to engage the Grand-Visier to a
second Battle; but in regard he found it impossible, and for that the continual
Rains and overflowings of the Rivers made the ways unpassable, he called a
Council of War upon the Field of Battle, to consider what to do. The greatest
part advised him to pass the Drove; but the Trouble he met with in passing it
the first time having silenced that Advice, the Duke resolved to spend his time
in repairing the Disorders, which it was impossible but such a Battle as that
of Mohats had caused in his Army; till he could have a positive Account what
was become of the Enemy. In the mean time he sent a particular Relation of the
Battle to the Emperor, who returned him his Congratulations and Thanks for so
Glorious a Victory with his own Hands; and at the same time he also wrote his
Acknowledgments to the Duke of Bavaria.

Great was the Rejoicing at Vienna for the Defeat of the Grand Vizier. But the
Emperor's Joy was somewhat abated, by a Letter from Count Caraffa, then in
Upper Hungary, wherein he gave his Majesty to understand, that the Prince of
Transylvania had declared for the Port, notwithstanding the Treaty which I
mentioned, by which the Prince Abaffi and his Territories were obliged to
contribute to the Subsistence of the Imperial Forces, and to furnish them with
Ammunition and Money. This News was so much the more unwelcom to the Emperor,
in regard he had resolved, since the Treaty, to send his Forces to take up
their Winter Quarters in Transylvania. Thereupon the Duke of Lorrain, who soon
received the same ill Tidings, finding that he must give over the Designs which
he had on the other side the Drove, without any hesitation, marched away into
Upper Hungary, with a Resolution to reduce Prince Abaffi to his Duty. To this
purpose he strengthened the Places from whence he was to remove with good
Reinforcements, and having left a flying Camp in those Parts, by the Advice of
the Duke of Bavaria, and the rest of the General Officers, he advanced toward
the Frontiers of Transylvania.

Now in regard this was a tedious March, and the Ways bad, his Men suffered
great Hardships; but the Advantages which they hoped to find in their Quarters,
made them endure all their Toil and Inconveniences with Patience. However the
Duke of Lorrain, who omitted nothing to disappoint and distract the Counsels of
the Enemy, made a show of Marching toward Temeswaert. Upon which, the Grand
Vizier apprehending that the Duke had a Design to Besiege that Place, sent a
numerous Detachement to secure it. Of which the Duke no sooner received
Intelligence, but perceiving the false March which he had caused the
Grand-Visier to take, he sent away immediate Orders to Count Erdedi, Governor
of Croatia, to join Count Dunewald, and march forthwith to that Part where the
Grand Vizier had least Strength. Upon which, the Infidels, who expected no such
Visit, were not a little surprised, and abandoned Esseck. Upon which, Count
Dunewald made himself Master of Walpo, which had been so often attempted
before, and took in several Castles, and other petty Places, which must of
necessity have been reduced at the beginning of the next Campaign.

But to return to the Duke of Lorrain's March; He was no sooner arrived upon
the Frontiers of Transylvania, but he demanded Winter Quarters for his
Soldiers; to which the States returned answer, That in regard their Country lay
open and without defense, they could not hinder the Turks from entering into it,
and committing all manner of Hostilities, if they should openly Declare against
them. But since the Imperialists were at their Gates, and that they were no
longer in fear of the Ottoman Forces, they offered the Duke to allow Quarters
to some of his Regiments. Which though it were something, yet the Duke was not
fully satisfied. He therefore sent them word, that he must be constrained to
take by Force what they would not grant him in a Friendly way; and because that
sort of Language produced no Effect, he advanced into the Country, and seized
upon the Castle of Samblock in Transylvania, which lay in his Road; and after
he had caused it to be fortified, to make himself Master of that Passage, he
came before Claussenberg, which is a considerable City, where the States
frequently meet; into which Place being resolved to put a Garrison, he proposed
his Resolution to the Governor. To which the Commander made answer, That in
regard he must have an Express Order from Prince Abaffi for such an Admission,
he desired time to write to him. But the Answer not coming soon enough, and the
Duke preparing for an Assault, the Governor opened the Gates, and Prince
Abaffi's Garrison being gone out, after certain Conditions agreed to, Three
thousand of the Imperialists entered with Drums beating, and Colors flying.
Several other Cities also followed the Example of Claussenberg, and received
Imperial Garrisons. All this while, Prince Abaffi, who had one of his Sons, a
Hostage, at Constantinople, having given the Turks to understand the Condition
of his Affairs, and how he was distressed, solicited for Aid. But while the
Imperial Troops advanced and still gained Ground, Count Dunewald having taken
Possega, the capital City of Sclavonia, and the Turks having quitted some
Castles, and several small Towns between the Drove and the Save, the States of
Transylvania resolved to put themselves under the Protection of the Emperor,
fearing lest the Duke of Lorrain, should seize upon their best Towns, and so a
Re-assignation of Winter Quarters was made. The Principal Articles that were
Signed by the Duke of Lorrain, Prince Abaffi, and the States of Transylvania,
were, I. That the Prince of Transylvania, his Children, all those of his
Household, all his Nobility, and in in General, all the Transilvanians should
have free Liberty to Depart out of Weissembourgh, which is the usual Residence
of the Prince, and out of all the rest of the Towns; to return, or retire where
they should think most Convenient. II. That the Prince and Michael Abaffi, his
Eldest Son, who had been declared his Successor, should be invested with the
same Authority, and should enjoy the same Power which had been Confirmed to
them by the Ottoman Port, and the States; and should continue in the Exercise
of it, according to the Laws and Customs of the Country. III. That the People
also should be maintained in their Privileges and Franchises. IV. That the four
Religions received in Transylvania shall be upheld; the Lutheran, Calvinist,
Roman Catholic, and Unitarians; that is, the Arrians or Socinians.


Besides this General Treaty, there was one in particular touching
Contributions and Quarters, by virtue of which, the Prince and States consented
to Quarter and Pay during the Winter one part of the Imperial Forces, which the
Duke should leave under the Command of the Duke of Croy, and Count
Scherffenberg. After which the Duke quitted Transylvania with the rest of his
Forces, and marched into Upper Hungary, where they took up their Winter
Quarters according to his Orders.

THE LIFE OF Charles V. DUKE of Lorrain and Bar, And Generalissimo of all the
Imperial Forces. THE FIFTH BOOK.
THE Grand Vizier, after the Battle of Mohats, retreated, as I have already
said, toward Esseck, with the Remainder of his Forces. He encamped at Little
Waradin, and having called a Council of War, the result of the Consultation was
to send Twelve thousand Spahi's, with every one a Sack of Corn behind him, to
endeavor the Relief of Agria with Provision and Men, as being Blocked up by
the Christians. But though the Ottoman Soldiers had generally testified such an
Extraordinary Resolution to oppose the Christians, after the Harangue which the
Grand Vizier made them, and the Distribution of the Money which he gave them;
yet the Spahi's were so afraid of meeting and being forced to fight with the
Christians, so accustomed to Vanquish, that they refused to march. However,
because they durst not let it be seen that it was out of fear of being beaten,
that they refused to obey, they pretended that three Months Pay was detained
from them, which was the only Reason that constrained them to disobey the
Orders of their General; and at the same time they demanded their Pay after a
most tumultuous and mutinous manner. This Revolt, which began only in bare
Murmuring, increased insensibly to that Degree, that the whole Army was in an
Uproar. They cast their Eyes upon a Leader, who was constrained to appear at
the Head of those Rebellious Mutineers; and there was one Bassa, who being in
the Grand Visier's Tent, was so bold as to tell him, in the Presence of two
other Bassa's, the Treasurer of the Army, and the Secretary of State, That the
Musulmen desired to be Paid their Money, and that they would no longer endure,
that above Fifteen thousand Bags which had been taken out of the Imperial
Treasury, and sent into Hungary, since the Beginning of the Campaign, should be
expended to enrich him and his Creatures, while They Sacrificed their Lives for
the Defense of the State.

The Grand Vizier, who at another time would soon have made the Bassa repent of
such an Insolent Reproach, had so much power over himself as to dissemble his
Resentment; and therefore said no more to him, but that it was only a Pretense
which the Soldiers laid hold of; that he himself was a Man of deeper Judgment
than not to see it, but however, that instead of three Months Pay, he would
order them to be paid six. This Answer, so smooth and soft for a General who
has no less Authority in his Camp than the Grand Signior himself, had nothing
of Prevalency to soften the rugged Bassa; who therefore replied in the same
Language, That he was not worthy the Place which he held, since the ill Success
of the Campaign concluded with so much Ignominy, or rather which they were not
in a condition to conclude, since they were constrained to fly before their
Enemies, could be attributed to nothing but his Cowardice and want of Conduct.
And at last, he declared to him, That the Army would no longer acknowledge him
for their General, and therefore demanded of him the Seal of the Empire, and
the Standard of Mahomet.

In this Danger wherein the Grand Vizier found himself, he knew not presently
what course to take; nevertheless, he made this quick Answer, That for the
Marks of his Sovereignty, he could not Surrender them to any one but the Grand
Signior himself, who had entrusted them in his Hands. Nevertheless, to avoid
the Fury of the Soldiers, he Embarked upon the Danaw, as soon as Night came,
and so betook himself to Belgrade, from whence he departed immediately for
Constantinople.

The Vizier was no sooner gone, but the Chieftains of the Rebellious Army
dispatched away six Commissioners, who were no sooner arrived at the Port, but
they declared to the Grand Signior, That they would no longer obey Solomon, nor
the Caimakan his Lieutenant. They demanded next, that Siaoux Bassa, whom they
had made choice of for their chief Captain, might be put in the Grand Visier's
Place, and Cuprogli his Brother-in-Law, in the Place of the Caimakan; and
carrying their Insolence as high as it was possible for any Ottoman Subjects,
they added, That his Highness had nothing to do, but to resolve one way or
the other; for that the Army had given them no longer than a Months time to wait
for his Answer.

How Insolent soever this Demand were, and how unwilling soever the Sultan
might have been at another time, to have given the Command of his Army to
Siaoux Bassa, nevertheless he now found himself constrained, in this disorder
of his Affairs, to send him the Patent of Grand Vizier, and the Standard of
Mahomet, which Solomon had already resigned. Nor was this sufficient to appease
the Mutineers. For above Ten or Twelve Thousand Spahi's or Janisaries, having
left the Army, marched directly for Constantinople, under the leading of one
they called Little Mahomet, being followed by a Bassa, with Eight Thousand
Horse. And the Soldiers that staid with Siaoux, compelled the new Vizier to
take the same Road, to demand of the Grand Signior the Head of Solomon, and
some others of the General Officers.

It would be a difficult thing to make a true Relation of the Disturbances that
were then in Constantinople, and the Trouble the Grand Signior was in. So that
although he were convinced that Solomon was not Guilty, he was compelled to
cause him to be Strangled; and to send the Head of that Unfortunate Vizier to
his Rebellious Soldiers. He abandoned to their Fury the Principal Officers,
whose Lives they obstinately demanded. He paid them all the Money which he got
from them, which were Arrested, and who were daily Tortured to squeeze more out
of their Bones. Nor could all these low and poor Submissions prevent Mahomet
himself from being deposed; in whose stead Solomon his Brother was advanced to
the Ottoman Throne, who had been shut up in a Dungeon above Forty Years.

During these Commotions in Constantinople, the Duke of Lorrain having settled
his Soldiers in their Winter Quarters, departed from Transylvania, to visit the
Blockade of Agria. Where he was no sooner arrived, but he was wellcom'd with
all the great and small Shot from all the Posts of the Blockade. By the Noise
of which the Governor of Agria, being informed of the Dukes arrival, sent an
Aga to him at the same time to Compliment him, with Orders also to let him
know, That 'twas in vain for him to tire his Men in a Season so inconvenient;
that therefore he advised him to draw off; since it was to no purpose for him
to continue in his obstinate Resolution to make himself Master of a Place,
which he had blocked up for so long time without any Success, he being resolved
to defend it to the last Extremity. To which the Duke caused this Answer to be
returned, That he was not come before the place but only to streighten it more
closely, and that he should find in a little time, which of the two was the
most Resolute, he that was resolved to Attack, or he that was so well resolved
to defend the Place. In short, the Duke rode round the Town to view it, and
advanced to the very Counterscarp; yet not a Man from the Garrison durst
adventure to discharge a single Musket. However, as his presence was not
necessary, after he had given Order for a closer Blockade, he departed for
Presburgh, where the Emperor then resided, in order to the Crowning of Archduke
Joseph, his Eldest Son, King of Hungary.

Nor was the Governor of Agria so resolute as he seemed to be; for some time
after the Dukes departure he desired to Agria Capitulated the 28th of November.
1687 and the Garrison went forth the 9th of the next Month; which was the same
day that the Archduke was Crowned.
Capitulate. And the day that he went out of the place, he protested, That he
and all the Garrison had subsisted without Bread for Seven Months together. The
Duke of Lorrain was received at Presburg by their Majesty's, with all the Marks
of Joy that could be expressed. Some few days after he went to Vienna, and
thence to Inspruck to the Queen Dowager of Poland, his Wife; the Differences
about Precedence not permitting him to be present at the Coronation of Prince
Joseph; which Ceremony was performed the Ninth of December.

The new Vizier flattered himself that the Deposal of Mahamet the IV. would
restore Tranquillity to the Ottoman Empire; but he found that his Expectations
and his Hopes failed him. However, as it was his Interest to keep all quiet at
Constantinople, he sent thither Two Thousand Men, under the Conduct of Little
Mahomet, and some time after he followed himself. But no sooner had he left the
Army, but the Spahi's and Janisaries, who lay encamped some Miles from the
City, having Disbanded themselves, got into it in small Companies; so that in a
little time, they amounted to above Five Thousand; and these committed Infinite
Disorders. Siaoux himself had much ado to pacify this licentious Rabble,
though they had chosen him for their Chieftain. Because he went about to tell
them their Duty, they told him boldly, That he began betimes to follow the ill
Example of his Predecessors; that he must expect as unfortunate an End as
Theirs; and upon some tart Answers that he gave them, they demanded his Head of
the Sultan; and being divided into several Quarters of the City, they committed
most dreadful Hostilities. Solomon the III. was strangely confounded at the
sight of so many Disorders; and seriously acknowledged, that having been a
Prisoner for Forty Years together, he understood not how to Govern an Empire;
and besides, that his Power not being well settled, he knew not what course to
take to pacify those Madmen of Soldiers. However, in regard these Mutineers
had made the detaining of their Pay the pretense of their Rebellion, care was
taken to distribute among them a great part of what was their due; and after
the Sultan had tried by all the ways of Mildness and Sweetness to reduce 'em to
their Duty, they were at length prevailed upon to depart Constantinople, and
take their Winter Quarters where they were assigned 'em. After this, they made
it their whole business to get all things ready against the Spring: They made
new Levies of Men. Hassan, the new Bassa of Aleppo was nominated Serasquier in
Hungary, according to the usual Custom of the Ottoman Empire, which is, That
that Bassa is always to Command the principal Army in the absence of the Grand
Vizier. And in a Divan assembled on purpose, it was resolved, That in regard
the Imperialists care as little for Sieges, as the Turks did for pitched
Fields, they should after an extraordinary manner supply those Garrisons in
their Power with Men, to the end they might draw out Detachements from thence,
as necessity required, to make up small Parties to beat the Field, and harrass
the Duke of Lorrain. Chiaux's were sent to the Princes of Transylvania,
Moldavia, and Valachia, to give them notice of the Advancement of the new
Emperor, and to solicit them at the same time to stick close to the Interests
of the Port. And in regard that Solomon saw well that so long as he should be
at War with the Emperor, he should never enjoy any Tranquillity during his
Reign, he declared, That he Condemned the Declaration of War which had been
made against him by Mahomet the IV. before the Truce was expired; adding
withal, That to redeem the Credit which the Ottomans had lost by the Breach of
those Treaties, it could be no shame for them to signify to the Emperor, that
they were ready to enter into a Negotiation of Peace, to stop the Effusion of
that Blood which was every day shed.

These prudent Precautions gave some Hopes, that Solomon III. being ascended
the Throne, would settle a Calm in the Empire; and that in case the Emperor
would not consent to a Peace, which he so freely offered of himself, that he
should find himself in a Condition to withstand him, and to stop him in the
Career of his Conquests. There was but one Obstacle that could make him fear
the Disappointment of his Precautions; which was, that the Imperial Treasury
was almost exhausted. The Army was not wholly paid off; and a great part of
the Mutineers remained still at Constantinople, to have Right done them. There
was a necessity of keeping several Armies on foot; and of vast Expenses for the
Preparations against the next Campaign. The only Expedient which the new Vizier
could find was to lay new Impositions upon the People; the Immense Sums which
had been already heaped together, by constraint upon the People, to pay the
Taxes laid upon them, being not sufficient to satisfy the Soldiers. And these
Impositions they were, that renewed the foregoing Troubles after so horrid a
manner, that Constantinople was within a little of being sacked, and the new
Sultan massacred by the Rebels. The Spahi's that staid in the City, joining
with the Militia, and a part of the Rabble, themselves deposed the Principal
Officers from their Employments; and having besieged the Palace of Siaoux, that
new Vizier was butchered after the most miserable manner in the World. I only
speak of some part of these Disorders in Constantinople. Upon this the
Grand-Signior took off the new Impositions; and this begat him so much the Love
of the People, that having set up the Standard of Mahomet, he rallied together
about the Seraglio above a hundred thousand Men; which though for the most part
unarmed, showed however so great a Resolution, that the greatest part of the
Mutineers were dispersed or cut in pieces. After which, Solomon created Ishmael
Bassa Grand-Visier, a Person much in the Peoples favor, which in a manner
restored the City to its former tranquillity. However this new Minister was laid
aside in a little time after, and Mustapha Bassa was advanced in his Room. But
the Bassa, who commanded at Belgrade, and had under him the Hungarian Army,
upon the news of the new Visiers advancement, immediately mutiny'd, and set all
in a flame, pretending that the Dignity was his due, after he had obtained by
his Artifices and Intreagues, the Deposal of Ishmael Bassa. So that the Repose
which the Ottoman Empire seemed to enjoy, being but a Shadow of Peace, which
might have been disipated in a moment, there was just reason to hope, that if
the Emperor had been as well served then as he was in the preceding Campagnes,
it would have been no difficult thing for him to have continued his Conquests;
and to have rendered himself Master of all Hungary. But two unlucky and
unexpected Circumstances gave him cause to fear that he should not be in a
Condition to make his Advantage of the Troubles and Divisions among the
Infidels.

The first was, That the Elector of Bavaria had resolved not to take the Field.
For though there had been a Regulation already made of the Body of the Army
which he was to command, and that the General Officers that were to serve under
him were nominated, yet at the same time that he was expected at Vienna, there
came a Courier from him, who brought the news, that it was impossible for him
to march into Hungary, by reason of the Marriage of his Sister with the Duke of
Tuscany.

It was immediately suspected, that the Elector, who had so highly signalized
himself in the preceding Campagnes, was grown weary of serving under another
General; and that the Marriage of the Princess his Sister was only a Pretense,
which he was willing to lay hold of, that he might not be obliged to share his
Honor with the Duke of Lorrain: and it was thought, the Elector by this
designed the sole Command to himself. In short, it was then reported, that a
Minister of State had proposed to the Emperor to make him Generalissimo of his
Armies, and to keep the Duke of Lorrain at Vienna to be President of his
Council of War, in the Room of Prince Herman of Baden, who was for that purpose
to have been discharged from that Employment.

However it were, in regard the Emperor was far from doing that Injustice to
the Duke of Lorrain, to whom he was to Sacrifice, as I may so say, Prince
Herman of Baden, by sending him to the Diet at Ratisbonne, under the Character
of his First Commissioner, only out of a Design to remove him out of the sight
of an Enemy, of whom he would have had just reason to Complain; and for that he
had given a thousand Testimonies of his Affection for that Prince, and of the
Confidence he had in his Counsels; for these Reasons it was, that the
Resolution of the Duke of Bavaria, whom he would have preferred before any
other but the Duke of Lorrain, whose presence was so necessary in Hungary,
troubled his Majesty very much.

The next Circumstance which was worse then the other, was this, that the Duke of
Lorrain was seized at Vienna by a Distemper so dangerous, that all Men were
afraid for the Life of that great Prince. The frequent Vomitings, and other
scurvy Symptoms which accompanied his Disease, made Men suspect at the same
time, that he was Poisoned. And in regard the Physicians unanimously despaired
of his Cure, the Emperor began to be pensive past Consolation. However such was
the Care of of those that attended him, and the Remedies applied so prevalent,
that at length he began to mend. But then when it was thought the worst had
been past, he fell into a Relapse so dangerous, that the Physicians gave him
quite over. It Is true, that at first they would have concealed his Sickness
from the Queen Dowager of Poland; but when they thought there was no hopes of
Life, a Courier was sent away to Inspruck to let her understand his Condition,
that she might have the satisfaction to see her Husband before he expired;
which brought her in haste to Vienna. But fortunately the Judgments of the
Physicians proved Erroneous; for the Duke mended of a sudden. But still the
Indisposition of Body, and the great weaknesses under which he labored were
such, that the Emperor well saw, that he could not be in a Condition to endure
the Hardships of a Campaign, though perfectly recovered in his Health. So that
while he waited to regain the Duke of Bavaria, he gave the Command of the Army
to Caprara.

However all this while there had been no care wanting at Vienna, to prepare
against the Campaign; for they would not hear of any Peace with the Port. True
it is, that the Grand Vizier Solomon, after his Defeat, had written a Letter
full of Elogies to the Duke of Lorrain, wherein he acknowledged, that the
Losses which the Empire had sustained, proceeded only from the Grand Signior's
Breach of Faith in violating the Treaties between the two Empires; but that
having sufficiently paid for it, by all the fatal Events that had happened for
Four years together, since the Beginning of the War, it was now time to stop
the Effusion of Blood that had been spilt on both sides: but the Emperor would
vouchsafe no Answer to the Vizier. Quite the contrary, he was in Treaty with
several Princes and States of the Empire, for a considerable Number of their
Men, to recruit his wasted Regiments. He had raised Money to Pay his Soldiers;
and at length he knew so well how to manage the Duke of Bavaria, that he not
only granted him Three thousand Men to recruit his old Regiments, but he
consented to march himself into Hungary, where the Turks began to move. All the
Forces, being in their Winter Quarters, except those which were left in
Transylvania, had Orders to meet at the Rendezvous appointed near Esseck about
the Beginning of June: where the Imperial Army was mustered Threescore thousand
Men.

When the Duke of Bavaria arrived in Hungary, he found that the Turks had
quitted Pettie-Waradin, and Issock, which Count Caprara had Besieged; and
which, though it were but a small Town, yet might have made a far longer and
stouter Resistance, considering the situation of the Place. The Imperial Army
was divided into two Bodies; of which the one, that was very considerable, was
commanded by the Elector, and the other by Prince Lewis of Baden, who had
Orders to pass the Save and Besiege Gradisca, which the Turks immediately
quitted, after they had set fire to the Town: on the other side, the Duke of
Bavaria laid Siege to Belgrade, and carried it by Storm the 6th of September.

But at Constantinople, whatever Industry or means Solomon III. could make use
of, to appease the Disorders that Ruined the Ottoman Empire, he could not
possibly accomplish his Desires. The Punishments which he had inflicted to
reduce the Rebels to their Duty, did but the more provoke 'em. The mild and
gentle means which he had put in practice, rendered 'em more Insolent; and the
most part of the Bassa's taking their Advantage of these Troubles, were
revolted in Egypt, Asia, Natolia, and other places, where they endeavored to
make them selves so many Sovereigns. The Soldiers deserted their Colors every
day or mutiny'd; for that in this Condition of Affairs, it was impossible to
find Money for their Subsistence, as they desired: And they whose Fidelity was
to be relied upon were so cowed, that they suffered themselves to be beaten
every where.

Add to this, that besides that the new Sultan had no Kindness for War; for he
had been bred up all his Lifetime in Nothing else but reading the Alchoran,
and other Books of the Law of Mahomet; he felt his Throne in such a tottering
Condition, that he thirsted after Peace.

Then again Mahomet IV. was no sooner degraded, but he highly blamed the
Conduct of his Ministers in regard to the Emperor, against whom by their advice
he had declared War, before the Expiration of the Truce. He had in his
Prosperity often proposed to his Ministers, that since nothing but a Peace
could save the Ottoman Empire, so near declining, it could be no shame to the
Musselmen to desire it of the Victor. He had recommended it to his new Visiers,
upon their Creation, in particular, to make Overtures of Peace to the Christian
Generals upon all Occasions. He had solicited the Foreign Ministers at the
Port, and such Princes to whom he sent the News of his Advancement to the
Throne, to second him in so good a Work. And foreseeing that the Christians
would begin their Campaign with the Siege of Belgrade, he had recommended it to
the Bassa that Commanded there, to omit no opportunity of engaging them by an
Accommodation to conclude a War that had cost so much Blood and Treasure. In
pursuance of these Requests, several Foreign Princes began to interpose their
Mediation. The Grand Vizier and Bassa of Belgrade breathed after Peace no less
than the Grand Signior, and had neglected nothing to bring their Design to a
happy Conclusion. But in regard the Emperor had other Things in Prospect, he
always rejected the Propositions that were made him, how advantageous soever
they were. Any other Prince perhaps but Solomon, would have taken these
Repulses in disdain; and would have rather ran the Risco of being deposed, than
beg a Peace from them that scornfully refused it him. But the welfare of his
Empire, or rather his own Repose being of more value to him, than Honor purely
Airy, there was no Stone which he left unturned to render the Emperor flexible.
And at last to try the only way left, and the most probable to succeed, he sent
his Ambassadors to Buda, to give his Majesty notice of his Advancement to the
Throne, and withal to desire a Peace.

Now at the same time that the Emperor had advice of the Sultan's Resolution,
the Elector of Cologne died. At what time the Cardinal of Furstenbergh, having
been elected Co-Adjutor to that Archbishop, pretended that the same Members of
the Chapter that had elected him, ought to name him Elector in the room of him
who was deceased, though the Pope had refused to Confirm their Election, and
though the Elector deceased, had recommended by his Last Will, Prince Clement
of Bavaria. And at length, after several Contests, the Nomination was agreed:
for that of Twenty four Voices, Cardinal Furstenbergh had Thirteen, and Prince
Clement but Eleven. But in regard that the Cardinal was not qualified by the
Laws of the Country; and for that also by the same Laws of the Country, it was
requisite that the Cardinal should have had two Thirds of the Voices to have
carried it from Prince Clement by When any one is put up to be Elected who is
not One and twenty years of Age, or not a German Born, or not a Canon of the
Cathedral who has several Benefices; these four Conditions together, or one, or
more, make that which is called Postulation. Cardinal Furstenbergh had Right by
one Condition, as he was Bishop of Strasburgh. Prince Clement had none by that
Condition; but for his not being One and twenty he was dispensed with for that,
from Rome. See the Universal Monarchy of Lewis XIV. Tom. 2.
Postulation, the Nomination was not adjudg'd lawful.

Thereupon the King of France, who designed to have an Elector of Cologne that
should be a devoted Creature of his own, such as the Cardinal of Furstenbergh
was, had gained by Gifts and Bribes all the Members of the Chapter, that had
given their Voices for the Cardinal. Nevertheless, finding that notwithstanding
the Plurality of Voices, the Nomination was contested and looked upon as void;
he resolved by force to advance the Cardinal to the Electorate, and set himself
above the Laws, in case the Pope, to whom the Business was referred, should
give his Decision in favor of Clement; as the King had some reason to
apprehend. To this purpose, he presently declared by his Manifesto's which he
presented to the States General, and the Diet of Ratisbonne, that he looked
upon the Enemies of the Cardinal of Furstenberg, as His: and not contented with
menacing, he caused his Army to advance toward Cologne, expecting the Issue of
the Affair that was to be decided at Rome.

Upon this, the Emperor, who till then, had closed his Ears to all Proposals of
Peace that were presented to him from the Port, and who saw well, by the
carriage of Affairs, that he should infallibly have a War with France, that he
might not have two Enemies to deal with at once, now thought it not convenient
to reject the Offers that were made him by the Sultan, and therefore determined
that the Duke of Lorrain should go to Buda, to give Audience to his Ambassadors.

And indeed the choice which his Imperial Majesty made of the Duke, was a
certain Sign that he had a desire to terminate the War, if he might have an
advantageous Peace. For it is certain, That there was nothing which the Duke
more passionately desired. And he had often brought the Emperor to agree with
him in this, That he got nothing but desolate Countries in Hungary, while he
suffered considerable Losses toward the Rhine, by the continual Claims and
Enterprises of the King of France. He had laid before him the Designs of that
Monarch: He had pointed out to him the Methods he had taken since the Peace
concluded at Nimeguen, to make himself Universal Monarch; and that there could
not be too much have made to limit his Ambitious Designs. And certainly, though
all that the Duke of Lorrain said, had not really been true, it was so highly
his Interest, that the Emperor should turn his Arms against France, that he
could not choose but desire a Conclusion of the War with the Turks.

But the Emperor, who listened after nothing but Fame, and saw nothing before
his Eyes but Victory and Triumphs in Hungary, how desolate and ruined soever
the Country was, of which he got Possession, had shut his Eyes to all that the
Duke of Lorrain represented to him, though he were satisfied in the Wisdom of
his Counsels. For he imagined, that after the K. of France had seized upon
Strasbourg, and Luxemburgh, he would not adventure to Undertake any thing more.
And that when he came to reflect upon the great Victories, which his Imperial
Majesty won every day from the Ottomans, he would be afraid to buckle with a
Prince so favored by Fortune. But when he found that the King of France was
resolved to support the Cardinal of Furstenbergh, whom he had a long time
looked upon as the capital Enemy of the Empire; when he saw that the French
were upon their march toward Cologne, and that he could no longer doubt but
that he must have a War upon the Rhine, he then without any farther Hesitation,
thought it high time to hearken to the Propositions of Peace that were made him
by the Grand Signior, so that they were very Advantageous; and to avoid the
spinning out of the Treaty, he made choice of the Duke of Lorrain, whose
Interest it was to hasten the Affair.

There was also another Reason which made the Emperor cast his Eye rather upon
the Duke than any other Minister of State, to Treat with the Sultans
Ambassadors. For the Turks had an Opinion, That the Duke who was become the
Terror of their Armies, not being able to take the Field, was no more in a
condition to Command the Army; and that this was the main Reason which
constrained his Majesty to think of a Peace. In short, they sent to
Constantinople that the Duke would never recover of his Sickness, and the Imans
cried out already in their Mosques, That they had all the reason in the world
to hope that now their Prophet was appeased, since the General of the
Christians was at the Gates of Death. And therefore it was of absolute
Necessity that the Duke should appear, to make a more Advantageous Peace. So
that these two Reasons joined together, made the Emperor make choice of the
Duke before any other, for this Important Negotiation.

And now the Duke, recovering his Strength by degrees, was no sooner in a
Condition to endure the Inconveniences of a Journey, but he departed from
Vienna, together with the Queen Dowager his Wife, and safely in a short time
arrived at Buda. They that were not Privy to the Secret, were of Opinion, that
he was going to the Army; and his Enemies publicly reported, that he had never
intended any such thing at that time, before he was perfectly recovered, but
that the Elector of Bavaria, who had so honorably behaved himself the year
before, in the Battle against the Turks, should not acquire new Honor by the
taking of Belgrade. But beside, that the Duke of Lorrain was not in a condition
to endure the Toils of War; besides that the ^ueen his Wife, accompanied him in
his Journey; and that he had consented that the Duke of Bavaria should command
the Army in Hungary, his obliging and generous Behavior toward that General,
justified him to all the World. For although he went to visit the Camp at
Belgrade, he came away the day before the Assault, because he would leave the
Elector all the Honor of the Conquest.

And now the Duke and the Turkish Ambassadors being arrived at Buda, they
offered the Duke of Lorrain to show him their Commission from the Grand Signior
to negotiate a Peace with him. At which time it was, that fresh News came that
the Disorders and Con-Confusions at Constantinople were broken out again; That
the Janisaries had massacred a great many of the Officers of the Divan; that
they had made an Attempt to Kill the new Vizier, who was forced to make his
Escape into Asia; And as News daily increases, it was also farther added, that
the new Sultan was deposed, and that Mustapha, the Eldest Son of Mahomet IV.
was set up in his room.

This News, as uncertain as it was, might perhaps have wrought with any other
than the Duke of Lorrain, to surcease the Negotiation that had brought him to
Buda. And the Turks, though accustomed to desire Peace, and to detain to that
effect, Ambassadors in Hostage, found themselves compelled to send first of
all, and for a Pretense of sending, to lay hold on the Occasion that offered of
Complementing the Emperor upon the Accession of their new Master to the Throne,
which they never were accustomed to do at other times. However, this unusual
Forwardness apparently showed that the Port was at a great Stand. And these new
Commotions which had some appearance of probability, had been sufficient ground
on the other side to let his Imperial Majesty see, that it was for his Interest
at that time to have preferred War before Peace. But all these Considerations
never moved the Duke in the least. He was still of opinion, that all that could
be gained from the Turks by a War, would not countervail the Losses which they
should run the hazard of sustaining in Germany. And therefore considering that
the Emperor could not maintain two Wars at a time, it was good Policy to grant
a Peace to those that sought it, to the end he might bend all his Power against
France. Therefore the Duke caused this to be said to the Ambassadors, That he
had not left the Imperial Court but to negotiate a Peace with them, that might
conduce to the repose of both Empires.

But just as he was about to enter into a Conference with the Turkish
Ministers, his Ague unfortunately seizing him, he was constrained to return to
Esseck, from whence he wrote to the Emperor that he resolved to transport
himself to Gran through Sclavonia and Croatia, and so to Inspruck, till he were
perfectly recovered. Upon which, Count Caraffa had Orders to Conduct the
Ambassadors to Presburgh.

In the mean while, the King of France, who since the Truce for Twenty years,
concluded in the year 1684. seemed desirous to observe his Conditions with the
Empire, thought it not convenient to interrupt the Progress of the Emperor's
Arms against the Infidels, deeming it more for his Advantage, to leave him
engaged in a War, of which he had run the hazards, and of which the Success had
been too doubtful some years before, then to break a Truce that suffered him
quietly to enjoy the Fruits of his Conquests, and gave him time to fortify his
Frontiers, which he had so considerably enlarged since the Peace. He flattered
himself, that the Emperor, contented with not being crossed in his Designs,
would suffer him to reap in Peace all the Advantages which the Death of the
Elector of Cologne seemed to secure to the Cardinal of Furstenbergh; and which
he passionately desired, to the end he might have so sure and steadfast a
footing in the Empire, that he might be able one day, to strike home. But when
he saw the ill success of his Negociations; the Cardinal of Furstenbergh
disappointed of a Dignity, wherein he thought to have had a greater share than
all his Rivals; the Pope not well inclined to favor him; the Emperor
victorious; the Princes of the Empire resolved to stand by Prince Clement of
Bavaria, and the Peace with the Turk ready to be concluded, notwithstanding all
his Menaces, and the Approach of his Army near Cologne; all these things making
him deeply sensible, that after all the Methods he had taken, his Honor was
too far engaged to recoyle; and that the only thing to be considered now, being
whether to Attack, or be Attacked, he judged it his Interest to begin, and
resolved to assail the Empire, though the Emperor had not stirred a foot. And
to that purpose he sits down before Philipsburgh was Besieged the 6th of
October 1688. and Capitulated the 29th of the same Month, and the 1st. of
November the Imperial Garrison went forth: that day being the Dauphins Birthday.
Philipsburgh; which was Surrendered in a short time after to the Dauphin.

For though the King of France well understood, that the Siege of that Town
would be looked upon by the Emperor, as a Rupture of the Truce, since himself
was the first that offered Violence; nevertheless being desirous to make the
World believe, that his design was rather to defend himself, than assail
others, he Published a Manifesto, wherein he gave several Reasons, for his
being compelled to Invade the Empire: Protesting that he had no other intention
than to procure the Public Repose. That he was ready to restore Philipsburgh
after he had taken it and demolished the Fortifications, and to join Friburgh
also with it, provided the Cardinal of Furstenbergh might be put into
Possession of the Electorate of Cologne: that the Truce should be changed into
a perpetual Peace; if by virtue of that Peace he might keep all the
Fortifications which he had built upon the Rhine, and all the Places which he
had reunited to his Crown, in pursuance of the Treaties of Munster and
Nimiguen.

Sometime after the Emperor made answer to all the Reasons of the Manifesto;
and having refused his Consent, that the Truce should be changed into a
perpetual Peace, upon the Conditions proposed by the K. of France; as being
that by which he gave away to perpetuity a sixth part of the Empire, of which
the King had made himself Master; he laid aside all other thoughts, but those
of defending himself.

Now in regard the Invasion of the French upon Germany was a thing not
foreseen, either at Vienna, nor in any other Courts of the Empire, as being all
lulled asleep under the Faith of a Truce for Twenty years, the King of France
had no great Trouble to Conquer in a Country which he found without Defense. So
that after the taking of Philipsburgh, he invaded the Palatinate, under the
Pretense which is universally known, and seized upon Worms and Spire, put a
French Garrison into Mayence; Besieged Coblents and Bomb'd it, after he had
ravaged all the County of Treves; threatened to Burn Francfort, ruined all the
Countries round about by the excessive Contributions which he exacted from the
People, and of a sudden saw himself Master of the Rhine from Hunninghen to
Cologne, which declared for the Empire.

However the Season was so far advanced, that it was impossible for the Emperor
or the Princes interested to oppose the Progress of France. They were forced to
let her do what she pleased her self. And the French Soldiers, who afterward
took up their Winter Quarters in the Palatinate, and other Countries newly
conquered, committed a thousand Barbarous Inhumanities, without any regard to
Capitulations.

But these Exorbitances unusual and scarce heard of among Christians, did not
produce that Effect which France expected; they only served to exasperate the
Princes and Neighboring States of Germany to take more speedy and severer
Courses.

The Electors of Brandenburgh and Saxony, the Duke of Hanouer, and the
Landtgrave of Hesse, after several Conferences together, both at Magdeburgh and
other places, omitted nothing to put themselves into a Condition to expel the
Common Enemy, so soon as the Season should permit them to take the Field: and
the Emperor, in a just Rage, took such vigorous Resolutions, that he could not
forbear openly to say, That he hoped his Armies would prove no less Victorious
upon the Rhine, than upon the Danaw, and that he would humble the French, as he
had humbled the Ottomans.

However notwithstanding the firmness of his Resolutions, the Emperor found
himself but in a bad Condition. He had two Enemies to deal with at once, who
considering the State of his Affairs, were both formidable, though not both
equally Puissant.

The Peace which was in Negotiation with the Port, was not an Affair so soon to
be concluded. For upon the Invasion of the French into Germany, the Turks
seemed to have taken heart. Nor did the Ambassadors testify that extraordinary
earnestness to come to a Conclusion as they did before. On the one side they
started such and such Difficulties, and new Scruples: on the other side they
desired the consent of the Venetians; but more especially of the King of Poland
who opposed the Peace, and without whom there could be nothing concluded,
considering how greatly they were beholding to him. But this was not the only
thing that pestered the Emperor; The Duke of Lorrain still continued ill. And
though there were great hopes that he would recover his Health, yet in the mean
time the Emperor could not build upon the Services he could do him: for that
supposing his Armies were ready to take the Field, yet he knew not what to
determine in respect of the Duke, whose Presence was no less necessary in
Hungary than in Germany.

At this time, the Prince of Orange assisted with Ships and Men out of Holland,
made that unexpected Descent into England, with which all the World has rung,
and which proved so fatal to King James, while it set all the rest of Europe at
Liberty, from the Bondage it had so long been groaning under. He set Sail from
Holland the 15th of November, and the 26th of the same Month, the King of
France declared War against the United Provinces, under pretense that they had
engaged with the Emperor, to cross the Establishment of the Cardinal of
Furstenbergh in the Electorate of Cologne. But there is no Person so dull in
this Age as not to see that the King of France had other Motives than that. But
however it were, that flourishing Republic was become a new Enemy to France,
that gave the Emperor hopes he might be revenged of the French. In short, the
States General engaged to assist him: and their Ambassador at the Port pressed
with so much Earnestness the Conclusion of the Peace, that it was not long of
the toil of that Minister, that his Endeavors did not succeed.

If the Emperor were afflicted for the Sickness of the Duke of Lorrain, the
Duke was no less concerned than he; and indeed till then, he had endured his
Sickness with a wonderful Patience, but then he began to complain of his hard
Fate. For Affairs were come to that pass which he had wished for a long time.
He saw a large Harvest of Laurels to be reaped upon the Banks of the Rhine. He
saw all the Princes of Germany unanimously inclined to enter into a Confederacy
with the Emperor; and the Pope was his Friend: nor was there any Question, but
that Spain would be of the Confederacy, and that they might in time engage the
Princes of the North, the Cantons of Switzerland, and all Italy. And in a word,
the Duke must be thought very short sighted, not to see, that the only
Revolution in England, was a blow that disappointed all the King of France's
Measures. So that since the Death of Charles the Fourth, the Duke had never
such fair hopes of being restored to his Territories as now. He knew the People
loved him; that they heartily wished for his return; and that they only waited
an opportunity never so little favorable to shake off the Yoke of France. When
he came to make these Reflections, he was willing to be in Germany; but his
Indisposition kept him at Inspruck. And whatever Hopes and Encouragement the
Physicians gave him; he despaired of ever being able to endure the
Inconveniences of a Campaign; and these thoughts, which entirely possessed
him, did him more Mischief than the Ague that consumed him. If the Desire of
Health could have contributed to the Cure of his Malady, he had soon been rid
of his trouble. For never did any Prince more ardently desire to recover his
Health, than he did. But they were ineffectual Desires. However when he had the
least of hope to be in a Condition to act again, his Ague remitted: and it was
so necessary, that this Commencement of his Recovery should be known at Vienna,
that he dispatched away a Courier on purpose. And the Emperor being overjoyed
at the News, wrote back to him at the same time, that being his Counsel, and
his Right Arm, he wished for his being near him, so soon as his Health would
give him leave.

While the Duke was gathering Strength at Inspruck, there was nothing omitted
at Vienna, nor in all the Courts of the Empire, that might contribute to the
success of the next Campaign; so that when the Emperor perceived that the
Turkish Ambassadors took their advantage of the War which the French King had
declared against him; and besides, that the Peace which they Negotiated was
impossible to be concluded, or at least that it required a long time to
satisfy the Interests of the Venetians and the King of Poland, they took all
the best Methods imaginable to make Head against the King of France and the
Ottomans both at one time. Men were raised every where; and while the Forces of
the Elector of Saxony, Landtgrave of Hesse, and Duke of Hanouer, marched to
take up their Winter Quarters about Francfort, to be the more ready to
Rendezvous again as occasion should serve, the Emperor sent six Regiments of
Horse, and four or five of Infantry toward the Rhine. The Elector of
Brandenburgh also arrived at Weizel, where lay a great part of his choicest
Men. The Bishop of Munster having declared for the Emperor, promised to put
Eight hundred Men into Cologne, whither also the Elector of Brandenburgh was to
send Two thousand Dragoons. The Hollanders sent Seven or Eight thousand Men
into the Country of Juliers; and apprehending lest the French should make
themselves sole Masters of the Electorate of Mayence, they sent a considerable
Force to seize upon the greatest part of the Towns; and Eight Regiments of
Hanouer advanced at the same time toward Treves to secure Coblentz, and the
adjacent Countries.

These Proceedings of the German Princes, and the extraordinary Preparations
that were making every where, did not a little alarm France; though she had
been designing this War a long time ago, and for that reason was provided with
a much more numerous Army then that of the Confederates, surprised, by the
Invasion. Only because she had not foreseen the Revolution in England, she was
no less apprehensive of a Back-stroak from thence. However dissembling her
Fears, she began with the Palatinate, Wittemberg, and several other Imperial
Cities, where she committed those Abominated Acts of Inhumanity that all Europe
trembles at; and at the same time that she laid all in Ashes, and gave her
Soldiers all manner of License, she threw about her Declarations every where,
That she desired nothing more then Peace. And at the same time also she made a
particular Proposal of Peace to the Emperor, imagining that her Hostilities had
frighted Vienna out of her Senses. And some report, that the Duke of Lorrain,
to whom he gave some hopes of the Restitution of his Territories, solicited his
Imperial Majesty for an Accommodation. But that was a fiction imposed upon him,
there being nothing more distant from his thoughts. But on the other side, he
wrote to him, that the Offers of an Enemy were never to be accepted; that they
were always to be mistrusted; that it behooved him to declare War against
France; that to make Peace with a Crown that always took the slightest
Occasions in the World to Violate it, would be a fault never to be forgiven;
considering the good Condition of his Affairs by virtue of such Potent
Alliances. That as for what concerned himself, the Interests of the Empire were
his own, and that he would never act but with regard to the Common Cause; and
that he would be bold to say, There was never a Prince in Germany but what was
of his Mind; there being some who affirmed, that there was no need of any
Public Declarations, seeing that without any Declaration preceding, the King
of France had declared War against the Empire by Acts of open Hostility, not to
be thought of without Horror. In a short time after came forth the Result of
the Diet at Ratisbonne, full of Thundering Expressions against Lewis XIV.

I. That contrary to the Treaties of Munster and Nimeguen, he had seized upon
several Places that belonged to the Empire; That he had raised Cittadels, built
Bridges upon the Rhine, cut down Woods, and had assumed the Propriety of whole
Countries to himself by virtue of his pretended Pretentions.

II. That in the Places so seized and reunited, he had made most unjust
Alterations as well in reference to the Spiritual as Temporal Government.

III. That to stop the Progress of the Christian Arms against the Ottomans, he
had attacked the Empire by surprise, besieged and taken Philipsburgh, invaded
and oppressed the Countries, Cities, and Fortresses of several Electorates and
other Principalities, violating the Treaties of Peace and Truce, and his Royal
Assurances so often reiterated.

IV. That contrary to the Faith of Capitulations Signed by the Dauphin, he had
Exacted from those who had submitted to him, excessive Contributions; had
destroyed by Fire, and the endurance of a thousand Miseries, whole Societies of
People, who living under the security of the Truce, were surpised without any
Defense; that he had sacked and burnt whole Towns and Cities; not sparing the
Palaces of Princes, neither the Sacred Residencies of the Religious, nor the
Ecclesiastical Monuments of Ancient Devotion.

V. That he had destroyed the Imperial Chamber, and had carried away all the
Rolls, Records, Deeds, and Evidencies of the Imperial Crown.

VI. That he would compel the Emperor by force to acknowledge the Cardinal of
Furstenberg to be Elector and Archbishop of Cologne, contrary to the Electoral
Canons which had been made, and which the Pope had confirmed.

VII. And lastly, That he filled with Armed Soldiers that Electorate, and the
Principalities adjoining, from whence he had exacted vast Sums by Military
Executions, and committed several other Spoils upon the Subjects of the Empire;
omitting nothing whatever lay in his power to oppress their Liberties.

After which Enumeration of their Grievances, the Diet declared France to be an
Enemy to the Empire: adding withal,

I. That the War with that Crown ought to be reputed a Common War for the
Preservation of the Empire, and that it was declared to be such.

II. That they would oppose against the Pretenses of Religion maliciously
invented in the King of France's Manifesto, to disunite the Members of the
Empire, a unanimous Union of all their Forces, to restore Things to their first
Condition, and constrain the Enemy to repair the Damages he had done, and to
give Security for the time to come.

III. That they would not entertain under any pretense whatever, any
Correspondence or Neutrality with France, nor with her Ministers or Adherents;
and that all those who should assist Her directly or indirectly, should be
declared Enemies.

IV. That Notice should be given of this Result to all the Princes of Italy, to
all Foreign Crowns and States, and generally to all that had Dependence upon
the Roman Empire.

V. That his Imperial Majesty should be desired to make a Peace with the Turk,
to the end that by the joint Force of the Interested Princes, they might be
enabled, the more strenuously to carry on the War against France.

Lastly, That they should with all the speed that might be agree together upon
the Ways and Methods, how to support and continue the War according to the
Constitutions of the Empire.

This was the Result of that Diet, which Prince Herman of Baden approved in
every particular, in the Name of the Emperor, with this supply; That it being
notorious, that the Crown of France had fomented the Rebellion in Hungary, and
incited the Turk against his Imperial Majesty, and that there was also certain
Information given, that he had offered the Ottoman Port an Offensive Alliance,
with assurance, that as he had begun the War, to procure the Establishment of
that Empire, so he would not make a Peace without the Sultans Consent; there
was a necessity for these Reasons, to declare that Crown the Common Enemy not
only of the Empire, but of all Christendom, as well as the Turk himself; as was
done in the year 1544 upon the like occasion against France, by the general
Assembly at Spire.

Nor were these only bare words; for the Emperor had no sooner declared War
against France, but he studied all the ways to maintain it. He erected
Magazines in all places where he thought them necessary; he pressed the hastening
of the Levies which were already begun; he recalled part of his Forces that
were in service against the Turks. And to the end that the Army which was to be
sent into Germany might be encouraged by being under the Command of a
Captain General that was concerned for the Success of the Enterprise, he
designed the Elector of Bavaria for Germany, and the Duke of Lorrain for
Hungary.

Not that it was less the Interest of the Duke of Lorrain, then of the Duke of
Bavaria, to have France brought down. For the Concerns of Prince Clement were
nothing in comparison with those of the Duke of Lorrain, who was despoyl'd of
his Territories by the Usurpations of that Crown. But in regard the Emperor had
a design to give two Blows at once, and for that the very Name of the Duke of
Lorrain was become a Terror to the Ottomans, he thought it necessary to
appoint him against those Enemies whom he had so often vanquished, believing
that the Elector of Bavaria, fighting as well for his own proper Interests as
those of the Empire, would be no less formidable to France, then the other to
the Ottoman Port, after so many famous Conquests of which he had his share in
the Hungarian Campagnes.

There was also another Reason which induced the Emperor to make choice of the
Elector of Bavaria before the Duke of Lorrain to Command upon the Rhine, which
was the Indisposition of his Body; and because France was the Aggressour,
whereas the Port was only upon the Offensive Part; besides, that there was all
the Reason in the World, that the French would be stronger in Germany, then the
Turks in Hungary; and therefore there was an absolute necessity of opposing
against France a General that was in perfect Health, and in a Condition early
to take the Field.

Now at the same time that the Emperor had taken this Resolution, and made it
known to the World, that the Elector of Bavaria was to act upon the Rhine with
a considerable Army, which advanced every day to join the Confederates, while
the Duke of Lorrain prosecuted his Victories in Hungary toward the total
reducing of that Kingdom, if his Health would permit him, he found himself
perfectly recovered; so that he felt himself in a Condition to leave Inspruck,
and attend the Emperor with his Counsels, in order to the taking such Methods
as were necessary for the carrying on the two great Designs.

And in regard there was nothing which the Duke more passionately desired than
to Command in Germany, so soon as he arrived at Vienna, he used all his
endeavors to make the Emperor alter his Resolutions: protesting however at the
same time, That he had no other will but the Emperors; That he was ready to
march into Hungary; and he agreed with his Imperial Majesty, that his Presence
was absolutely necessary in that Kingdom. Nevertheless, after he had made it
appear, that the Turks would not be in a condition to undertake any thing
Considerable, in regard the Ottomans were all raw Soldiers, New raised Men, or
cowed by the Victories of the Christians: After he had laid before him, that he
wanted not Politic and wary Generals to oppose against the Ottoman Army; but
that the main Effort was to be made upon the Rhine, where the King of France,
who had been a long time preparing for this War, would not fail to employ the
Choice and Flower of all his Forces; His Imperial Majesty considering, that the
Dukes Presence was more necessary in Germany than in Hungary, submitted to his
Reasons, and resolved at length after more mature deliberation, to have two
Armies in Germany, the one Commanded by the Elector of Bavaria, and the other
by the Duke, and to send Prince Lewis of Baden into Hungary, who had signalized
himself in Bosnia; where with four or five thousand men he totally defeated an
Army of twenty thousand Turks.

At length the Season for Consultation and Preparations having given way to
that of Action, the Duke of Lorrain departed from Vienna, and arrived with
about fourteen or fifteen Thousand men near Coblentz, where he was to join the
Forces of the Elector of Saxony, and the Landtgrave of Hesse. The Elector of
Bavaria marched toward the Upper Rhine, with an Army of ten Thousand Bavarians,
Seven thousand Imperialists, and four thousand Suabians; while the Elector of
Brandenburgh advanced toward Cleves with about Twenty thousand men of his own
and the Bishop of Munster's.

These motions of the Confederate Armies were fatal to several Towns, as
Oppenheim, Worms and Spire, which had surrendered to the French, and flater'd
themselves that they should be dealt with no otherwise than according to the
Laws of War; but met with a destiny far more Cruel and Terrible than that of
the Palatinate; for they were not only utterly consumed by Fire, but besides,
the Inhabitants who had been permitted to carry away the best of their Goods,
were exposed to the plunder and fury of the Soldiers. For the French, who
during the last Wars, had besieged and taken several Towns and Cities before
their Enemies were in a condition to take the Field, now quitted all those
which they had surprised after the Siege of Philipsburgh, except Bon, Mayence,
Keyserwart, and some other inconsiderable places; but at the same time that
they quitted 'em, they set 'em on fire, and of one of the most delightful
Countries of Europe made a vast and hideous Desert, after they had committed
such Acts of Barbarity and Inhumanity that after Ages will hardly believe.

During these Hostilities and Burnings, the Confederate Princes did not sleep;
they Expelled the French out of some Forts, and petty places which they thought
themselves able to keep; they worsted them in several Encounters; and
Keyserwart, which the Duke of Brandenburgh besieged, surrendered in four days
after he had opened his Trenches: And now after so prosperous a Beginning which
was taken for a good Omen, all the Generals met at Francfort, where they held a
Council of War, wherein after they had Unanimously resolved to give the Honor
of the Command to the Duke of Lorrain, with a promise that they would never
sheath their Swords till they had restored him to his Dominions, they agreed to
besiege Mayence and Bon, before they made any farther attempts, since it was
not safe to advance into the Enemies Country, before they were Masters of those
two Towns.

Mayence was no considerable Town, before the King of France got possession of
it: but the Situation of it was such as to be able to stop the Imperialists.
And therefore the King had no sooner secured it with a French Garrison, but he
ordered it to be Fortified; and the Marquis d'Uxelles who was appointed
Governor, continued the Work with so much assiduity, that it is incredible how
strong that City was become, while the French had it in their hands.

And in regard it was expected that the Confederates would besiege it, it was
Garrisoned with above Ten thousand men, the best and choicest Soldiers under the
best Officers of France.

However, the difficulties of the Siege could not stop the Duke of Lorrain.
Upon the 16th of July he crossed a small River two Leagues below the Town, with
an Army of Twenty thousand men, and presently caused four thousand Croats to
advance, whom the French durst not adventure to attacque, though they were
sallied forth to meet them with a great Body of Horse. The next day the Elector
of Saxony, and the Landtgrave of Hesse passed the Main, above Mayence, and
posted their Men within Cannon-shot of the Town, on that side where the Duke of
Lorrain's Army began to encamp* The 18th about three Thousand Country People
wrought in the Approaches: And the same day the French made a sally, but were
repulsed with extraordinary vigor by the Imperialists; at what time the Duke
of Bavaria being arrived in the Camp, they prepared for a formal Siege, and to
batter the Town.

Not to stop upon the particulars of the Siege, the Town was assaulted in three
Places. The Duke of Lorrain commanded one Attack, and the Duke of Saxony and
the Landtgrave of Hesse the other two. The Besieged defended themselves
desperately, and their sallies were so frequent and so mettlesome, that they
often ruined in one, what the Confederates had been toyling several days to
Erect. The Sixth of August, when least expected, they sallied out at Noonday
with about two thousand picked men, and fell with such fury upon the Saxons
Quarter, that they overturned all before 'em; but the Duke of Lorrain hastening
to the succor of the Elector, the Imperialists, animated by the Presence and
Example of their General, repelled the French with so much vigor, and fought
with that fury, that above twelve hundred men on both sides were numbered to
cover the place with their dead Bodies. But this same Sally was nothing in
Comparison of another that followed some days after. For in the two former they
had made a dreadful slaughter, and cleared the Trenches; and therefore those
two Actions proving so successful, they resolved to try a third Sally with
three Thousand men, Drums beating, and Colors flying. Now in regard that
neither the Duke of Lorrain, nor any of the rest of the Generals expected their
Third Effort, it caused no small Terror and Disorder in the Camp, of which the
Enemy taking their advantage, fell on Pell-Mell upon four or five hundred men,
that sold their Lives at a dear Rate; they nailed two pieces of Cannon, and
having filled up the Trenches of the Confederates, posted their great Guard of
Horse, where the Besiegers had begun to open their Trenches. But at length the
several Generals having rallied and re-encourag'd their Men, they repelled the
Enemy, cut to pieces a great number of them, and regained their Post.

And now the Duke of Lorrain being resolved to try whether he could carry the
Town by Storm, and fearing least the French should attempt to relieve it, wrote
to the Elector of Brandenburgh to send him some Regiments of his Men, that
being so reinforced he might be able both to carry on the Siege, and fight the
Enemy in case they advanced to raise it. Which precaution was the more
necessary, because their ran a report, that Marshall Durass was advancing with
his Army, and orders to give the Confederates Battle. But it happened that the
Brandenburgh Regiments were useless, for Durass never appeared.

After which, notwithstanding the fierce Resistance of the Besieged, the
Besiegers by little and little gained the Outworks which the French possessed,
and lodged themselves therein. Batteries were raised in every one of the
Attacks, and they made themselves Masters of so much Ground, while the Cannon
opened a wide Breach; that the Duke resolved a General Assault.

To which purpose all things were prepared in readiness: And the next day after
this Resolution was approved by all the Generals at a Council of War, they
began by break of day to play upon the Town from all the Batteries, and so
continued till four in the Evening. At what time upon the throwing in of a
Bomb, which was the Signal agreed on, they fell on, in every Quarter, with so
much vigor and such undaunted Courage, that after a Bloody Contest of three
Hours and a half they carried the Counterscarp.

At the beginning of the Assault, in regard the French were desirous to keep
the Town whatever it cost, the ground was strewn with dead Carcasses: And the
Imperialists were they that lost most Men. For the Marquis D'Uxelles, who was
acquainted with the Duke of Lorrain, believing the Hottest work would be at the
Attack which he Commanded, he took not so much care of the other Attacks, that
he might make the greater Resistance against the Duke: So that the Saxons, and
the Regiments of Hesse and Lunenburgh, were Masters of the Counterscarp an Hour
before the Imperialists. But notwithstanding this Prosperous success of the
Besiegers, the French continued firing their great Guns, and blew up three
Mines that made a dreadful havoc. Nevertheless the Saxons and Lunenburghers
pursued the Enemy to the very Gates of the Town, and the Imperialists lodged
themselves upon one of the Principal Bastions, making way through the very fire
of the Cannon, and an infinite number of Bombs, that were thrown from the Town.

As the fight was desperate on both sides, so the loss of the Confederates was
very great; several Officers of Note, and a vast number of Common Soldiers. But
in regard the loss of the French, to whom the Germans gave no Quarter, was much
greater, the Marquis D'Uxelles, no sooner began to consider with himself, but
he saw that if he should hold out any longer he should loose all his men.
However he made a show as if he intended to stand the the other brunt. But when
he saw that the Confederates began to fill up the Motes, with a purpose to
assault the Town it self, he desired to Capitulate, and Hostages being given on
both sides, the Articles were concluded. Mayence was invested the 17th of July
1685, and surrendered the 11th of September following.
This Siege lasted not above two Months: And it is most certain that if the
Besiegers would have made use of their Bombs, they might have sooner compelled
the French to a Surrender, notwithstanding the strength of their
Fortifications, and the number of their Cannon. But in regatd the Generals were
willing to preserve Mayence, they chose to spend a little longer time, with the
loss of a few more Men, than to deface the City, and at the end of the Siege to
be the Masters only of a heap of Ruins.

While the Duke of Lorrain signalized himself in Germany, Prince Lewis of Baden
obtained a considerable Victory over the Turks in Servia. Of which the Emperor
received the News almost at the same time, that he had the Tidings of the
taking Mayence. But notwithstanding these Successes as well upon the Rhine as
in Moravia; other ill News rendered his rejoicing imperfect. For the French to
repair the loss they had received, continuing their Hostilities after the same
manner as they began, Burnt all before 'em from Heidelburgh to Strasburgh; and
at length made Frankendale taste of their Mercy; the only Town in the
Palatinate, which till then they had spared.

At the same time that the Confederates laid Siege to Mayence, they determined
also the Siege of Bon, to make themselves Masters of two Cities at a time if it
were possible. The Duke of Brandenburgh who was to Attack that Place, and who
had already carried the Fort of Bael, made trial at first to reduce the Town by
his Cannon and Bombs; as being willing to spare his own and the Confederates
Men. To which purpose, he was no sooner sat down before the Town with part of
his, and the Bishop of Munster's Men, together with some Holland Regiments, but
he fell to raising his Batteries. The Effect was quick and terrible; for in
less than two Days the City was destroyed and laid in Ashes, all but one great
Tower, and one Church, which the Bishop of Munster's Men at last quite ruined
with their Cannon. But all this was so far from discouraging the French, that
instead of Surrendering they made continual Sallies; so that the Elector
resolved to have laid a formal Siege to the Place. To which purpose, all things
were prepared in a readiness; and there was no question but the City would have
been carried in a small time, after the Havoc which the Bombs had made. But
when all things were just ready, the Elector received three pieces of News that
broke all his Measures.

The first was from the Elector of Treves, That the Marquis of Boufflers having
drawn together a considerable Body, was advanced toward Coblents, which
constrained him to send away General Schening with a Detachement of Seven or
Eight thousand Men to defend those Parts. The second was from Prince Waldeck,
who finding himself not strong enough in Horse to deal with Marshal d'Humieres,
sent for the Dutch Cavalry, then before Bon. Which constrained him to send away
a Detachement of Seven Regiments. The third was from the Duke of Lorrain, then
before Mayence, who desired a Reinforcement of Men, as has been already
observed, in regard of the Resolution he had taken to Storm that Place. So that
the Elector was forced to send away a third Detachement, which weakened his
Army so very much, that finding he was no longer able to carry on the Siege, he
only blocked it up at a Distance.

Which though it streighten'd the Place considerably; and that the Garrison were
extremely weakened every day by Diseases that swept away the Soldiers; and that
they were in great want of all things, nevertheless the Count d'Asfeild who
commanded there, would by no means think of Surrendering, but made continual
Sallies. For he imagined that the Confederates had work enough before Mayence,
and therefore could not be in a Condition to Besiege him till that Affair were
over, in which Interim he might be relieved, and strong enough to deal with the
Duke of Brandenburgh. But while he fed himself with these Hopes, Mayence
Surrendered, and that News which he so little expected, struck the Garrison with
such a Consternation, that the Duke of Brandenburgh having Summoned the Town,
the Governor desired to Capitulate; but his Conditions were thought so
unreasonable, considering the Condition of his Affairs; that a Siege was
resolved on, and two days after effectually prosecuted.

Nevertheless Mayence was no sooner reduced, but the Saxons who were extremely
tired during the Siege, were sent into new Quarters to refresh themselves; The
Bavarians advanced toward the Palatinate; and one part of the Imperialists
marched with the Duke toward Bon. So that the Forces which had already formed
the Siege, having received so considerable a Recruit, the Duke of Lorrain
immediately began to sink his Approaches, and raise his Batteries, which was
done with so much diligence, that in two or three days they were ready for a
General Assault. I shall say no more, but that the Trenches were run on to the
Foot of the Counterscarp, and that the Breaches being made, all things were
ready for Battery, though the continual Rains for some days, delayed the
General Assault; but then the Weather proving fair, the 9th of October was
fixed. The Brandenburghers, Dutch, and Bishop of Munster's Men were appointed
to Attack the Counterscarp, Half Moon, and Covert Way; and the Duke of Lorrain,
who some days before was got within a hundred Paces of the Hornwork, with the
Hessiens, Lunenburghers, and those others which he brought from Mayence,
undertook the Storming of that Hornwork.

The French disputed long the Covert Way, firing most dreadfully upon the
Assailants. But at length the Count of Dona leading on the Grand Musketeers,
and the Younger Brothers of Brandenburgh having broken down the Palisadoes,
they fell Pell-mell upon all that stood in their way, and after a horrible
Slaughter, carried the Half Moon, and lodged themselves upon the Counterscarp.
The Hollanders also, and Munsterians signalized themselves highly in this
Onset, venturing through the Fire of the Great and Small Shot with such an
undaunted Courage, that they lost above Five hundred Men, and had Seven or
Eight hundred Wounded. The Brandenburghers were not so rudely handled, but they
lost several Officers of Note; and among the rest Monsieur de St. Bonnet, who
after he had performed several great Actions at the Head of a Regiment in
Candy, in the Service of the King of France, and in the last Campagnes of
Hungary, where he served a Volunteer, had also made himself no less remarkable
in the Service of the Elector of Brandenburgh.

While these things thus passed in the Brandenburgh Attack, the Enemy was
assailed with no less vigor in that which the Duke of Lorrain Commanded. It Is
true, his Men were repulsed with much Gallantry at first; but that Bravery
serving only to incense them the more, and stimulate their Courage, they
returned with such an unwelcom fury, that they disheartened French, after they
had sprung two Mines, retired into the Town, so that the Duke of Lorrain lodged
his Men upon the middle of the Hornwork, with the loss of no more than a
Hundred and thirty Men.

Nor did the Duke or the rest of the Generals think fit to stop there; they
were all resolved to enter the Town also by main Force; more especially the
Duke of Lorrain. But the Count d'Hasfeldt, who was himself dangerously wounded
in the Defense of the Half Moon, seeing all the Outworks lost, and fearing a
second Assault, resolved at length to Surrender. So that having sent out the
Major of the Regiment of Castres, who was Conducted to his Highness of
Brandenburgh, by Monsieur Dorosey his Adjutant Camp-Master General, and that
Major having presented him a Draught of a Capitulation, the Proposals were
generously accepted, though extremely Advantageous to the Governor, considering
the Extremity he was in. But the Season being far spent, it was thought the
best to preserve good Soldiers, by granting a fair Composition to those who had
bravely done their Duty Bon was formally besieged foam days after the taking of
Mayence; Count Hasfeldt Capitulated the 12th of October. 1685. and three days
after the Garrison went out.
. For in short, it is most certain, that never any Garrison was better defended
than this.

It may be said that the Emperor had all the Advantages he could desire,
considering the Condition of his Affairs: Victory accompanied his Arms,
wherever they advanced. For at the same time that Bon was reduced, the Marquis
of Baden took Nissa, after he had defeated the Turks in a Battle fought not far
from that Town, wherein the Infidels lost between seven and Eight thousand Men,
their Artillery, all their Provisions and Baggage.

'Twas thought the Confederates would have undertaken some other Siege. But the
Soldiers were so tired, and the Season so incommodious, that all the Generals
began to think of resting themselves, and preparing for the next Campaign.

Therefore the Duke of Lorrain, after he had disposed of his Men in their
Winter Quarters, departed for Vienna. Only he stayed some time at Ratisbonne,
where he found that the Diet had made several terrible Edicts against France.
For that Assembly not only forbid the Subjects of the Empire all manner of
Communication and Commerce with the French; not only ordained their Expulsion
from all the Courts of the Empire, of what Quality soever or Profession they
were, even the Ecclesiastical Persons themselves; but also declared moreover,
That any Foreign State that should propose any thing in favor of France,
should be reputed an Enemy to the Emperor, and the Confederates.

As for the D. of Lorrain, he had caused frequent Memorials to be presented to
the Diet, wherein he set forth, that the Dutchies of Lorrain and Bar, having
been wrested from his Uncle, Charles IV. after such a manner, as all Europe
well knew, it was not just that the Heirs of that Prince should be deprived of
them all their lifetime; wherefore the Dukes of Lorrain being Princes of the
Empire, and Members of the Circle of the Upper Rhine, he had addressed himself
to that Assembly, to demand of them, that he might be assisted by main force
against the King of France: alleging that though that Monarch had in some
measure acknowledged at the Peace of Nimeghen, that he detained certain
Dominions that did not lawfully appertain to him; yet he offered no Promise of
Restitution, but upon Conditions so hard and unjust, that he could not accept
them; as he had ordered his Ambassadors to declare in the Assembly of the
Plenipotentiaries. By the Constitutions of Germany, when any Member of the
Empire is disturbed in the Possession of his Territories, or happens to be
despoiled of them, all the rest of the Princes of that Circle are bound to
defend him, and use all their Endeavors for his Restoration: and by the same
Constitutions, if that Circle is not sufficiently Powerful to effect it, the
Circles adjoining are to assist. And if the adjoining Circles are not strong
enough to do the oppressed Prince justice, then the whole Empire is obliged to
undertake his Defense; and the Emperors themselves make the same engagement, in
the Capitulations which they Sign at their Election, and when they receive the
Imperial Crown. Now as the Diet of Ratisbonne represents the Body of the
Empire, the Duke had had recourse to that Assembly to be restored to his
Dutchies of Lorrain and Bar, with a design to solicit and press them, to make
use of all the necessary means to compel France to make Restitution upon
reasonable Terms. But notwithstanding the great Inclination of the Diet to have
given the Duke a favorable Answer, the best part of the Princes of the Empire
had so many Cautions to observe, and were so entangled with the Court of
France, that all the Remonstrances which the Duke had made himself, or caused
to be made, proved always fruitless. For in short, since France was become so
Potent, The Territories of the Duke of Lorrain lay too conveniently,
considering the Prospects that he had, for him to come to any friendly
Accommodation, but upon the Terms which he proposed at Nimeghen; and perhaps he
had made such as should have been infinitely much harder, seeing that the
greatest part of the Princes of the Empire were bound to furnish the Emperor
with Forces, to continue his Conquests in Hungary. And as Affairs then stood,
there was no compelling France to make the Duke Restitution, but by Declaring
War against her, which Germany could not undertake, as having at the same time
to do with the Ottoman Port. And this the Duke of Lorrain knew well enough
himself. However these were Formalities which he was obliged to observe, and of
which he might make use in Season; for that Great Prince had his future
Prospects as well as others. In short, therefore, the Reasons which had obliged
the Diet not to give any Effectual Answer in his behalf now ceasing, since
France had Declared War against the Empire by laying Siege to Philipsburgh, the
Duke laying hold of the Circumstance, and reckoning much upon the great
Services he had done the Emperor, and which he was going to do him in Germany,
he presented a New Memorial to the Diet, to which the Diet having returned him
an Answer to his Wish, he had certainly made a push for it, at the Beginning of
the Spring. But Death surprised him, when he least expected that Fatal Blow,
and at a time that he saw himself arrived at the very Eve of a Triumphant
Holiday. All things seemed to Promise this Illustrious Prince, that the same
Victorious Fortune that had accompanied him in Hungary with so much Glory,
would attend him still in Germany: the taking of Mayence and Bon were
sufficient to presage it. He had by his Valor cut out a Glorious Way to
re-enter his Dominions, as soon as he appeared upon the Rhine. But he had the
Destiny of that Great Captain of the People of God, so famous in Sacred
History, to see the Promised Land, but not the Happiness to enter into it.

This Prince, whose loss the Confederates will have reason long to bemoan, as
they have already found by Experience the last Campaign, gave himself almost no
repose, in the amidst of those Designs he had to give but one fair Blow, to
disappoint the measures of France, and which it was impossible for her to have
Fended off. He studdied Night and Day the means to humble that Crown; and
knowing 'twas impossible to accomplish his Desires, but by taking extraordinary
Methods, and making vast Preparations, he was always in Action. He had been
obliged for some time to be absent from the Imperial Court; where the Affairs
of War called him, which were the sole Affairs that employed him, and in which
he took delight. But in regard the Emperor determined upon nothing, but what
was debated before hand, and had therefore desired that the Duke might be at
Vienna, where there was a Council of War to be called, he was upon the Road
thither, and was arrived at Weltz, a small Village within three Leagues of
Lintz, when he was seized by the Malady of which he died; and which has put all
Europe in Mourning. He felt at first a Pain in one Ear; but not apprehending
any Danger from so slight a Matter, (...) nothing of it: However he was much
troubled with it all that Night, and the next Morning when he rose about Four
of the Clock, believing he might be able to continue his Journey, he went to
Church, to pay his Devotions to Heaven; but the Pain considerably increasing,
he was forced to retire to his Inn, and go to Bed.

The Defluxion in his Ear, falling down about half an hour after upon his
Throat, his Physician let him Blood, as he desired himself. But that Remedy
producing no Effect, on the other side his Pain becoming still more violent,
and finding his Strength decay, those sad Symptoms put him out of doubt that
he was near his End. And the thoughts of this struck him a^l of a sudden: but
then recollecting with himself, that Princes were subject to dye as well as
other Men, he put himself into the Hands of his Creator, sent for the
Capuchins, made his Confession, and endeavored to acquit himself of those
Duties which the last moments of Life require.

Immediately after he called his Confessor aside, and charged him with two
Letters, one to be delivered into the Emperor's own Hands, with a Note
containing these Latin Words.

Sacrae Cesarcae Majestati Commendat se, and Ultimum Vale dicit Carolus
Lotharingiae Dux.

Charles Duke of Lorrain Recommends himself to his most Sacred Imperial
Majesty, and bids him his last Farewell.

The other Letter was for the Queen his Wife. By the first he Recommended to
the Emperor that Illustrious Princess, his Children, his Domestic Servants,
and the Lorrainers: And by the second he Recommended his Children and his
Domestic Servants to the Queen; after he had given her a thousand Marks of his
tender Affection, and his Sorrow for so Harsh a Separation.

All this while he grew weaker and weaker; yet as his Strength decayed, you
might read in his Eyes and his Countenance, and observe in all his Words, that
his Piety fortified him, and that he had resigned himself over to dye.

The Father Guardian of the Capuchins of Weltz, with nine others of his Order,
exhorted him while he had time, to dispose of himself, and then approaching
near the Bed to Kiss his Hand, he drew it back, only desired 'em all to to say
the Office of the Dead, which they prepared to do, but while they were reciting
the Prayers, his Speech began to fail him.

This Symptom was as it were the last Signal of the Death of that Illustrious
Prince, but it nothing terrified him. He then made a sign for Paper and Ink;
and wrote, That he desired nothing else but that they should Pray for his Soul.
He had his right Sense and Judgment to the last Gasp. At length, after he had
caused several Prayers to be said, finding himself ready to expire, he made
another sign that they should Pray to God for him, and some minutes after he
gave up the Ghost. This was the next day after he fell ill, being the 18th of
April, 1690, at the beginning of the Forty ninth year of his Age. The
Physicians said that he was choked with a Catarrh.

Charles the Fifth of Lorrain was a great Hero. He had a noble Air; though he
affected an extraordinary plainness in his Habit; and though he were not at all
proud, but modest and sober in all his Actions. He was well shaped when he was
Young; but too much Corpulency had altered his Proportion. You may see, through
the whole Series of this History, that he was Courageous, and Born for Warlike
Achievements. But the Qualities and Perfections of this great Prince were not
only Military. He was a great Lover of Learning and Reading, especially of
History and Politics. He was a perfect Master of three Languages, Dutch,
French, and Italian, and understood Latin well: He was a Man of few words, but
when he spoke, it was to the purpose. He was grave and serious with Strangers,
however without Affectation, but with his particular Acquaintance Pleasant and
Familiar. He went to the bottom of all things he Discoursed of; and hated
Impertinence. He loved familiar Dispute; And he took great delight to maintain
what he propounded, and he would uphold it strongly: but it was not so much to
convince those with whom he disputed, as to understand their Parts and
Character. He was as liberal as his Fortune would permit him to be; a great
Observer of his Word; a good Friend; and an easy Pard'ner of Injuries. His
Designs were all great, and deeply laid. He provided without any relaxation for
the Future: particularly applying himself to the most proper means to establish
his Family. Lastly, He was an Exemplar of Devotion, with the same equality of
Mind entertaining his Prosperities and Adversities, relying wholly upon
Providence.

He left four Children by his Marriage with the Queen of Poland, the eldest of
which is now Duke of Lorrain, by the Name of Leopold the First.

Never was Prince more generally bewailed then Charles V. and indeed all Europe
was sensible of her loss. And she had reason to mourn for the loss of an
Experienced Captain; one of the greatest Generals in the Confederate Armies: A
Captain, whose Prudence and Valor began to be dreadful to France. In a word, a
Prince that was not to be corrupted, and who acted less for his own Interests,
then for the Interests of the Confederate Princes. But she has reason more
particularly to mourn, that he died at a time, that he was just upon the point
of restoring his Family to it is Ancient Luster, and to deliver his Subjects
from the Yoke of Tyranny and Oppression; and for that by his Death, he left a
disconsolate Family. In short, it was observed, that those Princes who had most
reason to bewail his Death, were not so sorry for themselves as for the young
Princes, who at the same time that they lost their Illustrious Father, seemed
to loose all the Hopes that began to sooth their Expectations.

The Duke of Newburgh who was compelled to fly for Relief to Vienna, after the
French had despoiled him of his Country, declared to the Queen Dowager, that
the Desolations of his Electorate did not go so near his Heart as the Loss of
the Duke her Husband, and that the Princes his Children, looked upon him as
their Protector, who was no less sincerely mindful of their Interests then his
own. Several other Princes condol'd her loss in very near the same Language.
And the Elector of Brandenburgh wrote at the same time to the Emperor, desiring
his Majesty would vouchsafe him the Favor of sharing with him the Quality of
being a Father to the young Princes: adding withal, That as he had promised
Charles V. never to lay down Arms, till he were restored to his Territories, so
he would continue the same Promise in behalf of the Successors to such a Hero,
whose loss he should deplore as long as he lived. Some time after, the Emperor
conferred the Government of Tyroll upon the young Duke. And the Pope has
already granted to another of the Princes a Dispensation to be Coadjutor of the
Grand Priory of Castile, which is worth above Two hundred thousand Crowns a
Year.

The End of the Fifth and Last Book.
BOOKS Printed for Francis Saunders at the Blue-Anchor in the Lower-Walk of the
New-Exchange.
THe Life of Charles the Fifth late Duke of Lorrain, Dedicated to the King. The
Life of Alexander the Great, Dedicated to the Queen, by N. Tate. An Epistle to
the Right Honorable Charles Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, Lord Chamberlain of
His Majesty's Household, Occasioned by His Majesty's Victory in Ireland. ZAYDE,
A Romance, in Two Parts, Dedicated to the Ladies. Sultana of Barbary, a Novel,
in Two Parts. Philantus and Bellamond, a Novel, in Two Parts. The Baronage of
England, in Two Parts, by Sir William Dugdale. Cowley's Works. Beaumont and
Fletcher's Plays. Shakespeare's Works. Killigrew's Plays Davila's Civil Wars
of France. History of the Council of Trent. Philip de Comine's History. Paulo
Paruta's History of Venice. Mrs. Phillips Poems. Waller, Denham, Sucklin, and
Donn's Poems. By Mr. Boil. Seraphick Love, Style of the Scriptures, Occasional
Reflections, Phisiological Essays, Excellency of Theology, Reason and Religion,
All Mr. Driden's Plays, in Two Volumes, and all sorts of other Plays. Also all
sorts of the Best of Divinity, History, Poetry, Romances, and all other English
Books.

