THE HISTORY OF Father La Chaise, Jesuit, and Confessor TO LEWIS XIV.

Present King of France.

Discovering, The Secret Intreagues by him carried on, as well in the Court of
England, as in all the Courts of Europe, to advance the Great Designs of the
King his Master.

Made English from the French Original.

LONDON, Printed by J. Wild, for H. Rhodes, at the Star the corner of
Bride-lane, Fleet Street, 1693.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Will not trouble my self, kind Reader, to make a Bustle for your Suffrage,
in favor of my Book: It will speak for it self; and if the Reasons which it
offers are not of sufficient Force, 'twould be in vain for me to allege mine.
Excuse me therefore, for producing any more then only this, That there is great
Reason the World should know, what a Saint the King of France has got to teach
him the Way to Heaven.

However, I cannot forbear to tell you, That you ought, in some measure, to
return me Thanks for the Present that I make you; not so much for the value of
it, as for the danger to which I expose my self for your sake. I attack not
only the most revengeful Man that ever the Sun shone upon, but a whole Society,
that never pardons any Injury, and from whose remorseless Hatred there is no
Asylum can secure me. For suppose that I had drawn upon me the displeasure of
my native Sovereign the King of France, and should retire to London under the
declared Protection of King William, which one would think were sufficient to
guard me from the Menaces of the most puissant Monarch in Europe, yet early or
late, this caba^ling Society would find a way to sacrifice me to the Resentment
of my offended Prince: Nor should I be the first who had fallen into their
Snares. Have they not whirlwinded several out of Amsterdam that at this very
Day lie Rotting in the Dungeons of Mount St. Michel? Others have been
assassinated in the very Court of Hanouer. And the same Father La Chaise, that
illustrious Impostor, against whom I write, did he not enforce the Geneveses to
deliver into his hands an unfortunate Person that had written something against
him, though he had not made out any thing that was very Essential, and was
extremely mistaken in some of his Conjectures. What would become of me then,
should he come to discover who I am, and who I may be. Nothing could save me
from his Fury. But as good Luck would have it, though I have had the Opportunity
to know him Intus and in cute, yet I believe he has no reason to be more
suspicious of me then another. He sees, and is seen by so many People of all
Sorts, and Conditions, of which the greatest Number curse his Infidelities, and
Treacheries, experienced by them selves, that his Suspicions would be l^st in
the Throng. Besides, it may be well imagined, that 'twas not from himself that
I learnt the following Particulars of his Life. He is not a Man to trust every
body with his Secrets. Yet in regard no man can be Vicious alone, and that
there must be the passive, as well as the active Part, in all manner of Luxury,
it is no less certain that Father La Chaise must all a-long have had his
Intimates, and Socios Voluptatum, among whom it was impossible for Father La
Chaise to choose so well, but that there might be now and then a Judas.

Never ask me then through what Channel these Curosities were conveyed to my
Knowledge. For it is a Question to which it becomes me not to give a positive
Answer, and that upon good grounds. All that I can say to it is this, That I
was none of those who had the fewest Intriegues with the Society for several
Years together; besides that I had sundry particular Friends who were perfectly
acquainted with this Metropolitan Jesuit, from the time that he was first
admitted into the Order, by whose means I had the Opportunity, not only to hear
several Stories confirmed by Tradition, but also in Private, and as it were by
Stealth, to read his Memoirs themselves.

Now in regard the following Relation comprehends as well the Incontinencies,
and Gallantries of his Youth, as the ungodly Practices, the Treacheries and
Villainies of his riper Years, and more crafty Age, As to the First, there is no
body can have any reason to deny, but that Tradition might be a very faithful
Assistant to me. For there is no cause to believe him more a Saint when he was
a young Man, then now he is the King of France's Confessor. The Fox has only
changed his Skin, but not his Conditions. And I should take him to be very
incredulous, that should give Credit to the Frailties of St. Augustin's Youth,
and yet scruple to believe the Follies of La Chaise's. As for the deep Exploits
of his riper Years, and the venomous Effects of his more mature Meditation,
there needs no more then the Complaints of Two Popes, the Bishop of Pamiers,
Cardinal Camus, and others, to convince ye of a great deal, in regard that all
his Actions, of which they complain, are no other then what is purely natual
and consonant to the Humor, the Genius, and Morals of that Society, of which
he is the Head, and Directour; and for many of the rest, the dire Proceedings
of his Penitent, the French Monarch, so much guided by his Counsels, are such
Evidences to the World, of his being the Man I mean, that no one can well
question the truth of my Relations.

It Is true, I cannot expect that this poor Book of mine, should be approved of
in all places; for how is it possible it should be so? for I can neither
disguise, nor betray my Sentiments. I utter things sincerely as I think; and
this is not the Mode at this time: Perhaps it may be read, and that is all that
I desire. However, should it never be looked upon, this would be my Consolation,
that I make no trade of writing; and if I have lashed out a little, 'twas
merely the Instigation of my Zeal for the Public, which I could not suffer to
be so long imposed upon, while the Impostor triumphed without some kind of
Punishment.

Reader, If you stand too nice upon the Punctilioes of a History, mine will not
please ye. I know, that to present a History dressed up in form, it is requisite
the Author should tie himself solely to his subject, and never lose sight of
it, by wandering, and throwing himself impertinently into Contemporary Affairs.
I confess ingeniously, you will not find that strictness in mine. In that
respect I have given my self a great Liberty. For in regard the Person, whose
Actions I trace, is a kind of an Ubiquitarian, here and there, and every where,
I was forced to follow him wherever his Projects lead me, and as he changed
his Scenes to vary mine: which caused a Division of the Continuum, that could
not be avoided.

The French Bookseller to the READER.
I Would willingly, Reader, that it lay in my power to let ye know who the
Author of this Book is; but in truth it does not. All that I can tell ye is
this, That it was sent to me from Paris by the Post, sealed up in a Cover:
which when I opened, I found among the Sheets a little Note, of which I here
give you a Copy, though I believe you will be^li^^e the Wiser for it.

Could I have found any Bookseller in Paris that would have ventured to print
my Book, I would not have put you to the trouble. I designed it for our own
France, and not for Foreign Countries, to which I knew not whether it would be
of any great use. Nevertheless, because it could not be done here, I freely
give it you, desiring no other Reward, but that you would convey to me hither,
One or Two hundred Copies.

I knew, Reader, the Subject would please you, and therefore printed the Book,
and gratified the Gentleman according to his Directions. Now then, seeing I was
so Generous for your sake, I make no question but you will re-imburse me, by
buying the rest.

THE HISTORY OF Father La CHAISE, Jesuit and Confessor TO LEWIS XIV.
Discovering The Secret Intrigues by him carried on, as well in the Court of
France, as in all the Courts of Europe, for the Advancement of the King his
Master's Great Designs.
IF Hero's, and all Great Personages in general, after they have finished an
Illustrious and Glorious Life, merit that Magnificent Mausoleum's should be
erected to perpetuate their Memories, and that the Pens of the Learned should
celebrate their Story, by deriving to Posterity the Remembrance and Admiration
of their Virtues; one would think, that in Opposition to this Argument, we
ought to bury in the Shades of eternal Oblivion the Memory of the Impious. And
doubtless, this was the Opinion of those who prohibited, under very severe
Penalties, the very naming the Name of that famous Villain, who in One Day
destroyed the most magnificent Temple in the World, which had been rearing so
many Years. And the same Thought might have hindered me from publishing this
Piece, had I not been induced by quite contrary Reasons which are of great
weight. I considered, That among all the Disorders so rife in the World, there
is none more offensive then Outward-Shew, which confounds Hypocrites with
sincere and honest People; and which is such, that without a long and very
diligent Observation, it is impossible, oft-times, to distinguish the one from
the other: so that a Man is forced to pay the same Honor and Respect to
Imposture, as to Real Truth. It Is a Mischief so general, and so inevitable,
that I do not believe there is any Person in the World who has not several
times been deluded by it. But after that, when he comes to be better informed,
there cannot be a greater Vexation to a Man, then to have been the Cully of a
Villain who sports, unpunished, with Heaven and all Mankind.

I therefore thought it would be no small piece of good Service done the
Public, to make an open Discovery of those that have been lately found out for
such. And this is the only Motive that induced me to set Pen to Paper.

All the Jesuits in general may be said to be of this number. Their wicked
Morals, and the horrid Crimes which have been the Productions of those Morals,
are convincing Proofs of what I assert. But among all the whole Gang, of
necessity it must be agreed, That Father La Chaise, at this day the King's
Confessor, is one that challenges to be ranked among the Topping Hypocrites, as
being a Tartuff in a sovereign degree, and one that has found the way to
impose, for so many Years together, upon one of the most quick-sighted and
penetrating Princes in the World: for to think that he willingly shuts his
Eyes, in Consideration of the Usefulness of his Counsels, and the Services done
him by the Society through his means, is never to be imagined. There are a
thousand substantial Reasons against it: and not to insist upon Reports, I
shall say no more, then that our Monarch is a Prince that loves Virtue, and
hates Vice wherever he meets it; that is to say, with reference to the
general Converse of Men, and gaining to himself an outward Applause; and
therefore it is not probable, that if he knew it, he would tolerate downright
Knavery in his Confessor.

I do not therefore believe I shall draw the King's Indignation upon me, by
unmasking this Hypocrite, as I am about to do in this History. To which purpose
I cannot begin better, then with giving the Reader an Exact Portraiture of the
Person who is to be the Subject of my Discourse. By which means I shall prepare
him for every thing which afterward he is to expect, so that he will be the
less surpised when he shall see so many things that so little correspond with
his Character.

Father La Chaise is Middle-siz'd, Slender enough, and who now goes somewhat
Stooping. His Nose Compact, but Large, and somewhat like a Hawk's Beak. His
Complexion Fresh and Ruddy, the Marks of a Healthy Constitution: His Mouth a
little too much apt to gape and show his Teeth, which are none of the
handsomest, though sound enough: His Eyes, which are the most agreeable part of
his Face, are Blew, and well enchas'd. They are usually called the Mirrors of
the Soul: but certainly they are not so in him; unless you will say, That she
never shows any more then one Side there, which is Flattery and Complacency. We
must confess, he does with his Eyes what he he pleases; but usually he will
have 'em to be Mild, Engaging, and full of Friendship. Nor is he less skilful
to compose his Mien and Garb, then his Looks. You would swear, did you but see
his modest Air, and his affable Behavior, that he were the best Natured, the
most Downright Person, and most easily wrought upon in the World. To Great
Personages he is Humble, creeps and cringes; and nothing drops from his Lips
but Protestations of Fidelity, Services, and a most entire and absolute
Devotion. And as for Ordinary Persons, he hears 'em patiently and courteously
to the end; and then always gives 'em good Words, and amuses 'em with Hopes.
This is perfectly to be observed in the Audiences that he gives upon Tuesdays
and Fridays. Upon those Days you shall always find above Two hundred People in
his Antichamber, of all Ranks and Conditions, Citizens, Learned Men, Lawyers;
and among them, a great number of your Diminutive Bands, whose Eyes are never
off from the Door, and who never hear it open, but they see two or three
Benefices coming out. Nevertheless, he hears all these People, without showing
the least Disturbance, and has the knack to please 'em all with sweet
Sugar-Plumb Words. His Habit very well agrees with his Outward Show of
Humility; the Stuff is little different from what the rest of the Society makes
use of; and he wears his Gown Two Years, like the Meanest among the Jesuits.

It Is true, these petty Mortifications are amply allayed and softened by the
Pleasure which he has to see Princes, Dukes, Archbishops, and in a word, all
sorts of Persons of the Highest Rank and Quality, come to kiss the Hemm of his
Garment, and beg his Protection.

Thus much in general for his Outside. But his Inside is quite another thing:
Nothing in the World more close and hidden; so that unless you are extremely
Familiar with him, it is a hard matter to Know him. The foul Concealments of his
Breast are impenetrable: He is Knave and Wicked beyond Imagination; does Good
to Few, Mischief to Thousands; unless it be to the Ecclesiastics, to whom he
is obliged to distribute Benifices, because that otherwise they would lie
vacant. But the Man is unborn for whom he did a Kindness of his own
Inclination; or if ever he does one, be confident, it is out of some Prospect of
Interest. There are two sorts of Persons with whom he is never to be
reconciled; Honest Men, and those that are in Favor. The First, because he in
nothing resembles 'em; the Second, by reason he is jealous of 'em, and for that
he would fain possess the Prince's Ear alone by himself. He loves his Pleasures
and his Ease more then any Courtier; and his Inclination leads him to Luxury
and Expense. But in regard he knows this would not be the shortest way to
maintain himself in the Credit to which he has attained, he keeps himself
within Bounds as much as he can. However, he cannot forbear allowing himself a
Lacquey, and a very neat Coach, with Four the best Horses in Paris. As for his
Table, he finds it always spread in the King's Palace; and when he returns to
the House of St. Lewis, he fares never a whit the worse for that. But it is not
there that he makes his most delicate Repasts; for they that would know how
this blessed Father governs himself, must go to the fine House which he has
built at the end of the Faubourg St. Anthony, which affords a most delightful
Prospect to those that walk upon the Bulwark. That Is the Place where all the
sumptuous Collations and Merry-Meetings are appointed; but they must be his
intimate Friends that are invited thither. Many Courtly Adventures happen
there, which I shall not recite in this place, because there are several
Particulars of which I am yet ignorant, and which I shall take care to inform
my self of more at large; and if I find that this little Manual meets with a
favorable Reception, I shall impart my further Knowledge another time.

Whatever Liberty he allows himself in that Place, when he returns from thence,
he resumes his Air and Mien of Devotion without the least Trouble in the World.
For my part, I cannot apprehend how he is able to strain his Dissimulation so
high; but you may give a Guess by this little Draught. One day that he was
extremely tired with an Audience of above Five Hours, and that he was already
retired to repose himself in his Cabinet, Friar Benedict came to tell him, That
the Bishop of Angiers, who was returned from his Province, desired to kiss his
Hand. What would that Jansenist have with me? (replied La Chaise, in a great
Passion,) I am so plagued with his Visits: Why does he not keep at home? I Will
assure him, I Will never run after him -- But it is my misfortune to be thus
perpetually besieged by such kind of Persons. So saying, away he flung out of
his Cabinet; and returning to the Bishop, so soon as he perceived him, with
open Arms, and with a Countenance wherein Joy and Satisfaction were serenely
painted, Oh, Sir! (said he) what an Obligation have you laid upon me, to
prevent me with so much Goodness! What a Contentment to my Soul is this Visit
of yours! Truly, seeing I have not had the Honor to see you a long time, I
have been laboring under most cruel disquiet to know what place I possess in
your Heart -- I beseech ye, Sir, let me know, Have I the least share of your
Affection? -- Do me the Favor to list me in the number of your most Humble
Servants.

In this Tone he continued his Familarity all the time of the Visit, with such
an Outward Show of Sincerity, that I knew not whether I was asleep or awake:
for you must know, that this Prelate was Mr. Arnauld, his mortal Enemy's own
Brother.

Having given this Portraiture of this Religious Saint. I should think it
Impertinent to add any thing farther; and I am also apt to believe, that a Man
cannot well know more. I proceed therefore to the Relation.

Were it my Intention rather to Please my Reader, then to speak Truth, I should
follow the Example of a great number of Authors, who would think it a
Transgression against the Laws of History, should they write the Life of any
Person, without ascribing to him some extraordinary Birth, or signalized by
some surprising Events, which in truth very much prepossess and awaken the
Attention; but in regard it is not my Design to frame a Romance, I shall only
relate things nakedly as they are.

La Chaise was born at Lion, and descended from a Family that made some Figure
among the Burgesses. His Father also had served some time in the Wars; had seen
the World, and understood the Manners of it; so that he wanted only an Estate
to write Gentleman, as he had a great desire to do. He had several Children,
and among the rest, the Person here mentioned; who putting forth early Blossoms
of a pregnant Wit, and giving great Hopes, was sent to School; where he made
great Progresses in a short time, though he were very debauched, which is a way
of living that does not well agree with studious Application. He performed his
Philosophical Exercises under Father de Vaux, who was afterward advanced to
the Highest Employments in the Order; and to him it was that he owes all his
Fortune, in regard that Father protected and supported him with his Credit upon
all Occasions; and while he lived, their Interests were inseparable.

Some good honest simple Soul may imagine, perhaps, that the Foundation of so
firm a Friendship was nothing else but Neighbourly Love and Charity. It Is true,
that Neighbourly Love had a great share in it; but it was not that Love of our
Neighbor which is recommended to us in Scripture.

Mascon to bring her to his House, during the Vacation in Vintage-time, set
forth from Lion along with his Love; but Night overtaking 'em, they were
constrained to lie in a Village, where there was but one poor Inn. La Chaise
called for a Chamber, and ordered Supper and a Bed to be got ready for his Wife
and himself, and then went out to take a walk. He was not gone far, before a
certain Knight came to the same inn and desired a Lodging also. The Innkeeper
told him, he had but one Chamber, which a Gentleman and his Wife had already
bespoke; but that he could make him another Bed in the same Chamber, if he
pleased to lie there. The Knight, who had some particular Reasons to be shie of
Company, was a little scrupulous at first; but in regard he had a great way to
the next Village, he resolved to stay. Thereupon he alighted, and after he had
set up his Horse in the Stable, went up stairs to the pretended Wife of the
pretended Husband, to whom he made very great Complements, and a thousand
Excuses upon the Inconveniences to which he was forced to put so charming a
Lady, and for whom he felt the sudden Motions of so high a Respect. The Lady,
who was not accustomed to such Sublimities and Raptures of Language, was almost
Entranced to hear 'em; and replied to his Civilities in so obliging a manner,
that the Knight began to be smitten: besides, he found her very acceptable to
his Palate, a curious White Neck, and well turned lovely Arms, and of which she
did not seem to be niggardly. All this so inflamed the Knight's Concupiscence,
that from Complements he proceeded to Demonstrations of Affection, and from
tender Expressions to Dalliance, and so to the Act it self. The mischief was,
that in the heat of their Amors, Forecast was wanting, and they forgot to
bar the Door; so that in the fury of the Venereal Combat, they never heard the
pretended Husband come up Stairs, who for that reason surpised 'em in illegal
Conjunction. Presently La Chaise's Choler appeared all in his Face; out went
the Instrument of his Wrath, with which he gave the naked Knight several
cooling Slaps of equal Virtue to a Basin of Water; who, instead of defending
himself, would fain have been beholding to his Heels. But La Chaise, resolving
to give him sour Sauce to his sweet Meat, took him by the Collar; and as the
other struggled to get rid of a troublesome Adversary, off fell his Perriwig,
and discovered a Shaven Crown Alamode de Virorum Sanctorum. La Chaise was not a
little surpised to find that the Person he had so well curry'd was a Priest;
but he was almost astonished when he knew him to be Father de Vaux, his
Preceptor in Philosophy. How! (said he,) Father, is it you! or do I see a
Vision? With that he surveyed him from Head to Foot: And then, It Is He; the
very individual He, in his own proper Person, (added Signor Cornudo.) In good
faith, most Reverend Father, I beg your Pardon for this rude Usage of your
Sacred Person; but how was it possible for any Man to have known ye in this
Disguise? I would have allowed fifteen Days to all the Fathers of your Convent
to have found it out. The Jesuit was ready to hang himself for Shame and
Vexation; but seeing there was no remedy, he made a Virtue of Necessity. It Is
very true, La Chaise, it is I; and since you have discovered me, it is in vain to
make a Mystery of the Business. You are a Person of Worth, and I hope you will
use me like a Gentleman. La Chaise assured him, That he had all the reason in
the world to believe so, and that he might sleep in quiet without ever being
afraid of suffering by his Indiscretion. Afterward, he told him how he had
brought the Girl from Lion; and that he was carrying her to one of his Friends,
to pass away a little time with her, during the Vintage: That he might well
thereby perceive that he was no jealous Person; and that if his Anger had
transported him a little too far, when he found 'em together, 'twas rather to
assert his Honor, then otherwise, and because he looked upon him as an unknown
Person that came to rob him of his Mistress upon the King's Highway. But as
for you, Sir, (continued he,) I am overjoyed that she pleases ye; and if you
think her a Handmaid fit for your farther Delight, you may take her along with
you where you judge convenient. Civilities of this nature were not to be
refused; so that the good Father accepted his Kindness, and testified his
Acknowledgment to La Chaise, by Embraces and Offers of his Service, which you
would have thought would never have been at an end. From that time forward they
tied themselves together in a most strict Bond of Friendship. And the better to
fasten the Knot, they agreed to stay Eight Days together in the same place, and
that the Woman should be in Common between 'em.

After this, La Chaise, being very curious to know the cause of his
Disguisement, besought him that he would be pleased to unfold the Truth. Which
the good Father granted him with a wonderful deal of frankness; well
understanding that the best way to secure the Discretion of a Person that is
privy to our Secrets in spite of our Teeths, is to put an entire Confidence in
him He declared then, that at the time that he lay at Chaalons, he had
insinuated himself into the Favor of a Rich Merchants Daughter, by whom he had
had Two Children; that she was married about two or three years since, and
lived in the Country near Bellegarde, where he had given her several Visits
already, in Secular Habit, and going for her Kinsman: that her Husband, who was
a very good Man, had kindly entertained him; and that the same Occasion had
moved him to take another Journey in the Disguise wherein he saw him; having
made his Rector believe, that he was gone to see a Gentleman of Dijon, his
intimate Friend, and from whom he had counterfeited two or three Letters,
importing earnest Business. In short, they concealed nothing one from the
other; and their mutual Reliance one upon another produced such a world of
Stories as would suffice to make a Volume. But in regard I have too many things
of serious Consequence to relate, I shall as slightly as I can, pass over these
Fooleries, and only touch upon 'em, when they are of absolute necessity to
display the Hypocrisy of my Tartuff, and his Brethren in Iniquity.

During their stay at the Inn, La Chaise, who though lewd and debauched enough,
however was not as yet accustomed to Sin without some Scruple of Conscience,
could not forbear asking the Father sometimes, how he could reconcile his loose
way of Living, with his Obligations that were so opposite. For (said he) you
are obliged to Coelibacy by such solemn Vows, the Breaches of which are
attended by such Terrible Penalties, that I wonder how you can so easily
dispense with 'em. They are not so Opposite as you think for, or as many People
imagine (replied the Father) there is a certain Moral which you understand not
as yet, and which we never publicly teach in the Schools, because indeed it is
not expedient that all the World should know it: we reserve it for strong
Stomachs, and such as are able to relish it; but be you careful, and I may in
time impart it to your Knowledge, and then you will hear Mysteries that will
ravish you with Admiration. I am apt to believe ( replied La Chaise) that you
will not conceal from me any part of your profound Learning; 'twas for that
reason that I submitted my self to your Discipline; and you are obliged to it
afresh, by the Friendship which we have renewed by mutual Oaths on both sides;
and therefore, Dear Father, vouchsafe to satisfy my Curiosity; and since we
are here at Liberty together, why should you deferr your Instructions till
another time? I have Discretion and Wit enough now both to hear and learn.
That Is the thing of which I am not well convinced, (answered the Father) for I
assure ye, it requires a great deal of Wit and Discretion to understand our
Morals. Suppose to your self at first, that it ranverses all other Morality,
and that it leads ye through new and uncouth Ways, but yet more pleasant, and
less encumbered; when you have once unshackl'd your Heels from the Fetters of
old and painful Morality, and are become an easy Captive to our new and
inviting Morals, you will find those sweet Acquiescencies, that Repose of Mind
that were unknown before. For Example: Would not you be glad to have it made
out to ye, past all Contradiction, that it is lawful for ye to recreate your
self with Mrs. Magdalen (for that was the Female Sinners Name) without
committing a Sin, or any Snubbs of Conscience. Without question, ( replyld La
Chaise) you could not do me a greater Kindness. Well then (quoth the Devout
Father) set your Heart at rest -- take it from me, it is not a Sin that is worth
the asking Pardon for. And this is according to the Decision of our greatest
Doctors, whom we call, and that justly too, The Guides to Salvation, and The
Lights of the Church. Hear what the great Escobar, our Master says. When a Man
is so excessively provoked by the Concupiscence of the Flesh, that having an
Opportunity at hand to Commit Adultery, he distrusts his Weakness, and fears
his Inability to defend himself from falling into the Transgression; if such a
Man sneaks into a House of Debauchery, and there extinguishes the Fire of his
burning Lust in the Bosom of a Punk, does he commit a Sin? No, Because he was
afraid of committing Adultery, and he had no other way to shun it. And in
another Place, A Man that finds himself quite overcome, and just ready to yield
to a Temptation that sollicites him to abuse the good Nature of a young Virgin
that loves him, and would venture a Crack in her Honor for his sake, commits
no Sin, if to avoid this Mischief he goes to a common Strumpet; to the end that
having allayed the Violence of his Passion, he may be the more Master of
himself and the more enabled to resist the Charms of such a strong Temptation.
This is express enough: but here is yet a clearer Decision of the same Doctor.
Of Two Evils, the least is to be chosen; if it be impossible, but that you must
commit either Adultery or Whoredom, avoid the Adultery; You have no other
Course to take.

The Learned Suarez was of the same Opinion. It Is never to be disputed, (says
he) but that when a Man has not Strength enough to tame his Passions, he may
have to do with debauched Women, once or more times, rather then do worse. And
in the same place, observe this well, I say farther, That if a Man be of so hot
a Constitution, that he cannot live without a Woman, and that he cannot marry
without some invincible Obstacle, he shall not commit a Sin in keeping Company
with an unmarried Woman, till that Obstacle be removed. This is positive, and
decisive and makes as much for me, as it does for you. Then again, Diana, the
most subtle of all our Casuists, discourses to a wonder upon this Subject, not
leaving the slightest Question un-resolv'd. A Man, (says he) who is constrained
by the Strength of his Temptations, and the Temper of his Constitution, commits
no Sin when he goes for his Satisfaction to the public Stews, provided he pay
the Strumpets; because it is, at that time, their Trade, and the Calling which
they live by, and they have no more Honor to lose, nor any Reputation to be
sparing of: Not but that if the same Man, fearing to draw a Scandal upon
himself, had rather keep a Whore in private, and lie with her as his Wife,
'twould be his better way. But (says he farther) it may be asked, Whether a Man
may be constrained to it after a manner not to be dispensed with. To this I
answer, That the Lust of the Flesh acts upon some Men, as Hunger upon the
Stomach; if then it be agreed, That a Man who is extremely pressed by Hunger,
and not able to buy, nor beg Bread, commits no Sin, if he steal no more then
will suffice to support Nature, Why should a Man be condemned, who being
enforced by the violent Impulses of Nature, lies with a Harlot to whom he gives
Money? There can be nothing desired more convincing; this leaves not the
minutest Difficulty undetermined. In the mean time, there are a Thousand
Paragraphs in our Authors, as clear, and as positive as these, with which my
Memory does not furnish me at present; but which I will let you see when you
please. I must confess, ( replied La Chaise) that this is most wonderful
Doctrine to quiet the wambling Conscience of a Sinner, and which will free me
from a great many Scruples that often interrupted my Pleasures. I know not how
to return you Thanks (dear Father) answerable to the Obligation. I am not sorry
(answered the Father) for having given you these Instructions; though I must
tell ye, you are not a little obliged to me for it, in regard these Secrets are
not revealed Indifferently to all; nay even in our Order, unless it be the the
Professors of Four Vows, very few others know these Things. How! ( replied La
Chaise) Do not all the Father Jesuits know these Things? No, -- not by a great
many, and though I should say (replied the Father) hardly not a sixth part, I
should not lie. In our House, for Example, there is only the Father Rector, the
Professors in Theology, the Father-Master, my Colleague, and my self, that are
of the Secret Doctrine. How! (answered La Chaise,) What! not Father Le Champs,
that Man of Wit and Parts, who pretends there is never a Philosopher in the
World but himself? No -- (replied the Father,) nor never shall be. He has a
Headpiece but ill-furnish'd, and abounds too much in his own Sense: our
Secrets are not safe in the Hands of such Men; we take care how we trust 'em.
But (said La Chaise, interrupting him) there is Father De Vernueil, he is no
Sieve; he is such a deserving Man, so Wise, so Learned, and besides he stands so
highly upon Punctilio's of Honor, and the Interests of the Order, that he
would be crucified, or bite his Tongue in two and spit it out of his Mouth,
before he would blabb. It Is very true; but notwithstanding all these
extraordinary Qualities, he is excluded for ever out of the Society called the
Directrix. He has yoked himself under the old Threadbare Principles. with
which he is inexcusably intoxicated. Though a New Suarez should drop from the
Sky to dispute with and confute him, the headstrong Fool would never recant.
We have no need of such wilful Fantasticks: we must have docible, pliable,
supple Wits, withy-Conscienc'd People* that will twine and bend to any
Doctrine; not stubborn; flinty-breasted Self-conceits, that must be canonado'd
before they will yield and surrender to our Reasons and Instructions. I
apprehend by this (said La Chaise) that so many Learned Men a^ you have from
time expelled your Society under some pretense or other of Irregularity, were
not of the Directing-Society For otherwise you would not have presumed to put
such an Affront upon 'em besides that, you would have been afrai^ to have
exposed your selves to their Resentment. You may be sure (replied the Father)
they never were: for they wh^^ are once admitted, are no longer subjec^ to such
usage, nor to any manner o^ Correction; unless of their own accords, and out of
pure Affection to the Society, they will submit themselves. An^ them we look
upon as Sacred Victims that sacrifice themselves for the Honor and Glory of
the Order. We have ha^ some, not very long since, that were ver^ zealous in
that respect. Father Alvar, among others, who was so highly in Favor with the
King of Spain, having had the misfortune to be surpised by the Duke de Sidonia
a-bed with his Wife, was run through the Body in several places; and the Duke,
not content with that, was so malicious as to revenge himself upon all the
Jesuits in general. To which purpose he sent the wounded Body to the House of
the Profession at Noonday: which brought such a Scandal upon 'em, both at the
Court, and in the City, that our Fathers durst not peep out of their Boroughs.
However, Father Alvar did not die; he was carefully looked to, cured, and lived
a long time after. When he was fully recovered, there was a Consultation, What
was to be done upon such an Important Occasion as this. The greater part were
not for letting the World know he was alive; by that means to free themselves
from being blamed for not punishing him according to his Deserts. But He
generously offered himself of his own accord; and told 'em, That since his bad
Fortune had caused so great a Dishonor to the Illustrious Order of which he
had the Advantage to be a Member, and for the Glory of which he would sacrifice
a thousand Lives, he would beg no Favor to be showed his Crime; and besought
the Fathers to Expel him their Body in the most authentic and ignominious
manner that might be; to the end he might remain the Scapegoat of all the
Disgrace and Infamy, and that the Society might be cleans'd with Hysop from it.
Which was done with a wonderful deal of sorrow for being forced by a fatal
Necessity to deal so severely by so good a Man. But however, wherever he
retired, there was nothing omitted for his Consolation. They allowed him
forthwith an Annual Pension of Two thousand Crowns; and after that, they
procured him a Consulship at Barcelona, which was worth above Two thousand
Livres more. By this you may perceive (added the Father) that that there is
great Respect shown, and a more then usual Care taken for those that are once
privy to the Secret.

But my dear Father (replied La Chaise) if I forget not, you told me, That to
facilitate leave to go and see your old Mistress, you counterfeited Letters to
the Father-Rector: What necessity for that? since he being one of the
Cabinet-Secret* would undoubtedly have given his Consent without such a piece
of Fourbery. I'l^ tell ye the reason (answered the Father) We rarely make our
Superiors privy to our Adventures or Intrigues, for Two Causes. The First, For
that naturally every Man is willing to carry his own Business secretly; and
because infallibly they would never give us Permission, not for any Scruple of
Conscience, as St. Paul says very well; for their Consciences are no way
engaged in the matter. In that respect, says the Apostle, Unus quisque in suo
sensu abundet: Let every man abound in his own sense. But for the sake of my
Brother's Conscience; Fit autem propter conscientiam fratris mei, in
consideration of the People, to whom we are to give no scandalous Examples. For
it is said, Mat. 18. Vae illi per quem scandalum venit. Now in regard that an
amorous Intrigue with a Maid or a Woman is very subject to Discovery, unless
you proceed with all the Precautions imaginable; which many times miscarry too,
as you see by what has happened so lately to my self; therefore it is, that our
Superiors have resolved to suffer none at all, to prevent the great Disorders
which otherwise would fall out by their connivance. However, this does not
hinder but that every particular Member may take his measures to divert himself
the best he can, without any fear of Offending God, provided he carry his
Business closely and secretly. For then it is no Scandal to any Body but those
that think it so themselves. Scio and confido in Domino, (says St. Paul,) quod
nihil commune est per ipsum, nisi ei qui existimat quod commune est. You
interpret the Text so distinctly, (replied La Chaise,) that he must be a very
dull Soul indeed, that does not understand your meaning. But with Submission, I
must needs tell ye, That the Passages alleged out of St. Paul, by no means
prove it lawful for a Priest to hold a carnal Familiarity with a Woman; for
that the Apostle makes not the Distinction upon any Question about Continence,
but upon that about Meats sacrificed to Idols. I find (replied the Father) that
you have not much conversed with St. Paul, otherwise you would have observed
the same Indifferency in him in one respect as in the other; and therefore I
did him no wrong to apply his Decision as to Abstinence to my Controversy
about Continency. St. Pau^ writes a whole Chapter to prove tha^ Priests might
lawfully Marry and appropriating the same Permission to himself Nunquid non
habemus potestatem (says he) mulierem sororem circumducendi sicut and caeteri
Apostoli, etc. He also in another place taxes of Anti-Christianism a certain
Sect that would not suffer their Priests to Marry. And when he speaks of the
Qualities requisite in a Bishop, he says in express terms, That he would have
him to be the Husband of One Wife; and the Greeks, who without Question have
preserved the Ceremonies of the Church in their greatest Purity, suffer their
Priests to Marry to this day.

These would be very proper Arguments, (answered La Chaise,) were the Dispute
about Lawful Marriage. You are much in the right o'nt, (replied the Jesuit)
but since it pleased our Lords assembled in Council to forbid us Matrimony, it
behooves us to provide for our selves some other way: Necessity has no Law, you
know it well enough; and it is so ancient a Truth, that we find it confirmed by
several Examples of the Old Testament. Thamar, the fair Daughter of Judah,
seeing that her Father-in-Law did not provide her a Second Husband, according
to his Promise, and not being able to live without a Man, did she not sit
waiting for him upon the Highway, in the Dress of a Harlot, on purpose to
allure her Father to get her with Child? and who knows but in that Disguize she
might prostitute her self to several others? However, when he rightly
understood the matter, he was so far from condemning her, that he ingenuously
confessed himself in an Error, and cried out to his Daughter, Me Justiores.
Ruth, the Daughter of Naomi, was she not encouraged and set on by her own
Mother to go to bed to Boaz, after she found that all the dumb Shows and
Artifices that she had made use of to put the good Man in mind of his Duty, had
proved fruitless? And to deal freely with ye, In my Opinion, she had a great
deal of Reason for what she did; for there is nothning so effectual to make a
Man yield to Temptation, as a Pretty Woman a-bed with him. Would you have a
more convincing Example then this, read in Genesis how the Daughters of Lot
behaved themselves. After they and their Father had made their Escapes from the
Fire of Sodom, they found themselves as good as Widows in the flower of their
Age, when they had most need of Husbands, and out of hopes of ever having any,
because the Old Man would not let 'em marry to any but those of his own
Religion; and whither to go for one of those, they knew not. In the mean time,
Desire of Issue pressed 'em, and would not let 'em be at rest; thereupon,
without any Hesitation or Scruple of Conscience, they so ordered it, as to make
their own Father quench their Fires. Nor does the Scripture blame 'em for it in
the least. What do you say to all this? (added he) -- If you have any Objections
to make, why don't ye make 'em? What should I say? (answered La Chaise) You
have stopped my Mouth; and I find your Reasons so apposite and convincing, that I
submit with the greatest Pleasure in the world; ravished with Joy that I have
found so short and so commodious a Way to Salvation: for I make no question,
but that you are able to remove all my other lesser Scruples, who have thus
dexterously rid me of my greater Doubts. Ay, Ay, we'll remove 'em at any time, I
warrant thee, (replied the Father, grasping him hard by the Hand) Alas, it
would be great pity to leave a poor Conscience to be preyed upon by the Stings
and Worms that infest it. Do but you submit your self to Instruction, and never
trouble your self any farther. You have no more to do but to come to me
regularly every day in private, and I will discover to ye the bottom and
Marrow of true Theology and Morality, of which others only know the outward
Rind and Shell. La Chaise gave him a thousand* Thanks, and promised him an
entire Devotion of his Fortune and Person to the Society, and to him in
particular.

Thus you see how furiously and desperately Men give themselves up to whatever
flatters their Passion and Irregularity. La Chaise was of this number; his
Inclination carried him to Vice and Debauchery, and made him slight all the
Warnings and Admonitions of his Conscience. No wonder then, that he so greedily
embraced a Doctrine that annihilates all manner of Sin by authorizing it, and
sooths up the Wicked with an Insensibility and a Lethargy so dear to 'em.

This was the Foundation and Original of that constant Amity which continued
between these two Persons, as you shall hear by the Sequel. But before they
parted, they bethought themselves which way to continue the Commerce between
Father de Vaux and the Damsel. For in regard she was Common and Public, he
could not go to her Lodging without great prejudice to his Reputation, upon any
Pretense whatsoever. Thereupon it was concluded, That she should put herself
into Man's Apparel, and go two or three times a Week to the Father's Chamber,
under the Name of Sieur Le Brun, of the pretended Reformed Religion, who having
a mind to quit his Profession, desired first to be satisfied in some Scruples:
and they gave her a Part which she acted extremely well for some time. But
there happened an Adventure which had like to have spoiled all. The
Father-Master, who was an Italian, and one of those that are more addicted to
the most infamous of Pleasures, observing the great Zeal of this Young Man in
pursuance of his Conversion, and his Assiduity to be instructed in order to it,
mistrusted that there was some Mystery at the bottom which all the World did
not understand; and being confirmed every day more then other of his
Suspicions, resolved to watch 'em so narrowly, that they should not escape his
better Satisfaction. To which purpose he left nothing omitted, and had often
tried to find out some Hole to peep into his Chamber. But Father De Vaux had so
diligently stopped up all the Chinks, that all his Attempts to discover any
thing that way, proved in vain. However, that affected Precaution confirmed him
more and more that he lay under no Mistake; besides that, he saw the fair
Novitiate come every day, which wonderfully augmented his Desires. At length he
found a way to see with his own Eyes what he had such a mind to know; and that
too, much better then he could have done through the Chinks of the Door. One
day, that happened to be a considerable Holy Day, he feigned himself sick; which
was a lawful Excuse for his not going to the Quire; and at the same time that
the rest were at their Devotions, up he got, with a Wimble in his Hand, and
went to Father De Vaux's Chamber Door, where he made a sloping Hole, from
whence he could see directly to his Bed: after which he stopped it up with a Peg
of the same Color, and so exactly, that it was as much as he could do to pick
it out again, when he had occasion, with the Point of a Penknife. This done,
he returned to his Bed, very well satisfied with his Day's Work. All that Day
he lay perdue. At length the handsome Lad, who had so much disturbed his Rest,
entered the Father's Chamber, and away went he to his Post; where, in a little
time, he observed how the good Father Catechi^'d his Pupil. He let 'em alone
till the Father was just ready to enter the Port; but then he bounc'd with so
much Impatience, that Father De Vaux, who had hardly time to put on his
Clothes, was in a peck of Troubles. Well, in short, he opened the Door, and the
Master of the Novices entering, and shutting it after him, In truth, Father
(said he) you take a most pleasant Course to Convert Heretics: your Zeal is
extremely to be commended, and ought to be made known; and therefore I shall
not fail to inform the whole Fellowship, to the end they may consider of a Way
to Reward ye according to your Merit. What do you mean? (replied Father De
Vaux,) Pray explain your self more clearly; for I profess, I understand ye not.
I mean (answered the Father-Master) That if you did not desire to be seen, you
should have taken better Measures. You had exactly well stopped up all the
Chinks and Crannies in the Door, but by misfortune you did not heed the
biggest, showing him that which he had made the day before. Oh! -- (cried
Father De Vaux,) you have betrayed me -- but for all that, you will not be
believed. -- Good God! (quo' the Father-Master,) Not be believed* How simply
you talk; -- But let us take the wisest Course -- Give me a share of the Cake,
and there shall not a word be said more -- You are a rational Man, and know the
common Practice upon such Occasions as these -- I have as much Zeal as you, and
should be glad to give some Instructions also to this well-meaning Youth.
Father De Vaux accepted the Proposal, and the Bargain was concuded upon the
spot. Thereupon the Father addressed himself to the young Spark; but in the
midst of his Caresses found him to be a Girl; which did not a little vex him,
in regard that Males were more pleasing to his Palate then Females; but for
want of better Accommodation, he made use of what he had.

Much about the same time La Chaise had finished his studies in Philosophy; and
one day as he was walking with the Father De Vaux, Well, (said he to his
Scholar,) and what Course of Life or Profession do you intend to follow? for it
is now high-time to bethink your self -- You are very near Twenty Years of Age,
and those Years require that you should begin to look about ye.

In truth, Father, (answered La Chaise) the more I think of it, the less I know
my own Mind -- It Is a Business of great Consequence -- Pray Father, give me
your Advice. -- With all my heart, (replied the Father) but it behooves me to
know your Inclinations, and how your Parents stand affected. My Parents
(answered La Chaise) would have me betake my self to the Bar; more-especially
my Mother has a strange Fancy for that Employment. But for my part, when I
consider how little I have to trust to at home, I mind but little their
Directions. I am a Person of Courage, and very Ambitious withal; and I am for
making my Fortune, I care not how, nor which way. What should I do with a long
Gown, that have no Money to buy Offices? I should rather choose to be a Soldier;
for so I might hope to be a Marshal of France, Besides that, we find many who
were but miserable Corporals, that now ride in their lacker'd Coaches: What
think you, Father? If you would take my Advice, (answered the Father) you shall
neither be Lawyer nor Soldier. As for the first, you have very well observed,
That there is no Advancement to be got by it without Money; and I say the same
of Physic^, which you have not mentioned: and as for being a Soldier, that is
less your Business then either of the other two. We live not now in those Times
when the Bravery of a Soldier was sufficient to make him a Captain, and to
advance him to be a General. It Is in the Army, as every where else, if your
Money does not make the Distinction first of all, were you a Caesar in Valor,
you may carry a Snap-sack as long as you live, and the Generals never know
whether ever there were any such Man living in the World. How many Soldiers
have performed surprising Actions, that in Twenty four Hours were utterly
forgot. I confess, there are some who attain to Preferment, but they are very
rare; and if you can name Ten, there are Fifty thousand to be opposed against
every one that have perished through Hunger and Misery. Add to this, That it is
a Trade whereby nothing is to be got but by dry Blows. An Iron Arm, or a
Woodd'n Leg, are the chiefest Reward of your Services, and happy he too that
scapes so. Then again, Are you able to endure all the Fatigues inseparable from
War, as Heat, Cold, Hunger, Lying upon the Ground, and sometimes in the Water,
the Wind and Rain, and all the Injuries of the Weather; Marching at all Hours,
and all Seasons; want of Sleep, and a thousand more. For my part, I am of
Opinion, That Rest and Ease are two the chiefest Blessings we enjoy; and that
none but Madmen prefer Tumult, Blood and Slaughter before 'em.

You ravish me with your Discourse (replied La Chaise) the main thing is, how
to come at this Rest and Ease. For I must confess ingenuously, That had I Ten
thousand Livres a Year, I would never seek for 'em other-where then at home;
but in regard I have not wherewithal to live, I must be forced to take some
course or other. Very good (replied the Father) -- What think ye of being a
Jesuit? -- You cannot take a better Course -- Let it Blow, let it Thunder, you
shall be always sure of good Bread, good Clothes, a soft Bed, and to be
honored and respected by all Men -- What would ye have more? I do not believe
'twill suit with my Genius replied La Chaise) I love my Pleasures, and am
afraid of every thing that resembles Restraint and Subjection, or any other
Torment of the Mind. Is it possible (quo' the Father, interrupting him) that
you should remember so little of all that which I entrusted to your Breast --
Good now, who told you that Pleasures were banished from our Society? Did you
ever see the contrary with your own Eyes? Or do you find me to be a Man that is
irreconcilable to all Mankind? All the rest are like my self; that is to say,
all those that may be truly called Jesuits. We love good Cheer, the Fair Sex,
Honors and Preferments; and we have got the knack to enjoy all these things,
without giving any Scandal to any body, or wounding our own Consciences. Name
me, if you can, any other Body or Society of Men, any Condition of People in
the World, where you shall find the same Advantages.

What you say, Father, is very true, (replied La Chaise) and enough to make a
deep Impression in my Mind; but I cannot away with a Life so level and smooth,
without any change or variety, as yours: such as the first day is, such is the
second; they neither Ascend nor Descend, which in my Opinion is a very
melancholy and irksom manner of living. For my part, I should like a little
Motion, a little Intrigue; not to lie still in the World immovable like a
Stone, without having any share in the Bustle of it.

This was that which I expected from ye, (replied the Father,) but if this be
all that withholds ye, I find I shall fix your Resolutions before you go out
of this Garden. You must know then, that there is no Society of Men in the
World that plunge themselves into Business more then we do, or where Men of Wit
and Merit more easily advance themselves: such Men as these are sought after
with all the care imaginable; and you would wonder, at the end of five or six
Years, to see 'em Heads of a Party. Good Luck and Preferment, are so frequent
among us, and so Prodigious as passes Imagination. Peter Gerard, our
Assistant-General, is the Son of a Cobbler of Reims; and Father Creps, the
present Emperor's Confessor, is the Son of a Hat-maker: and as for our present
Provincial, as great a Lord as he is, I knew my self, that when he came first
to the College, he had not Shoes to his Feet; yet now he is grown a
Considerable Man, takes State upon him, and gives all the World occasion to
talk of him. Were you one of the Ordinary, one of those Petty Genius's that are
to be won by Reasons that carry a General Vogue, I could tell ye, That there is
no Society in the World more Holy then the Society of Jesus, which every day
sacrifices her dearest Children for the Conversion of Turks and Pagans, among
whom they are continually sent; and that it is a sign that God accepts the Blood
of his Martyrs, since he permits so many Millions of Souls, even whole
Kingdoms, to be Converted to the Faith by this Means. I could give you a List
of all the famous Doctors that our Order has produced; of several Kings and
Princes that have desired Admittance into it; and of the Favors that God has
bestowed upon us through the Intercession of our Saints and blessed Members.
But in regard you are my Friend, and a Man of Sense, I shall tickle your Fancy
another way, and bait my Hook to catch such Dolphins as you with your own
Worldly Interest, which ought upon all Occasions to be your principal Aim. For
as for your Salvation, you may look after that as well in a King's Palace, as
in an Anchoret's Cell. And to this purpose I shall give you a True and Natural
Idea of the Congregation in general.

Set before your Eyes a Little, but Potent Republic, from whence Poverty and
Misery are absolutely banished; where the least Happy and the least
Considerable have enough to stop their Mouths from complaining of Fortune, and
largely to supply all the Necessities of Humane Life, without being obliged to
work and tire themselves. A State wherein you never hear any Discourse of Wars,
Torments, Taxes or Imposts; where for want of Payment, you are never exposed to
the Taunts and Threats of a Creditor, or to the Affronts of Bailiffs; a Country
where you may live in Peace and Gladness, without fearing lest a Knave of a
Debtor should Break in your Debt; or that an Enemy should set fire to your
Barns, without being disturbed in Mind, because the last Harvest was not so
good as the former. But imagine, That in these Fortunate Islands you have your
Corn ready Thrash'd in your Barns, your Wine ready Tunn'd up in your Cellars,
and your Table regularly spread without taking any Care, and carking where you
shall Dine. Nor is this all; the Government of this State is purely
Democratical; every particular Person has a share in it, more or less; and that
which is the chiefest thing of all, there is no Injustice done to any Body. The
most considerable Employments are distributed and proportioned according to
Merit, without any Respect to precedence of Birth; so that Wit and Ability are
sufficient to entitle a Man to the Highest Dignities; to which, when a Man has
once attained, he enjoys 'em for Life; he knows no such Thing as Ranversement
of Fortune. Now tell me seriously, does not this faithful Description move ye?
and would not you be glad to be admitted into such a Government? However what I
have told ye already, is but a Trifle to what I am going to tell ye; and yet as
true as the rest.

This Petty Republic by her wise Laws and prudent Constitutions, is arrived at
the Universal Monarchy, to which so many Kings and Emperors have in vain
aspired; and all this too, without drawing a Sword, or shedding so much as one
drop of Blood, or making use of any other means but only Persuasion. Bu^ in
regard it would signify little to have attained to so high a Degree of Glory
and not be able to support it; for that reason she has divided her self into
severa^ particular Communities, which she ha^ dispersed over all the Kingdoms
and Provinces of the World, to the end she may be every where at one and the
same time and always within reach to prevent the doing of any thing to her
Prejudice. (...) it not to be admired that she has so successfully accomplished
all this, without Armies and Soldiers, and that she has so easily upheld her
self? True it is, that this Wise and wonderful Government has not been always
exempted from Misfortunes: we have seen that certain People have revolted from
her, and with Ignominy have expelled some of her Communities. But these were
Tempests that have been soon allayed by the prudent Conduct of those that steer
the Helm of Affairs; so that they have returned Victorious into those Places
from whence they have been ejected with Disgrace. You laugh (continued the
Father, looking upon La Chaise;) however I tell ye no Fables; and if you do but
consider, you will find that I have told ye nothing but what is certain, and
that I have given ye a True Emblem of our Order. For in short, it must be
agreed, that it is at this Day the Primum Mobile of all the Potentates of
Europe; we form not only a State in a State, but a State in several States, and
a Regnant Republic, in the Universal Republic; and therein consists our great
Advantage: for if by Misfortune we lose on the one side, we are always certain
to gain on the other. And how indeed is it possible we should miscarry, since
we play sure. There is not any Secret in the Cabinets of Kings or Princes but
we can fish it out. We have People every where that inform us of every Thing;
and who suffer not any Resolutions to be taken contrary to our Interests. Which
being so, do you not see that we are the Persons that Reign and Govern, though
indirectly?

It Is something that cannot but choose to be very tickling to a Jesuit to be
employed in great Affairs, and to see himself caressed by a Prince who thinks
him a convenient Instrument to carry on his Designs. You have then a fair Field
to expatiate in, and if you do but never so little know how to manage Fortune,
there are no Grandeurs, to which you may not aspire.

But (said La Chaise) it is a Thing would be known, whether I may be so happy to
be admitted of the Number. Never doubt it (replied the Father) you have a
smooth, insinuating, flattering Wit, and a little Knavish withal; nor do you
want a quick and fiery Imagination, which however destroys not the Solidity of
your Judgment. These are the People that we want, and with such Talents as
these you can never fail of Success. Believe me then; be one of Us, and you
will find your self no loser by the Bargain: Nevertheless, I would not have you
take up this Resolution before you understand us rightly; and therefore come
and see me every day, and I will discover to ye the most Hidden Maxims of our
Secret Doctrine. After this, he carried him into the Library, and gave him
Escobar, Diana, Matchivel, etc. Here (said he) are Books worth Gold, read 'em,
and pick what you can out of 'em; to morrow you shall give me an Account of
what you have observed, and we will discourse together. After this, they took
their Leaves, and La Chaise went home.

The next day he returned to the Convent, at what time Father de Vaux, no
sooner saw him, but he asked him whether he had read any Thing. Yes, (said La
Chaise,) I began with Matchiavel, because he treats of Politics, which is a
Study that I relish very well; it is a very good Book, and I assure ye I read
on with a great deal of Pleasure. Oh -- (said Father de Vaux, interrupting
him,) he is a most wonderful Man, and one whose Decisions we admit in Matter
of Probability, with as much satisfaction as those of Escobar himself. Truly
(said La Chaise) to speak in general, they are very excellent, but there are
some that are also very bold: as for Example, he asserts, That one or more
Persons, though People of Worth and Probity, though they have done the State
important Services, may be sacrificed, when the Public Good is concerned; and
that upon such an occasion: Prince ought not to scruple the violating of his
Word and Promise, nor the most sacred Treaties. This is a little too Ran^. How!
(cried the Father,) what do you find there contrary to Reason and right Equity?
is not the Public Welfare infinitely to be preferred before the Consideration
of any Private Person? and would it be just, that for the Preservation of some
few Persons, who at most have done no more then their Duty, a Hunderd others no
less worthy should perish. Thus yo^ see the Absurdity of this Proposition; and
it is the same in respect of the Faith of Treaties, which, as you pretend,
should be inviolably preserved: for you must consider, my Dear, that a Prince
is to have no other Prospect in his Eye then the Welfare of his Kingdom; that
is to be the Center of all his Actions and (...) Politics, from which he is
not to stir (...) Inch, for the sake of his Conscience. An^ as it is only for
the Good of his Kingdom that he makes Treaties, they are to be looked upon no
otherwise then as the Means to attain that End. But so soon as through the
Revolution of things here below, and the Conjuncture of Times, those Means
become Obstacles, it is evident, That from that very time, those Treaties are
dissolved, because they no longer concur to the End for which they were made.

I know this very well (replied La Chaise) but after all, of necessity, this
Doctrine trails after it very evil Consequences, and gives a very fair and
large Liberty to Princes to break all manner of Allyances, the most solemnly
sworn, and to invade their Neighbors when they think themselves the most
secure. No question of it (replied the Father) and it is one of the most Noble
Prerogatives of Sovereigns. Certainly a Prince would be a very miserable
Creature, if he were so tied to his Word, that he could never unloose himself
from it. Every time you argue upon this Subject, never wag from the Principle,
which is the only Foundation upon which you are to build; viz. A Prince is to
have no other Prospect in his Eye, then the Good and Glory of his Kingdom. So
then he may do any thing to procure it, provided he be a Catholic; and if he
has a sufficient Strength to Conquer all the World, we give him free Liberty to
do it. It Is true, that in so doing, he will Dethrone several Kings and Princes
that for several Ages enjoyed the Inheritance of the Sovereignty; he will
strike Dread and Terror wherever h^ marches; he will shed Rivers of Blood*
and he will reduce infinite numbers o^ Widows and Orphans to Despair. Bu^ all
these Calamities are but slight and in considerable, in Comparison of the Goo^
that will accrue thereby. For first of all the Victor will ascertain Peace to
all the Earth; which without Contradiction in this Mortal Life, is the greatest
of a Blessings, in regard that no body will b^ in a Condition to raise
Combustion, o^ withstand the Conqueror; he will ma^^ wise and just Laws, which
will contribu^^on the one side to Universal Felici^ and Tranquillity; he will
procure, with out any Obstruction, the Advanceme^^ of the Catholic Faith and
the Church of God; he will take care the Arts, Sciences and Trade shall
flourish among his Subjects: And lastly, we shall see another Golden Age upon
Earth. If this be the only way to bring it back, (replied La Chaise,
interrupting him) we are not very like to see it again. That Is my fear too
(replied the Father) however, I speak this at present only by way of
Supposition, to make ye sensible, and to show ye, as with a Fescue, That when
the Mischief is less then the Good which is proposed, there never ought any
scruple to be made of committing the Lesser Mischief to attain the Greater
Good. This is our grand Maxim, and the Foundation of the Secret Doctrine, which
we received from the Divine Escobar, our Master, and of which we shall give him
a good Account. Did you never observe that Noble and Magnificent Sentence which
is set up in Capital Letters in most of our Churches and Colleges, AD MAJOREM
GLORIAM DEI? Few People understand the mysterious Sense of those words; they
are put up for an Eternal Admonition to the Faithful to have only that same
GLORY ^^^ore their Eyes; to procure it at any ^ate; and to that end, boldly to
sacrifice Parents, Friends, Duty, Honor, nay, and Prince himself too, if there
be a necessity. Every thing is to be thought Just and Reasonable at the Moment
that you propose it to your self. Let Heaven and Earth, and all the Creatures
therein perish, provided that God be Glorified thereby. This is the Spirit of
our Society, wherewith Garnet, Orcoln, and so many other Great Men of our Order
were inspired, when they out-dar'd both Fires and Wheels, to assassinate those
Heretic Princes that oppressed the Church of God.

Reverend Father (replied La Chaise methinks you run a little too far in the
Transports of your Zeal: but to spea^ sincerely, this Doctrine is so
extraordinary that a Man must have a Faith as extraordinary to jump with it. At
least, a Man would be satisfied first, whether the Doctors of the Church
approved it, and whether it be authorized by any Example of Holy Scripture. A
very pleasant Scruple indeed (replied the Father, in a great heat) -- Goo^ now,
who do you take me to be? a Man that broaches Heretical or Absurd Opinions? I Would
have ye to know, that when ever I assert a Proposition, I have alway^ a Proof
at hand. And as for this, I Will show it ye all along in the Writings of above
Fifty of the most Illustrious Authors that ever the Church produced; the
Learned Suarez, Diana the Subtle, Sancius, Descaltilius, Escobar the Divine,
Trufenk, Sanches, Bellarmin, Beccanus, Layman, Baronius, Bauni, Reginald,
Tolet, Amicius, Tilitius, Lessius, Molina, Cotton, Le Moine, together with a
great many others, which I would have ye to read twenty times over, from one
end to the other, and get 'em by heart. All these Doctors will tell ye, That
Mischief ceases to be Mischief from the very moment that any Good accrues by
it. Now if you want Examples out of Scripture, I Will undertake to cite ye Ten
pro, for Ten con. Judith, that Famous Heroess who saved her Country from
Assyrian Bondage, never scrupled to assassinate a Great General who loved her
tenderly, and from whom she had received a thousand Favors; and many People
believe, that the better to bring about her Design, she had not spared to
sacrifice her Honor to him: and for my part, I am of that Opinion; for what
Pretense could ^he have otherwise to lie in his Tent.

Jael, upon whom the Scripture makes so Noble a Panegyric, did she not put a
Great Man to Death that fled to her House for Sanctuary, without any regard to
the Laws of Hospitality, so highly in request among the People of Israel? And
Lot, the only good Man that God thought worthy to be exempted from the
Destruction of Sodom, did he not offer to prostitute his two Daughters to the
Mobile of the City, provided they would go home and let the two Young Men that
were in his House alone? And at another time, the Levite that lived in the
Mountain of Ephraim, did he not surrender up his own Wife to the Beastliness of
the Inhabitants of Guilha, who teased her to that degree, that she died the
same Night? There are a Hundred Stories in the Holy Scripture as corroborating
which it would be needless here to repeat, since what I have said already is
enough to clear your Doubts. I shall only desire ye to reflect upon the
Conduct of the Holy See, in the like case* Time out of mind it has tolerated
and protected Courtesans in Rome, for no other Reason then to prevent a
Disorder otherwise inevitable. But that which will surprise ye much more, is
this, That there was a Pope about Two hundred and fifty Years ago, who out of
his mere Pity upon Humane Frailty, (an Example rarely to be paralleled) made a
Present to the Venetians of Three hundred of those Ladies of Pleasure.

Since his Zeal was so profuse that way (replied La Chaise) he would have done
better to have bestowed 'em upon the Monks; perhaps he might have prevented a
great many foul Enormities. You think I Jest (replied the Father) but certain
it is, that it would be very well done of the Pope to allow 'em Wives; and if
the Huguenots desired no other Reformation of the Church, I would be of their
Religion. I believe it, in my Soul (replied La Chaise, ^aughing) and for my
part, I swear to ye, were that Liberty allowed in your Houses, it should be
one of the first things I did to take your Advice. However, I find that I must
resolve upon something; and you are almost within a hair's breadth of
persuading me with your bewitching Tongue. I had thought Religion had preached
nothing but Austerity, Continence, Abstinence, and ^uch like emaciating
Virtues: but since you assure me, That the Laws, and Religion of your Order,
allows a Man to satisfy his Love, and Ambition, which are my darling Passions,
I Will never seek any farther for what I find here, and so I resign my self
wholly into your Hands. How glad am I, (cried the Father, embracing him, to see
your Inclinations so virtuously bent; for I love ye tenderly, and I should
have been extremely sorry, should we have been obliged to separate at the
beginning of our Friendship.

Lion and there spent the Years of his Novitiateship, which were not very
harsh, a^ you may well conjecture, in regard the Father-Master, Father de Vaux,
and He were all of a Club toward the maintenance of the Girl beforementioned
Afterward he went to Dijon to perfect himself in Theology, under Father
d'Aubrai, reputed one of the most able Me^ of the Order. Besides, Father de
Va^^ wrote to him in the behalf of Father la Chaise, with all the Earnestness
imaginable: and because there was something singular in the Letter, I thought
fit to insert it.

Most Reverend Father,
OUR Father Rector has resolved, by my Advice, to send You this New Coad-jutor,
to study Theology under the Direction of Your Reverence. He had a Design to
have sent him to Father Le Goust, at Chaalon; however I dissuaded him, though
with much ado; my perfect Devotion to your Interests, not permitting me to
suffer, that a Person so hopeful, and promising, should be preferred to any
other but your self. For I must do him that Justice, that I never saw any one
admitted, that was ever stocked with proner Inclinations for our purpose. He
has an admirable Memory, a quick Imagination, a smooth, and flattering Wit, is
a Master in the Art of Dissimulation, and never did Man know better how to keep
a Secret. Under the outward show of a singular open-heartedness, he
accommodates himself, with so much ease, to all sorts of Humors, and Genius's,
as if he never had any Inclinations, but theirs. In a word, he is a Proteus,
that can change himself into all Forms, and carries 'em so well, that they seem
to be natural to him. Now, Reverend Father, judge what may be expected from
such a hopeful young Man of so much Merit: He has enough in him to make one of
the greatest Men of the Order. I recommend him therefore, with all the
Affections of my Heart to your Reverence, and beg of ye not to deny him the
Knowledge of the Secret Doctrine: for though he be but Young, his Wit, and his
rare Talants ought to be preferred before all other Considerations. It is but
Just, that they who are so signally distinguished should enjoy some Privilege
above others. If your Reverence vouchsafes me this Favor, as I dare presume
you will, I shall be no less sensible of it, then if I had received it my self.
Honor me with Your Commands, and never question the Sincerity, with which I
profess my self to be Yours, etc.

Lion, March 24th. 1646.

This Letter from Father de Vaux, proved as effectual as could be desired.
Father d'Aubrai made it his Business profoundly to instruct his Disciple in all
the Mysteries necessary for the Knowledge of a Jesuit of the first Magnitude.

Paris, where he remained several years in the House in St. James's-street; and
in regard that vast and populous City is the most proper Place in the World for
Intreagues and Caballs, La Chaise in a short time became one of the most
forward and active upon those Occasions; so that within the space of Five years
that he tarried there, he knew and was known to a great Number of Eminent
Persons. Nor did his easy Access to Persons of Quality, beget in him a Neglect
of Men of Learning, whose Company he much frequented, and became intimate with
some of 'em. Among others M. de Benserade, and M. de Scarron, were of his
familiar Acquaintance; and the latter had entered into so strict a Friendship
with him, that there was never a day went over their Heads but they were
together. And indeed, I am obliged to say this in praise of Father la Chaise,
that he had always a great Esteem for Learned Men; whether it were, that by
that means he would persuade the World that he were so himself, or that it were
the Effect of his own Inclination, I will not determine. Besides, he was very
constant in his Friendships contracted; as for Example, with Father de Vaux,
Mr. Spen, as much a Huguenot as he was, and several others. It Is true that his
Interest had always a share in his Friendship; for he had received a Thousand
Kindnesses from all those Persons; whereas, whenever he did them any, 'twas
always to be believed that he considered himself in the first place. Under this
Hypothesis, I comprehend whatever he did for Madam de Maintenon, the Widow of
his good Friend. For what could he do more for his own Interest, then to set up
for a Favorite, a Woman of whom he had been so well assured for so long a
time. However it were, that little Good which glimmers in him is clouded with a
Witness, by the abounding Crimes of his Life. But let us return to our History.

From the time that he left Lion, Father de Vaux, with whom he had all along
held a very regular intercourse by Letters, had had Fortune so favorable to
^im, that having passed through all the ^everal Degrees of the Order, he was at
^ength come to be Provincial, and kept ^is Station at Dijon. So soon as he
found himself advanced to that Dignity, he sent ^or his dearly and well-beloved
la Chaise, ^s well for the enjoyment of his good Company, and to take his
Advice, as that ^e might be ready at hand for any preferment, which it lay in
his power to pro^ure him.

Moreover, he stood in need of his As^stance in an Amorous Voyage, wherein ^e
had embarked himself with a Lady that was one of the Prettiest Women in the
City, and wherein there was nothing of greater Importance then Secrecy. So much
the rather because she was his own Niece, and the Wife of an aged Presi^ent of
the Parliament, who was looked upon to be one of the most jealous Cinque and
Quaters in the Province. It may be wondered, perhaps, that seeing there are ^o
many Women in the World whose Hearts are none of the most obdurate, why the
pious Father did not address his Vows and his Orisons to some one of Them,
rather then engage himself in a ^etestable Commerce of this nature. But to that
I answer, That when a M^ has once arrived to a certain Degree o^ Corruption,
not only the most eno^mous Crimes cost no more then you^ Peccadillo's, but
there is also a greate^ Titillation and chuckling Delight in committing 'em;
according to the Notion (...) an Italian Lady, who drinking Snow (...) the Heat
of Summer, cried out, Why (...) it not as well a Sin to drink fresh and fresh?

It Is very probable, that the Provinci^^ De Vaux was of the same Opinion: for
'twas neither hap-hazard, nor any pro^fer'd Opportunity, that made him (...)
easily surrender to Temptation. Rath^^ it might be said, That the subject of
(...) Amors was remote from him; and the he had a Hundred Obstacles to surmo^^
before he could accomplish his Desig^ not only in respect of the Lady who w^
not easily overcome, but in respect (...) the Husband, who had the Treasure
(...) his conjugal Sheets always vigilant^ watched by a Daughter by his first
Wi^^ and an old Governante that never would let her stir out of her sight.
Neverth^less, our godly Provincial was so incha^ted with his Niece, that he
could not (...) Night nor Day. He took a Resolution several times, to make her
sensible of his Love; but in regard he was not sure she would heark'n to his
Protestations, and no less afraid of a Hurricane about his Ears, he was a long
time before he durst make any Attempt; contenting himself only to make her a
Thousand Protestations of his Service, and Fidelity, which being only in
general Terms, at first were looked on no otherwise then the Effects of an
extraordinary Friendship. But 'twas not ^ong before she understood the meaning
of his zealous Applications, without the Help of Divination. For happening one
Day to find her alone, he explained himself in Terms so plain, and easy, that
^^was no difficult thing for her to understand his meaning without a Comment.
At first she put on her serious Looks, and seemed to be extraordinary surpised
at ^uch an unfolding of his Thoughts, so Extraordinary, and so little expected
from a Person of his Coat, and her own Uncle. But in regard he was not a Man ^o
be so easily put off, and for that he was well acquainted with the Person he
had ^o deal with, he stood his ground, and ^eturn'd to the Charge several
times. Forgive me, Reader, for not repeating all the Discourses that past
between 'em, nor all the Expostulations that the Provincial used, which I fear
me, would be too tedious.

It Is enough to tell ye the Lady surrendered, and that in less then a Month
the Provincial had gained the full Accomplishment of all his Wishes. The Lady
also seemed to be very well pleased with her new Alliance; and there were those
Reasons for frequent Society in this, that she could not have met with in any
other. The Quality of Uncle stifled all the Clamours of Suspicion. However this
Uncle was a Jesuit, and that was sufficient to make those People that were
concerned to be the more diligent upon the Watch.

They had by this time tasted the Pleasures of their criminal Love, with all
the Freedom that could be expected for abov^ Six Months together. But so much
amorous Pastime would not satisfy 'em; and and therefore, as People that are
never contented with Pleasures, when confined to Limits, they seemed to be in
torment both, because they could not consumma^^ their Delights between Two
Sheets* which was impossible. For though the old President had lain from his
Wife for some time, she was never a whit the more at liberty for that, because
the Daughter-in-Law lay constantly with her in her Father's Room. The Lady did
all she could to win her to her Party, by Civi^ities, by Complacencies, and
little Presents; but no likelihood of Success. We shall never compass our
Design, (said she to the Provincial) unless we can find a way to provide a
Sweetheart for my Husband's Daughter, that may be at our Devotion, and who
acting by concert with Us, may procure us the means to spend some Nights
together. Say ye so, (answered the Father) do you think her Inclinations are
such that she may be caught in a Love-Trap. There is nothing so certain
(replied the Lady) I know, and am as sure of it, as if I were in her Belly,
that she is no less sensible of Love then my self, and is vexed to the very
Soul that no body Courts her: It Is not the first time she has had a Sweet
heart; she understands as much, in that particular, as You, or I: The only
business is to find out a Man that we may confide in; one that will not betray
us to please his Mistress who desires nothing more then my Ruin, and this is
that which I believe to be impossible. If that be all, and that a Jesuit^ will
please her, who is no Cormudge^^ neither, we'll find her out one that shall do
her Business -- How! a Jesuit (replied the Lady) -- she would be gla^ of a
Capuchin, rather then fail; -- sen^ for him I beseech ye, -- the sooner the
better. -- He Is not in the City, (replied the Father) but I Will give order tha^
he shall be here very speedily; and so soo^ as he comes, we'll put our Irons in
the Fire my Life for yours it shall be none of hi^ Fault if we miscarry. All
this while the Provincial meant Father La Chais^ and it was upon this Account
that h^ wrote to him, with all the Earnestne^ that might be, to leave Paris,
and giv^ his Attendance upon him.

La Chaise) she must be a Rebel-indeed, if we ca^ reduce her to Obedience -- We
ha^^ brought several others to Reason -- and let me tell ye, without Vanity,
our Departure from Paris has occasioned ^he shedding of some Tears. The next
Morning he went to the Barbers, washed his Hands with Past of Almonds, combed
and powdered his Locks, put on clean Linen, and in short, made himself very
^pruce and neat, resolving to bestir the Balls of his Eyes, and his Tongue, if
he could do no more. It Is true, he found ^he young Lady a little Coy at first;
but that was no wonder: for Maids do not ^hrow themselves into their Lovers
Arms at first dash; there must be some Ceremonies and Formalities observed: nor
would La Chaise be easily repulsed. In short, He so managed his Business, that
in Seven or Eight Days he brought her to his Bow. Presently he informed the
Provincial, and his Mistress, who made Bonfires For his prosperous Success. In
truth, Sir, said the Lady to him, you are a wonderful Gentleman -- How! --
besiege and take a Coy Mistress upon Composition in so short a time! You may
well be said to come, see, and vanquish without a Hyperbole. What is impossible
Madam, (replied La Chaise,) when it is to do you Service: All things become
easy from the very Moment that you are concerned; and I am persuaded (...) owe
my good Fortune to your good Wishes in my behalf. Oh Sir, (cry'^ the Lady) you
are so great a Courtier* that I no longer wonder how you came to speed so well:
A little thing would persuade me to hear ye talk to me too* But Father, I Am
afraid that Constancy is none of your Virtues. As for my Constancy, Madam,
(replied the Father) it lies in your Power to fix it; (...) will not set it any
other Bounds the^^ what your Orders prescribe. Very good (cried the Lady) I
take ye at your word we shall see whether you are a Man (...) your Promise.
Morbleu, (cried the Provincial, finding his Mistress ru^^ Riot,) this is a
great piece of Impudence indeed, thus to make a Bargain before my Face. But
(said he to the Lady) (...) you had a mind to betray me, and to admit of his
perfidious Offers, methink^ you might have stayed till I had been dead. And as
for you, Mr. Under-Priest^ that pretend here to mow the Grass under my Feet, I
shall find a way to teach you better manners, assure your self. Upon this, the
Lady who resented the offensive Language of the Provincial, rising up ^n great
Fury, You sputter out your Threats (said she) very lavishly methinks, if any
body cared for 'em: And ^o saying, away she flew out of the Chamber. Father La
Chaise, unwilling ^he Quarrel should grow too high, run after her to stop her
-- Whi^her so fast, Madam, (said he) -- ^s it fit that such a Trifle as this
should but ye thus out of Humor? Stay, Madam, I beseech ye. In the mean
^ime, the Provincial, who was then in (...) manner Horn-mad, took this Action
^or a greater Affront then the first. It Is true, (said he) that I do ill to
in^errupt your Sport; I know a Third Person cannot choose but be very
troublesome to your Amors, and therefore I Will quit the Room; and so saying,
away ^e flung. Upon that, Father La Chaise ^eft the Lady, and ran after the
Provincial, thinking to hold him by the Cloak. At which the Provincial turning
about, ^n a foaming Rage, and lifting up his Fist, Mor -- (said he) let me go,
or I Will dash out thy Teeth. -- The Father seeing him in that Passion, and
finding no Persuasions would wo^ upon him, but that he would have do^ as he
said, left him, and returned to ^cifie the Lady, who was no less ince^^ He Is a
Madman, fitter for Bedlam, the^ a Lady's Chamber, (said she) This the Tenth
Trick he has played me up^ the same Account: I hate a jealous L^ver: but he has
done me a Kindness (...) make me weary of his Company, and hope I shall never
be troubled with hi^ more. The Father gave her to ^^derstand, That such
Capricio's as the^ proceeded from the Excess of his Lo^^ that too much
Equality, and Tranqui^^ of Humor was no good Sign in a ^^ver, and provided his
Jealousy did (...) continue, that it was always excusab^^ However, these
Reasons wrought not (...) effectually at first, as he could have d^sir'd: but
at last, being of a Compass^^nate Nature, she yielded to his impo^tunate
Entreaties, and promised hi^ That she would not cast any so^^ Looks upon the
Provincial if he ^^turn'd.

After this, the Father went to (...) new Mistress's Chamber; who, dur^^^ this
Skirmish, had been in the City. (...) told her of the Quarrel that happened
^etween her Mother-in-Law and Father De Vaux, in regard he could not ^void her
being informed of it by the servants of the House; but he did not ^cquaint her
with the real Occasion. ^n the Evening he returned to the Con^ent, and retired
to his Chamber, without so much as speaking to the Provin^ial, whom he thought
it convenient to ^et alone all that Night, that he might ^ave leisure to
reflect upon his Rash^ess. The next Morning he went to ^ee him, and found him
more Discreet ^^en the Day before. He made him ^sham'd of his Folly, and in
lively Co^ours laid before him the Misfortunes to which his Transports might
have exposed ^im, had the Husband been at home, or that he that spoke had not
had more Moderation. He told him further, That ^he Lady was very much offended
at his Proceeding, and that he had taken a world of Pains to appease her; That
she ^oudly complained of his Fantastical Humors and his Capricio's, and that
(...) was the only way to lose the good ^ortune he had met with. The Provin^ial
agreed to all this, and testified his Sorrow for being in such a Passion He
informed himself also with great diligence of what the Lady had said (...)
done, even to the slightest Circumstance^ and whether any body that belong^ to
the House had taken notice of the Falling-out. The Father answered, Th^^ a good
part of the Servants had hea^ it, but that they did not in the le^^ suspect the
Reason of it; and that (...) had taken care to turn the Business qui^^ another
way, when the Presiden^ Daughter asked him what the Matt^^ was: which did not a
little calm the uproars of his unquiet Mind. Some fe^ days after he saw her
again, and begged he Pardon in such submissive and Passiona^^ Terms, that she
could not choose but obser^^ that his Irregularities had proceeded on^ from too
much Love. On the oth^^ side, she gave him some tender Rep^^mands, that only
served to inflame hi^ the more, and to render their R^conciliation more firm.
As for Fath^^ La Chaise, he was got into his Mistres^ Chamber, who you may be
sure did n^^ waste her time in threading of Pear^ This Gypsy did so dote upon
the Father, that she could not live out of h^^ sight. By which you may guess
whether or no she refused his Proposal to come and spend the Nights in her Bed.
The Bargain was soon made, the Virgin pretending a great Pain in her Head, that
she might lie no more with her Mother-in-Law; and desiring her withal not to
speak a word of it to her Father. Which the Lady agreed to, yet giving her to
understand that she was to take ^t for a great Favor. Upon these bles^ed
Tidings the Provincial's Joy redoubled. He embraced Father La Chaise a hundred
times, and could not forbear Thanking him for a Kindness from which he reaped
as much Benefit as himself.

The main Business now, was, to find a way to be admitted into the House in the
Night, and where to remain concealed all the Day till the next Evening. There
was no likelihood of having the Doors opened ^o 'em; nor was it safe to get in
at the Windows; so much the less, because they looked into the Street. At
length, the best Expedient they could find, was ^o hire the next House to the
President's, where no body lived, and where the Gut^ers of both Houses falling
one into the other, they might get into the Garret of their Elysium, and so
descend into the Apar^ments of their Earthly Felicity. Th^^ being concluded,
was brought to p^^^ the next Day; and the same Night, between Twelve and One a
Clock, bo^^ the Reverendissimo's stole out of the Co^vent through a false Door
of which the Provincial had the Key, and happi^ met at their appointed
Rendevou^ where they were received with op^^ Arms.

These Nocturnal Visits were to the^ as so many Charms, which they co^tinu'd
three or four times a Week, for (...) space of a Year, without any Trou^^ or
Disgrace. But at last there came (...) fatal Night that paid for all the r^^
And then it was, that our two Amon^^ Fathers, according to their usual wo^ were
no sooner got fast locked in (...) Embraces of their Adorable Mistres^^ when
Father De Vaux heard some bo^^ come and knock very imperiously the Door. Seeing
himself therefore such apparent Danger, his Blood ^^geal'd in his Veins for
fear, and there (...) never a Saint in Paradise, though (...) Credit were never
so little, to whom (...) did not promise a Wax-Candle. A^^ indeed, he had great
reason to Tremble; for it was the President, a Man no less ^^vere then Minos
himself, and who had ^een upbraided never for having given any ^ther Sentence
but that of Death upon ^he most Petty Criminal that ever ap^ear'd before him. I
leave the Reader ^o judge what Resolutions the Jesuit had ^o take,
more-especially in a Business that so nearly concerned his Life and his honor.
But the Tempest did not fall upon him; so that for this time he was ^nly
punished with a most dreadful Fright. ^or the President, who only came upon
^^formation given him, That his Daugh^^r did not lie with his Wife; hearing ^o
Body answer, believed his Informers ^ere deceived, and that in all likelihood
^^ey had only shifted their Chamber. ^ith these Surmizes he forbore to knock
(...) call any more, and proceeded on to ^rry Terror and Alarm to his
Daugh^^r's Apartiment. In the mean time, ^ather De Vaux, taking his Advantage
of ^^at Moment of the President's Absence, ^ap'd out of the Bed, took his
Clothes in ^s Hand, and made his Escape the same ^ay he came, abandoning the
unfortu^ate Father La Chaise to his Evil Destiny. The old President was more
obstina^^ at that Door then the other; and seei^^ they would not let him in,
threaten to break open the Door. The poor supposed Virgin was so astonished
with Fe^ that she knew not where she was, (...) what Resolution to take. If she
open the Door, she visibly exposed her self (...) Ruin; and if she did not
open it, (...) was in as bad or worse Condition. T^ Father was no less at his
Wit's end; (...) without any Hesitation, he took a Re^^lution to leap out at
the Window. (...) that purpose, he put on his Clothes w^ all the speed he
could, being loath (...) leave any thing behind him that mi^ give Evidence
against him, or his dea^ Beloved. After that, he fastened one the Sheets to the
Window, thinking have slid down like an Angel in a Thea^ But as the Proverb
says, Haste man Waste; and his Precipitation proved fa^ to him: for his Gown
hitching in (...) pointed Bars of the Windows be^ he was forced to hang there
with (...) being able to disingage himself: h^^ ever, he made some vain
Efforts, t^ did but hasten his Misfortune; for (...) Servants that lay in the
Hall hearing (...) Noise and Bustle at the Window, and the Hurly-burly above
Stairs, thought the House had been Broke-open; and getting out of their Beds,
cried, Thieves! Thieves! as loud as they could yaul.

In the mean time the President having broken-open the Door, and finding his
Daughter like one in a Trance, and the Sheet tied to the Window, thought as the
rest did, that there had been Thieves in the House, and fell to crying-out,
Thieves! Thieves! himself. Upon this the Neighbors got together, and searching
about everywhere, at length they perceived his unfortunate Reverence, who
certainly was now in the midst of one of the most saddest Quarters of an Hour
that ever befell him in this Life. At first they could hardly distinguish who
he was; but at length the Lackeys and Footmen, after they had bestowed a
thousand Thumps, and Cuffs, and Whirrits upon him, brought him to their Master
in the most miserable Condition in the world; which did not hinder 'em however,
but that they knew him again to be the same Person who had so often frequented
the House. Thereupon the President rightly judged, that such a Thief as he came
not to rob him of his Money, and found too late that it would have been more
Prudence to have (...) him have escaped with the Theft, the^ to make the thing
so public. But seein^ there was no Remedy, he ordered t^^ Father to be kept in
a Chamber, wi^ a Design to have sent him to Goal t^^ next Morning, in order to
a due Pro^^cution. Which without doubt wou^^ have been done effectually, had
(...) the Provincial, who seemed not to ha^ the least share in the Adventure,
ra^ betimes in the Morning to beg, wi^ Tears in his Eyes, that his Member (...)
the Order might be restored him. Wh^^ I desire of you (said he to the President
is not only for the Glory of our Goo^ God, in whose sight you will do an A^^
both Acceptable and Meritorious, b^^ greatly to your own Honor. I desire (...)
for your Own sake, for your Daughter sake, for your Wife's sake, and for the
sake of all your Relations, whom you a^ going to defame in the World. The
President's Wife, who after her Galla^^ was got safe out of harm's way, wa^
come out of her Chamber to know wha^ was the matter, joined her Entreaties an^
Prayers with those of her Uncle, and gave him to understand, that since the
shortest Follies were always the best, would not be his wisest course to
prosecute the Offender: besides that, the ^eat of his Anger would be over in
two Days. Upon which the President, who was by this time very much come to
himself, and began to be of the same mind with his Wife and the Provincial, let
go his Prisoner, after he had called him all the Rogues and Rascals in nature,
and threatened him with what strange things ^e would do him. Presently the
Pro^incial sent for a Chair, and had him ^rivately carried to the College, more
^ke a Dead then a Living Creature; ^here, God knows how he was received. All
the Jesuits, upon whom the Affront ^f the Scandal fell, and who for that Reason
durst not show their Faces, gave ^im a world of coarse Language, and ^eated him
like the worst of Men, ^ccounting it as a great Happiness if they ^ould so
discharge themselves. But the ^ncens'd Fathers declared to the Provin^ial, That
they would have Justice done upon that infamous Fellow, to the end ^e might be
an Example to Others. Father De Vaux, as you may well believe, had no Maw to
grant their Desires, but the thing was so foul, that he durst not openly oppose
their Demands. He was therefore constrained to give way to the crowd of those
that cried out for Justice, so that he was forced to call a Chapter, to
consider what Punishment should be inflicted upon him. The poor Criminal was
called to receive his Sentence, and after he had been formerly interrogated
upon the Circumstances o^ Matter of Fact, and that his Answers had been duly
weighed, the Rector, after he had desired the Benedictio^ of his Superior,
began a long Speech wherein he set forth at large, The Obligation that lay upon
all Men i^ general to live well, and to confort themselves in all things to
God, an^ the Church, but more-especially they who were in Holy Orders who had
renounced the World, an^ the Vanities thereof, to devote themselves to God
after a more particular manner; and who were engaged to a Devout Life by such
Authentic^ Vows, so frequently re-iterated (...) Therefore that they were to
take into their Consideration, all these bold Invaders of divine Institution,
and to look upon 'em as Perjured, and Sacrilegious Villains, deserving the
severest of Punishments, who ought to have no Mercy showed 'em. To these
Considerations, he added, That of an Illustrious, and Godly Society, without
Relaxation toiling for the Destruction of Heresy, and the Conversion of
Sinners, which they endeavored to procure by continual Prayers, and
Sacrifices, and the Labor, and Sweat of their Brows. Afterward he set forth
the great Sorrow of their Holy Mother, who saw her self dishonored by
perfidious Children, that exposed her to the Scorn and Contempt, not only of
particular Kingdoms, but of the whole World, who was always duly informed of
their Excesses which were still thrown upon her. Is it Just then, (continued
he) That Millions of Religious Saints, and Purified Souls, should bear the
disgraceful Marks which these miserable Wretches would imprint upon 'em? And
shall it ever be said, That in the Holy Society of Jesus, that Men may may be
scot-free scandalous Adulterers, and Whoremongers? Most Reverend Fathers, I
know your Zeal, and how piously Jealous you are of the Glory, and Honor of
your Order; I see it in your Eyes, and in your Countenances. Courage then,
Fathers, let us cut off from among Us this corrupt and rotten Member; and let
us make appear, by such a pious Resolution, our Detestation of his Impious
Course of Life.

There needed not such a far fetched Harangue to animate People already
sufficiently incensed. So that after they had ordered the unfortunate Father to
retire, they proceeded to give their Opinions, while poor La Chaise withdrew,
casting a doleful Look upon Father De Vaux, as much as to say, That all his
Hopes were in him.

Their Opinions were various, though all equally terrible: Some were for having
him ignominiously expelled out of the Order; and that he should moreover be
degraded; and some, that he should be mewed up all the remainder of his Days
between Four Walls, in Pane Doloris, and aqua Angustiae. But the Provincial,
who presided in the Assembly, and whose Right it was to pronounce the
Definitive Sentence, made use of this variety of Sentiments, to help his Friend
out of the Mire, and therefore addressing himself in his turn to the Society,
he told 'em, That he could not blame the pious Zeal of the whole Society;
nevertheless, that he was obliged to put 'em in mind, That when there was an
incumbent Necessity to condemn any Person, they could not act with too much
Moderation, because it many times fell out, That our proper Passions disguising
themselves under the plausible Appearance of Zeal for God, transported us to
utmost Severity against our Brother, who, by that means, became a Victim: but
that then, not considering what we did, we sacrificed to the Devil, travesty'd
into an Angel of Light; which cautious, and evil Spirit, not caring how he
brought Men to Perdition, provided they were destroyed, had made too great a
use of this same fatal Means to Damn an infinite number of Souls, which but for
that, would be in a happy Condition. That it behooved us to have this Fear
before our Eyes, and after the Example of all the most eminent Saints, always
to lean toward Charity, which was the Soul of all Virtues, without which, they
are no more then a dreadful Chaos, according to the Doctrine of St. Paul: To
whatever Extremity we incline on this side, we can never Sin, whereas, on the
other side, we cannot be too cautious, as the same Apostle shows us. That he
did not take upon him to palliate, or lessen the Crime committed by the guilty
Person, which to say the Truth was very Enormous, but that Christ himself had
taught us, That there was Mercy to be showed upon all Sins, more especially
when it was merited by Repentance; and that after all, although this poor Father
had had the Misfortune to be vanquished by Temptation, and an opportunity at
hand, the effect of humane Frailty, yet for all that, he might come to be a
worthy Man, and a great Saint: That St. Peter fell into a Crime much more
heinous then His; nevertheless, we do not find in Scripture, that ever the rest
of the Apostles called him to an Account for it: He only wept, and they
believed his Tears sincere; he protested his Repentance, and their Charity
would not permit 'em for a Moment to doubt the Truth of his Words. Wherefore
then Brethren, should you now be of an Opinion so opposite to theirs? Why
should you estrange your selves so far from the Example which they set before
you? or, Do you require a greater? Read then what our Savior said to Judas,
though he knew him to be a Traitor, and impious Person, and worthy of Death. He
was so far from severe Usage, or Excluding him from the Holy Society, or
forbidding the Disciples from Communicating with him, that he admitted him to
his Table without Distinction. As for my part, Brethren, (pursued he) that
which I have here to say, as already I have given you to understand, is not in
order to take part with Vice. The whole Society, and all the Order in general,
will bear witness for me, that I have never given any occasion of Scandal to
any Person; I am neither Ravisher, nor Unjust, nor Whore-monger, nor Adulterer,
nor Covetous, as many among our Religious Orders are; I Fast twice a Week, I
observe with a particular Regularity my Vows, and the Constitutions of my
Order, and as an Accumulation to all the rest, I am ready to give all that the
Vow of Poverty leaves me, to the Glory of God. As for you* my Brethren be not
offended, if (...) re-call to the Consciences of every one of ye, the past
Conduct of his Life. How many are there in this illustrious Order of Jesus, as
also in this particular Society, who have not slipped into Crimes more
dangerous then this which is now laid to the Charge o^ our poor Brother, and
perhaps, wh^ never so truly repented of 'em as he does? And I may be bold to
add thi^ farther, How many are there who are actually engaged in infamous
Correspondencies, and which, perhaps, are within an Inch of being brought i^
Evidence against themselves. Wha^ shall we then say against such Persons as
those, who pretend to be so ridgidly Austere, and Interested for the Cause of
God. God preserve my Brethren from such Accidents as these; but who knows how
soon he may fall into Temptation. I declare therefore, that I shall never
consent to the inflicting of any other Punishment upon our Brother, then to
stand Barefoot, and Bare-headed before the Crucifix, confess his Fault, beg
Pardon of the Party, and then be sent into another Province. It Is your Business
now to debate the Cause, and give your Opinions over again; but before you go
about it, permit me to say to ye, what Christ said formerly upon the like
occasion; Let him that is without Sin cast the first Stone.

After so roguish a Speech, I cannot forbear crying out, O Popelings, and
Hypocrites, how are poor People deluded with your Mock-shews. But as roguish as
it was, it wrought the same Effect which he desired. The Process was re-view'd;
at what time every Man reflecting upon his own Conscience, or rather upon the
Punishment to which he should be liable upon a slip of the same Nature, the
Provincial's Sentence was ratified by general Consent, and Father La Chaise was
acquitted for declaring before the great Crucifix upon his Knees, that he
begged Pardon of God for the Sin he had committed. For as to his being sent to
another place, that was so much to his Advantage, that it was not look^ upon as
a Punishment.

Some few Days before, Father Barbin had been appointed Assistant-General of
France, at Rome: and in regard that Father De Vaux had contributed most to his
Election, he could not refuse, upon his Recommendation, to entertain Father La
Chaise for his Secretary; so much the less, because his Friend assured him,
That he knew no body more capable of an Employment that required so much
Activity, Ability, and suppleness of Wit; and that he should find all those
Qualities in him to Perfection. Thus he departed in the sight of his Enemies,
to go and possess a Post, which several among 'em had in vain contended for. He
governed himself very well; and in regard the late Misfortune which had
befallen him, had rendered him more Circumspect, he never exposed himself for
the future to the like disgraces.

Margareta del Caniglio, 1657:
the Cardinal Padron's near Kinswoman, who failed but very narrowly of
procuring him a Bishop's Crosier, had not the Holy Father, out of a peculiar
Discontent, refused it but a little before to the Cardinal, who begged it for
Father Davila, at that time Assistant-General of Spain. Which ruined all Father
La Chaise's Hopes, and disappointed all the Canvassings that were made use of
in his behalf. But for all this, he was well esteemed in the Court of Rome; and
Alexander VII. then Pope, lent him a willing Ear, and employed him in several
Negotiations, wherein he acquitted himself with good Success. And well it was
for the Bishop of Bayeux, that the Father was so much in the Pope's Favor, for
otherwise he might have had but an ill time of it.

This Prelate was one of those whom nothing will serve but to be Petty
Sovereigns in Spirituals, and who refuse to acknowledge the Holy See, but only
ad Honores. He had already played several Pranks of a Petty Lord and Master, by
permitting People in his Diocese to work on Holy Days, only some few excepted;
by granting Indulgences, and giving Dispensations beyond the Limits of his
Privileges, which had very much incensed the Pope against him. But that which
was the Complement of all the rest, and contributed to make him a perfect
Rebel, was an Action that made a great Noise, no way to be endured by the Pope.
There was in his Diocese a little Abbey, belonging to the Benedictines not
reformed, called the Abbey of St. Clement, which depended solely upon the Pope,
and which, till then, had preserved that Privilege to themselves; but he not
enduring those Dependencies under his Nose, pretended to a Right of Visitation
of their House, and to that purpose went to the Convent. The Monks refused to
admit him; However, having opened their Door out of Civility, and that they
might not provoke him to be their Enemy, showed him their Grants, and their
Patents for the Possession of that Immunity; of which the Bishop not only took
the least notice, but taking the Benefit of the Entrance that had been given
him, made a verbal Report upon the Spot. Upon which, the Monks finding him to
be in Earnest, stood upon their Terms, and sent away both their Complaints, and
their Privileges to Rome; whereupon the Pope granted 'em a Bull, prohibiting
the Bishop, under pain of Apostolic Censures not to impose any Innovations
upon 'em. The Fathers, so soon as they had received this Bull, caused it to be
fixed up upon the Doors of the Cathedral, which so provoked the Bishop, that as
he went out from High Mass he pulled it down, and tore it in pieces with his
own Hands; and within a few Days after, in despite of the Monks, he made his
Visitation in the Convent, after he had caused the Doors to be broke open. Such
an Act of Violence so incensed the Holy Father against him, that he threatened
him with nothing less then Excommunication; and then it was, that Father La
Chaise, who became the Bishop's Friend while he resided in Paris, was employed
to atone the Pope; but it cost him a great deal of trouble to bring it to
pass; and a small Accident happened at the same time, which had like to have
let fly the Thunder, that grumbl'd so terribly. For the Monks sent to Rome an
Ordinance of that Bishop, at the top of which the Bishop styled himself Bishop
Miseratione Dei, without making any mention of the Holy-See. The Pope saw it,
and foaming with Anger, Ecco (said He) Un Ridiculoso Barone, con il suo
Miseratione di dio; voglio been che Sappia, che non e Vescovo che per la mia; e
che quando vorro non sera piu niente: Look here, (said he) a ridiculous
Scoundrel of a Bishop with his M^^^^atione Dei; I Will have him to know (...) no
Bishop, but by my Mercy, and when I please I Will make him nothing at all. 'Twas
well this fiery Pope lived at that time; for had he lived till now; he must
have been forced to have swallowed many a Miseratione Dei; the Bishops at this
Day not using any other Addition.

Now, in regard this Bishop was one of Mazarine's Creatures, his Eminency wrote
to Rinaldo d' Este, Protector of the Affairs of France, and enjoined him to
wait upon his Holiness about this Affair. And indeed, he made a great number of
Jaunts to and fro, without making any Progress: for the Pope, who had already
thundered out a Bull of Excommunication against him, would not yield a hair's
breadth, unless the Bishop came himself in Person to acknowledge his Fault, and
beg his Mercy. Thus the Affair was spun out for above a Twelvemonth, and in
all likelihood would have lasted a great while longer, had not La Chaise found
out an Expedient, that the Excommunicated Bishop should make an Acknowledgment
at Paris, before the Nuncio, and write to his Holiness a submissive and
respectful Letter; wherein he was to beg Pardon for his Disobedience, and set
forth his Repentance in most significant Expressions. After which, his Holiness
should take off the Excommunication; which was to be read in the Body of the
High-Mass in the Cathedral Church of Bayeux.

Father La Chaise did a considerable piece of Service also for his own Order,
which did not a little contribute to advance his Reputation. There arrived at
Rome, toward the end of the Pontificate of Innocent X. an ancient Jesuit of a
Venerable Presence, who wore Long Hair, with his Locks flowing over his
Shoulders, and a Beard down to his Belly. This Jesuit took upon him the Title
of Ambassador from the King of China to his Holiness, whom he came to assure of
the barbarous Monarch's Respect and Filial Obedience to the Holy See, and to
desire a new Supply of Missionaries to labor the Conversion of a numerous
People who waited for the Succor of his Charity. The only Son of that King was
also come in Person to kiss his Holiness's Feet, and render the Embassy the
more Authentic. The Pope was overjoyed beyond Imagination to hear of such a
happy Progress of Religion in those far distant Regions: and not being able to
testify his Satisfaction to the Prince of China, whose Zeal had engaged him to
cross so many vast and dangerous Seas, he lodged him magnificently, and gave
Order, That both He and the Ambassador of the King his Father, should be
entertained at his Expense, during their stay in Rome; and moreover, he paid
him all the Honors that are usually paid to the Sons of Sovereign Princes.

But the Dominicans, who are no Friends to Jesuits, and less in the Countries
where Missionaries are employed, then otherwhere, utterly destroyed all this
fine Story. They wrote to the Pope, That understanding the Jesuits had
counterfeited an Embassy from the King of China, and had also Personated the
Son of that Monarch, which was a pernicious Imposture, They could not forbear
to give his Holiness Advice of it, for fear he should fall into the Snare, that
only tended to advance the Jesuits Reputation, and to procure him to part with
considerable Sums of Money for the Support of the Mission; whereas the King of
China, who was then at War with the Tartars, had no thoughts of turning
Catholic, much ^ess of sending his only Son to the other end of the World, to
make a fond Submission to his Holiness. To this they added heavy Accusations of
the Jesuits, for having so far disfigured Christianism in the Indies, that it
was hardly to be known: That they never preached the Crucifying of Christ, nor
his Poverty; but that out of a Rascally Compliant with the Genius of the
People, they a^ways represented him a Glorious an^ Triumphant King. And that
they ha^ kept the People under these Notions an^ Elements of the Christian
Religion, ev^ since Matthew Ricci, the first of the Missionaries, went thither;
that is (...) say, for near a hundred Years ago: Th^^ they permitted their
Proselytes, for the Preservation of their Estates, to comm^ Idolatry, and kneel
before the Idol (...) Chimboam; and that they were so sa^ from forbidding 'em
to swear by the^^ False Gods, that they did it themselves by giving the Name of
Wing, which s^^nifies Holy, to Kun-su-zu, making use (...) the same Title which
they give to Go^ To all these Accusations they added other also no less
heinous, and which are to long to be here inserted. I shall only sa^ this, That
they were so many, and (...) rank, that they redounded greatly to the Disgrace
of the whole Body of the Jesuits And if the Holy Father were so much overjoyed
upon the Arrival of the Embassado^ his Displeasure was much greater to (...)
such a Cheat put upon him. He refused to admit the General of the Order, wh^^
came to speak to his Holiness concerning this Affair; and caused him to be
cited, together with the Assistant of France, to come and Answer the Matter
charged upon the Society, before the Congregation of Foreign Missions which he
caused to be assembled on purpose, and every body expected to see some great
Alterations in that Order. He caused the supposed Ambassador to be Arrested,
and expelled all the Jesuits out of the Vatican. Neither was Father La Chaise
at that time exempted. You might have seen the Jesuits then running from one
end of Rome to the other, to beg the Protection of the Cardinals and
Ambassadors, and that they would help 'em out of the Misfortune which so
terribly threatened 'em. However, they escaped much better then People thought
they would have done, by the Mediation of the Cardinal Padron, who was the only
Person that durst solicit for 'em; the Pope having forbid all Persons
whatever to speak to him in their Behalf, being resolved to take cognizance of
this Affair in the Congregation, and to show 'em no Favor. And therefore it
was that the Cardinal, though he possessed entirely the Confidence and
Affection of his Holiness, yet boggl'd a long tim^ afraid to lose, all at once,
the Enjoymen^ of such a Benefit by one dangerous fa^ Step. But at length,
overcome by the Solicitations of La Signora del Caniglio, an^ by the
importunate Prayers and Tears (...) Father La Chaise, who threw himself a his
Feet, embracing his Knees, he promised to do his utmost, and performed (...) so
successfully, that he appeased the Popefiery Indignation, who consented to he^
in private the Reasons which La Cha^ could offer to him, by no means being
(...) yet to be entreated to admit any other To this purpose he was introduced
i^ his Holiness's Cabinet, who talked to hi^ with an extraordinary Heat of
Passion concerning the wicked Morals of his O^der, the horrible Abuses which
they committed in the Indies, where they prof^^ted Religion, and all Things
Sacred: ^ding to this, That their Impudence (...) not ashamed to act their
Farces at R^ by introducing Fantomes of a Prince a^ Ambassador, without respect
to the H^ See, nor the Holy Church, which the exposed to Laughter, and the
Contem^ of the Heretics. What can you say to this: (said the Pope) Nothing,
man Holy Father (replied La Chaise, all bathed in Tears, and prostrating
himself upon the Ground) I must confess, that all these Irregularities are
inexcusable, and therefore I do not go about to lessen 'em before your
Holiness, who would always penetrate to the bottom of my Heart, and from whom
it lies not in my Power to conceal my own Thoughts. I have nothing to say, but
only to implore your Paternal Clemency toward an Order, that beg it upon their
Knees, and which absolutely condemns, and disapproves the Conduct of their
Missionaries in China. They have heard of it, most Holy Father, with that
Sorrow which is not to be equaled out by that of your Holiness, and though they
should justify themselves upon the Purity of their Intentions, which were
never other then to win some Souls to Jesus Christ, and should cite in favor
of themselves the Example of St. Paul, who was a Jew to the Jews, a Greek to
the Greeks, yet we should never be persuaded to defend 'em, but would abandon
'em, without speaking so much as one word to atone the just Severity of your
Holiness, if the Interest of the Church, Religion, and the Holy See, did not
oblige us to speak. May your Holiness b^ pleased to consider, that in punishing
these Malefactors with that Rigor which they deserve, you will make public to
a^ the World, what is now only known (...) a few, and declare that to be a
certain Truth, of which as yet the World is n^ convinced by certain Proof.
Judge, mo^ Holy Father, what a general Scand^ such a Certainty would cause; and
wha^ a hindrance it would be to the Propagation of the Faith. The Heretics wo^
laugh us to Scorn, as your Holiness ha^ well observed, and take an occasion
(...) Insult over our Mother, the Holy Church upon all occasions.

He continued howling a long time, pe^cieving that the Pope lent him a
favo^rable Ear, with that apparent Submission of Piety and Tenderness, that the
Po^ suffered himself to be mollify'd, and to^ him in raising him up, (for he
had sp^ken all this while upon his Knees,) 'Twas ill luck, my Son, that thou
were a Jesuit then returning to the Cardinal, who^ he took to the Window, I
love this Man (said he) because there is no Guile (...) him. This Courteous
Answer put La Ch^i^ in great Hopes, who laying hold upon the Conjuncture,
struck while the Iron was hot. He never stirred from the Cardinal's House, and
pressed him so hard, that at length he obtained an absolute Pardon, got the
Ambassador released, who was only sent to the House of the Profession, like
another Jesuit, without doing him any other Harm. The Prince was also set at
Liberty, who betook himself to serve a Dutch Lord as his Lackey. This happy
Success, for which the Order was solely beholding to his Dexterity,
considerably signalized him; so that from that time forward, he was employed in
more secret, and more important Negotiations, which made him known in several
Courts, and more particularly in that of France; this very Father having proved
very Serviceable to persuade the Pope to what the King desired of him, in order
to the Satisfaction which he demanded for the Assault which the Corsi made upon
his Ambassador the Duke of Crequi. So that after the Death of the Assistant
General Barbin, he resolved to return into France, in hopes to meet with
Advancement sooner there then other-where.

Bayeux carried him to Cardinal Mazarine, who showed him a thousand Kindnesses,
and told him, he would be his Friend. And indeed, he was very much in his
Favor. He it was that presented him to the King, 1665.
as a Person whose Ability he understood to the very bottom. He also go^ him
admitted, in his lifetime, into the Council of Conscience, which indeed was no
more then to make him Co-adjutor to the Confessor. Nor did the Father in any
thing belie the Testimony which his Eminency had given of him He governed
himself in this Post with all the Dexterity of a Man grown old in Business; and
understood so well to study the King's Humor and Genius, that when the
Cardinal died, he found himself able to stand upon his own Legs Nay, more then
that, he supplanted his Competitor, who though he had been longer in the World,
had nothing near the Wit or Knowledge that La Chaise had.

By this time the King was become enamored of La Valliere; and in regard his
Passion was strong and violent, he but a hundred Slights upon the Queen for
her sake; which many times came to hard Words, though that Princess had a great
Love for him, at least, as much as his Mistress; nor was she much inferior ^o
her in the Allurements of Beauty. But I found the King was of the Humor of
those that never love their Wives, because they are tied to 'em. His Confessor
was always harping upon this String, and would not let him be at ^est; which
was a great Vexation to him, the King enduring no Lectures upon any Subject
whatever. Father La Chaise, who knew this pretty well, took the quite contrary
course; he carefully avoided all manner of Disputes upon this Subject; and if
at any time he were obliged to speak his Thoughts, he never failed to bring in
Humane Frailty to excuse the King. La Valliere, who had notice of ^t, ordered
Thanks to be returned him by Monsieur de Montausier, who desired him in her
Name to give her a Visit. But La Chaise excused himself, as being loath to
incurr the Queen's Displeasure. After that, she would needs have him for her
Confessor; and the same Person gave him notice of her Intentions. This put our
Reverendissimo to a little stand; for hi^ Ambition soared higher: nevertheless,
h^^ durst not refuse her, for fear of incensing her. He therefore returned for
Answer, That the Duchess of Vauj^^ did him a great deal of Honor; an^ that he
looked upon it as a special Favor of Christ himself, that offered him
Occasions to serve her, and to be any way contributing to the saving of her
Soul but in regard he had no desire that the thing should spread any further,
he went to attend her that Night. So soon as s^^ perceived him, What, good
Father (sai^ she) brought you hither? You do me a Favor that I could never
expect at you^ Hands. What will Their Majesty's say when they hear that you
bestowed a Vis^^ upon a poor Girl whose Soul they would never value the Loss
of. I come, Madam (answered he) to repeat those Pr^testations which I made to
the Marquis o^ Montausier, when he did me the Honor to speak to me in your
Name. He told me, Madam, that you had so good a^ Opinion of me, as to entrust
me with the Direction and Guidance of your Soul Yes, Reverend Father (replied
La Valliere) and I should be highly engaged to ye, if you would take Charge of
it* It Is too great a Favor, Madam, that you vouchsafe me (answered the Father)
But, Madam, permit me to speak to ye with all the freedom of a sincere Heart.
I have an infinite Value for the Good and ^piritual Repose of your Soul, and
should be glad to assist ye with that little Knowledge which the Lord has been
pleased to impart to me. However, Madam, it is true, that my Zeal for your
Service does not permit me to stop there; I would, if it were possible,
contribute something to the Establishment of a Fortune and a Favor which you
so duly merit. I dare be bold to say, Madam, That hitherto I have labored out
of a pure Inclination, without pretending to deserve any thing ^t your hands;
but as yet it has not been in my Power to do any thing considerable. But if you
will consent that I may cast my Designs, and watch Occasions to do you Service,
then you may reck'n upon me as a Person wholly at your Devotion. You may
perhaps wonder, Madam, that a Man of my Profession should ^alk to ye after
this rate; those of my Robe being accustomed to preach Mortification and
Penitence; and I must needs confess, that this would be the best way when all is
done. But when fatal Experience teaches us, That Youth, Great Engagements in
the World, Beauty, Extrao^dinary Merit, and Birth, are things absolutely
incompatible with an entire Self-denial, I cannot but agree with those that
believe there are some Grains to be allowed to Humane Frailty; and since the
King cannot bridle his Amorous Passion, I cannot choose but applaud the Choice
that he has made. I do not see any Lady in the Court, that merits his Heart and
Esteem so much as yo^ do; and as for your part, Madam, I shall never condemn
ye, for having hearkened to the Vows of the Greatest Monarch in the World. Nor
do I believe that any Lady in the Kingdom would have refused 'em. Your
Affection for him has had an extraordinary good Effect. For it has drawn him
off from his Engagements begun with Madam his Sister-in-Law; which made me
tremble a thousand times, out of that Zeal which I have for his Honor and
Salvation. So that it may be said, That your Charms have rescued his Royal Soul
from a greater Danger, into which it was falling. -- La Valliere, who desired
no more, then that he would prove by substantial Reasons, that she might Love
the King with a safe Conscience, listened very attentively till he had made an
end of speaking. After which (said she, fetching a deep Sigh) How happy should
I be, if the Father-Confessor were but in some measure of your Opinion. But he
continually torments the King upon this Occasion; and moreover, incenses the
Queen against me, and urges her to persecute me with all the Vexations
imaginable. There Is more Truth in that then you can well believe (replied La
Chaise) for I have left the Queen's Chamber twenty times, not being able to
hear how bitterly she inveighs against you, Madam, who, without Contradiction,
are the Person in the World who most naturally deserves her Kindness and
Respect. In a word, What shall I say to ye, Madam, but that that same Old Fool
has got a certain Notion of Morality in his Brain, which he takes to be pure
Devotion, and imagines there is no Salvation without Hypocrisy and
Dissimulation. You have hit his true Character (answered La Valliere) and
therefore it is that the King begins to disgust him, and only retains him out
of mere Respect: but I intend to speak to the King concerning him this Evening;
and if he believes what I say, we shall shift him off to say his Prayers by
himself. After that, Reverend Father, you shall have a good share in the next
Nomination, or else say I can do nothing. I would as willingly have you the
King's Confessor as my own, and therefore rely upon my Word. The Father
returned her a thousand Thanks, and assured her that she should never have any
cause to repent of her procuring him that Advantage. After which, in regard it
was late, and for that she expected the King, he took his leave of her, and
retired with Thoughts full freighted with the Idea's of his future Grandeur.

He slept not all that Night, and perhaps but little the Nights following. For
he is a Man whom Ambition suffers the least to take his Rest of any Man that I
know, as one that is always indefatigable in the pursuit of his Ends. There is
not any Conjuncture which he does not understand how to make use of to a
Wonder. Of which his Visit to La Valliere is a palpable Demonstration. 'Twas a
thing that required great Judgment, and a quick Resolution: for had he
absolutely refused what she demanded of him, and not thrown himself wholly upon
her proffered Kindness, it is evident she would have proved his irreconcilable
Enemy, and would have utterly excluded him from the King's Conscience: and had
he accepted the Confessorship as she proffered it for her self, he had shut the
Door against the Preferment he aimed at; there being no likelihood that the
King would have chosen his Mistress's Confessor for his own. Therefore he could
not act more politickly, then to open his heart to her, and by that means win
her Confidence; at least, we see that this way succeeded to his Wish. La
Valliere, who would having given any thing to have had the King's Confessor her
Friend, thought it no Prudence to refuse one that came to offer his Service,
and from whom she might promise her self all the Advantages she could expect.
And therefore this Female Favorite left nothing omitted to engage the King to
dismiss his old Confessor, and in his room to make Choice of the Person whose
Worth and Parts she extolled to the utmost of her Invention. This is a Man
(said she) that will never sit domineering over your Conscience like a
P^dagogue; and as he has a hundred times more Ability then the other, so he
knows the World better: he keeps himself reserved within the Bounds of an
Exemplary Regularity without troubling himself to Comme^^ upon the Actions of
other Men.

This was just assailing the King upon the weak side, who was wont to say, That
he hated nothing so much as Reprimands Besides all this, he had a great Esteem
for Father La Chaise, and was quite weary of the other: so that finding no
Reluctance against the Person recommended, he promised La Valliere to dismiss
his own Confessor upon the first opportunity. Nor was it long before he met
with one as favorable as he could desire For the Old Man observing that the
King one day, so soon as he came from the Communion, would hardly allow himself
time to Dine* but posted away immediately to La Valliere, was so enraged at it,
that never considering what would follow he waited till the King came to his
Chamber, which was not till Four a Clock in the Morning. The King seeing him at
such an unseasonable hour, with a surly Countenance, asked him, whom he looked
for? The Confessor answered. That he came to denounce God's Judgments against
him, just ready to fall upon his Head; and reproached him with his Manner of
Living in the most thundering Language imaginable, talking of nothing but
Impiety, Sacrilege, Forsaking God, and Eternal Torments; concluding his
Discourse with telling him, That he was no longer able to see such
Irregularities; and therefore if he resolved to continue his Debaucheries, he
desired, for his part, that he might be dismissed. The King, who only waited
for such a Harangue as this, told him very smoothly, but withal very coldly,
That he gave him leave to retire when he pleased, and that he would take care
to provide himself a Confessor. At the same time he bid him Goodnight, and
commanded his Valet de Chamber to draw the Curtains. The next Morning betimes,
because he would not give the good Father time to repent, and get the Queen to
mediate for him, which was the thing he most feared, the King sent for La
Chaise, and told him before Monsieur and Madam de Guise, That his Confessor had
begged leave to be dismissed; which he could not refuse him, 1667.
because indeed he was fitter for Contemplation, then to live in the Tumult and
Hurry of a Court; and therefore finding no Ecclesiastic so worthy as himself,
he would become his Penitent, and submit the Conduct of his Conscience to his
Guidance. An Hour after, the King mighty jocund that his Game had played so
well, went to La Valliere's Chamber, to tell her the News, so afraid he was
lest any body else should prevent him -- Oh, Par-bleau! -- (said he) As for the
Priest, I took him at his Word; he did his own business himself, and therefore
God knows, I only took the Ball at the Rebound. La Valliere made answer, That
'twas the best way in the world, provided the Queen did not mar all again: and
this is that (added she) which I very much fear. How! (said the King) Do You
take me then to be a Man that is lead by the Nose? Never deceive thy self, my
dear Girl, -- 'Twas my Pleasure; I have done it, and I will stand to it.
Nothing pleases me more, then to make those that are jealous of us, mad; and
therefore to vex 'em worse then I have done, I intend to keep Holy Day and
Confess to Morrow. In a word, without any Preparation at all, he recommenc'd
his Devotions the Day following, the whole Court admiring the Violence of his
Passion, and the Excesses to which it transported him. In the mean time, the
New-Confessor triumphed, and every body began to make their Addresses to him;
only Monsieur the Prince refrained, who naturally abominated Hypocrites. And
indeed he told him one Day in the Queen's Chamber, that strange things were to
be expected from his Confessorship, who could prevail with the King to confess
two Days together, that hardly went to Confession twice in a Year before. The
Father returned no answer, because that was no place for him to make Retorts
in; but from that time forward he hated the Prince with such a mortal Hatred,
that he never ceased to work his Ruin, and render him odious to the King.

So soon as he saw himself installed, he made it his Business to secure himself
against all unlucky Back-blows, which he had just Reason to fear; for he wanted
no Enemies: and to bring this to pass he sought to strengthen himself by
uniting Interests with those that were in Favor.

At that time the Count of Lausun was the Man that shined in greatest Luster at
the Court. He was a Gentleman of that sort, that there are not Ten thousand
such in the Kingdom, who had not above Six thousand a Year, paternal Estate.
But Fortune was so favorable to him, the from so small a Pittance, he rose in
a little time to the Pinnacle of Honor. He was Captain of the Guards of the
Body, Collonel-General of Dragoons, and a Favorite exclusive. He has a great
deal of Wit, and speaks with the greatest Grace in the World: Moreover, He is a
Person of Worth, and fit for great Enterprises, which he goes through with an
extraordinary Prowess. The History of Him, and Mademoiselle whom he married
privately in despite of the King and several other Passages, are Testimonials
of this; and if we would one Day afford the World the Memorials of his Life,
they would find therein many thing rare and singular. But his chiefest
Excellency lay in Courtship, wherein he gave way neither to Bassompierre, nor
St. Aignan. All the Ladies of the Court loved him, and some in a very
particular manner. However, La Valliere was not of that Number; and in regard
she loved the King to the Height of Delicacy, and Niceness, the least Kindness
which he showed to any other Person whatever was a great Vexation to her. The
Love which he had for the Count of Lausun among others, made her Mad. You love
him a Hundred times better then you do me said she) You hardly allow me your
Company above Three or Four Hours in ^ Day; whereas you cannot live a Moment
without him. He never stirs from your side; he is your Shadow. Prithee my
little lovely Creature, replied the King, what would thou have me to do?
Would have me drive him out of my Company, when he comes to wait upon me.
Not so (said La Valliere) I would only have ye not be always leaning upon his
Shoulder; that he should not be perpetually whispering in your Ear; and that
Lausun should not be the only Person that always never said, or did any thing
but what was curious and brave. One Day the King having laid himself upon the
Bed ^n her Chamber, and the Count discoursing to him by the Bedside, his
Majesty had a mind to say something privately to him, and to that purpose
pulled the Count by the Perriwig to bring his Head closer to his own, that he
might whisper in his Ear; but the Discourse ^asted so long, that the Count was
constrained to fall all along upon the Bed by the King. La Valliere coming in
that ^ick of time to show the Countess of Grancey a very curious Crystal
Looking-Glass, Glass, and finding Lausun in that famili^ Posture with the King,
was so terribly mad at it, that she could not forbear (...) show it. Truly Sir
(said she) you a^ wonderful bold -- Who gave y^ leave to lie upon my Bed? These
(...) very strange pieces of Impertinencies and therefore, without any
Complements pray withdraw. On the othe^side, the Count, instead of giving h^
any Answer, only smiled; and turning toward the King, Your Majesty (said he
softly in his Ear) must needs be very much pleased to see the full Extent of
her Jealousy; and so looking upon La Valli^ with an insulting Air, and
something (...) Contempt in his Face, he put her qui^ beside all Patience; so
that she fell upon him like a Mad-woman, pulled him (...) the Perriwig, tore
his Cravat, and ga^ him several Cornubs with her Fist. The Count who never
expected such a Tempest, endeavored to get clear of it (...) But I know not
whether he would have found it so easy a thing, had not the King, and Madam De
Grancey relieved him. After that, she fell a weeping, and upbraiding the King
with the little Love he had for her. You take my Enemy's part, (said she) and I
find too well, that I am unfortunate; who after ^ have sacrificed all to your
Majesty, ^m to expect no other, then to be ^he May Game of the Court. But I
shall take a care to prevent that (continued ^he) and since you have betrayed
me in (...) manner so unworthy of a great Monarch, I will betake my self to a
Nun^ery, there to bewail, all the remainder of my Life; a Love from whence I
promised my self so many sweet Satisfactions, which now, however, renders me
most miserable. In a word she pressed her Grief so home, that the King was
forced to give Lausun a smart Reprimand, and make him ask her Pardon; and all
that was little enough too, to appease her.

This Falling-out did not a little perplex Father La Chaise, who knew not well
how to manage these Two Spirits so opposite one to the other. Chiefly La
Valliere, who would admit of no Friends that took both sides, and to whom he
was particularly bound for his Preferment; so that he could not in Policy
desert her, for fear of making known his Ingratitude to the King. Thereupon, he
took her part altogether; and having overruled his own Judgment to join with
Leuvois, all Three united their Interests, and agreed unanimously together to
(...) move from all Offices, and managem^^^ of public Affairs, all Persons
that sho^ be suspected in common, or whoever (...) were, that either of 'em
hated. La V^^liere required, That Madame might (...) sacrificed to her;
Louvois, and La Ch^ resolved the ruin of the Prince; (...) all Three joined
together against Lau^^^ whose Favor was an Eyesore both (...) the one, and
the other; and for (...) more security of the Triumvirate, the^ resolved to
keep it Secret with all the (...) imaginable.

The Prince who knew nothing of (...) League, and besides was none of the m^
politic Flatterers, or Dissemblers, man times vexed La Chaise with some pe^
Mortifications, which incensed him (...) much the more. But that which man him
absolutely irreconcilable, was th^^ same bloody Piece, called The Impost^ which
Moliere brought upon the Stag^ The Prince ordered him to make a C^medy, wherein
he represented the C^^fessor so naturally to the Life, that y^ could not fail
to know him; for which the Prince promised him a Reward (...) Two thousand
Pistoles. Nevertheless that famous Comedian who foresaw the Consequence of the
Thing, although he set forth his Morals, and his Genius to ^he Life, yet forbore
to personate his Figure. The Prince therefore was not so fully satisfied with
the Piece; he would have had it spoken out more clearly, and complained of it
to Moliere, who justified himself, by giving the Prince to understand, That
besides that he should have exposed himself to manifest Danger, he could not
find Players that would undertake to act it, and so he should have ^ost the
Play without being able to give his Highness that Satisfaction which he
required of him. Thereupon the Prince resuming calmer Thoughts, and having
again perused it, found that Moliere spoke nothing but Reason; and that the
Copy sufficiently resembl'd the Original, without any necessity of adding new
bold Strokes. So that at length the Play was acted before the King; and the
Impostor appeared the first time, though not in the Habit of a Jesuit, yet in a
long loose Cassock, and a Hat with broad Brims. The success of it answered
Expectation; it was generally applauded, and in regard there was no body but
knew the Person, it kept awake the Attention of the Spectators to that degree,
that there was never known so profound a Silence upon the Stage. T^^ next Day
it was over all the Court, T^^ Father La Chaise had been acted upon (...)
Public Theater. Neither did the Prin^^ take any care to conceal the Part whi^^
he had in it: So that when the noise (...) it began to be spread abroad in the
City, (...) Crowd that came to see it was so great, th^^ they were forced to
shut up the Door^ and send away above a Thousand Person^ I leave the Reader to
Conjecture in wh^^ a Rage the Father was. He belched for Fire, and Flame
against those that in su^^ a manner derided God, and Religion for he would not
seem to agree, That (...) Comedy was made upon him. 'Tw^^ only his Zeal for the
Glory of God th^^ made him speak. Under that Preten^^ he engaged the first
President in the Q^^^rel, who forbid the public acting of the Piece upon his
Request. The Curate (...) St. Eustachius also, whom he had w^^ to his side, and
a great many others wh^^ he had made of his Party, out of a de^^ to please him,
preached against it; (...) that for a Year together, the Pulpits th^^ ^der'd
out nothing else but Anathem^ against the Author, and his Adherent However, the
King gave Moliere the Permission, which disanull'd the Pre^^dent's Prohibition,
and the Comedy was acted with as numerous a Concourse as before. He also
afterward granted him a Benefice in the Chappel-Royal of Vincennes, for one of
his Friends: which made many People believe, That the Confessor had but a short
time to Reign. But the Event showed, That they were deceived in their
Conjectures; and that if the King consented to put those little Mortifications
upon him, 'twas only to blind the Eyes of the Queen, and such as had no
kindness for him. In a word, from that time forward he was very much guided by
his Directions; and if he did not always punctually follow 'em, at least he
hearkened to his Advice in many Affairs of highest Importance.

In the mean time, the Triumvirate began to fall to pieces. Louvois, and the
Father considered, that notwithstanding ^ll their Efforts, Lausun would keep
his Post, that he grew in favor more, and more every Day, and that in the end
it might prove fatal to 'em, if they did not close with him betimes. Besides
they ^aw that La Valiere got her self many Enemies out of an affected
Resolution, ^ot to beg any Favors for any body; that her Beauty began to
wither; and that most certainly the King would su^denly quit her, so soon as he
met with more potent Charms: so that they shou^^ be Victims to the new
Mistress, and Lausun, who would be sure to link himself with her. And thus you
see our T^^ Politicians, the nearer they appro^^ her Enemy, the farther
removing themselves at a distance from La Valli^^ But the Count, whose
presumption wa^ very great, looked upon their returni^^ to him, with as much
Indifferency, (...) he had beheld their slighting him before. Nevertheless he
accepted the^ Friendship, and acted sincerely wi^^ 'em.

Nor was it long before what the foresaw came to pass. The King ^^held
Montespan, who was generally a^knowledg'd to be the most celebrated L^dy of the
Court; and therefore su^^^ring himself to fall in Love with her W^^ and Soul,
he was willing to make so^ Trial of the Substance.

Lausun had a great mind to h^ Courted her; but perceiving the Ki^ Inclination,
he was glad of the Oppo^^^nity to offer him a Sacrifice; he infla^^^ his
Passion; extolled and magnified (...) Merit and Charms of his Goddess; adding
withal, That he understood the Grandeur of the Conquest, but that he had not a
Heart that durst presume to Love in the same place with his Prince. The King
Thanked him; and was so well pleased with him for this Surrender, that to
repair his Loss, he gave him leave to make Choice of any Mistress that pleased
him in the Court; and that he would persuade her to have him. He also entrusted
him to speak to the Lady in his Favor; so that he had an Opportunity to make
her sensible how much more she was beholding to him for quitting his Affection
to her. In short, The King loved her, and she received his Love with all the
Joy of a Woman that breathed nothing but Ambition. The difficulty was, to work
the Confessor to a Liking of this new Commerce between two Married Persons,
whose Husbands grew Horn-mad to that degree, that the King was forced to Banish
the Marquis of of Montespan, by reason of the hideous coil he kept at Court
for the taking his Wife from him.

Now though this Story was something like to that of David and Bathsheba, the
Father thought it not so proper to be Nathan. There was no such necessity for
him to trouble himself much about the Business That Holy Man had always a Moral
ready at a dead-lift, and Pistol-proof against the most crying Adulteries. So
that he submitted with an Exemplary Resignation to the Pleasure of his King.
More then that, he caused Lausun to let Montespan know, and afterward went
himself to assure her of his inviolable Devotion to her Interests. She, on the
other side, promised him reciprocal Adherency, and that he might be certain she
would serve him to the utmost of her Power, both for and against all In short,
Although till then they were but very little Acquainted, they became Intimate
Friends before they parted.

Poor La Valliere, who saw these things transacted before her Face, wept Day
and Night, and made such mournful Complaints, as would have mollify'd Stones.
She went ten times, like a Mad woman, to Father La Chaise, on purpose to
upbraid him with his Infidelity; b^^ he was always invisible when she came One
day among the rest, that her Fury had transported her to seek him out a^ far as
Paris, in the Professed House, whither he goes two or three Days in a Week, and
that Answer was made her, That he was gone: she not being so satisfied,
alighted out of her Coach, and would be let into the Convent. The Porter
opposed her; and the Noise that she made, fetched out several of the Jesuits
that stopped her from going any farther. Then melting into Tears, and abandoning
her self to all her Sorrows, she thundered out a thousand Exclamations against
that Knave, who had been the first who confirmed her in her Tenderness for the
King; who had promised her a Thousand times, that he should never engage
himself to any other; and yet notwithstanding all his Promises, and his Fear of
God, had basely betrayed her, and had authorized the King to commit an infamous
Adultery, and take another Man's Wife from him. In short, In less then a
Quarter of an Hour she informed all those that were present of all the secret
Transactions that had passed between her and him. The Jesuits were ready to
hang themselves at this unlucky Accident, for which there was no Remedy. For
she was a Fury not to be approached but at the Peril of him that came within
her reach. And if Mareshal de Bellefonds had not arrived in the interim, and
carried her away, she had most certainly revealed a great deal more, so much
she was beside her self. I know not whether Night brought her to her self, and
caused her to see that extreme Folly that she had committed, and made her
ashamed of what she had done; or whether her Despair to see her Love despised,
were the only Motive. However it were, she betook her self into a Carmelite
Nunnery, where she has continued ever since.

Her Retirement delivered Father La Chaise from an extraordinary Disturbance
that extremely tormented him: for he made no question but that in her Fury she
would have affronted him even in the King's Chamber.

Montespan could not moderate her Joy, that now she had no longer any Rivaless
that could dispute with her the Prince's Heart, and keep her from being sole
Predominant. Lausun rid victorious over all his Enemies; and Louvois, content
with his share of her Favor, little regarded La Valliere. So that she, a poor
unfortunate Mistress to a King, abandoned and betrayed, saw her self
constrained to fly to a dreary Retirement, there to bewail, all the rest of her
days, those transient Pleasures which she had hardly had time to taste;
together with a Surplusage of Grief, not to be lamented or pitied but by very
few.

It Is true, that Lausun did not overlong enjoy the Pleasure of Rejoicing at
her Disgrace. For in a little time after, he had the ill Luck to be crushed by
a Fall no less desperate then here is. Every body knows how he had enthralled the
Heart of Mademoiselle de Montpensier, who demanded him for her Husband; and how
the King, who thought himself engaged by his Word to let him have whatever
Mistress he should make Choice of, consented to the Match; which had been
solemnized in the sight of all the World, but that the Prince of Conde, in
Conjunction with several other Princes of the Blood, so well represented the
Stain which that Marriage would imprint upon the Royal Family, that maugre the
Importunities of La Chaise, and the Interest of the Nobility who sided with
Lausun, he retracted his Word, and forbad 'em to think any more of it.

But all the Prohibitions in the World were never able to withold two
Persons, of which the one was possessed with a violent Love, the other by an
inordinate Ambition; and He more-especially, since by the Match he became
Related to one of the Greatest Monarchs in Europe. He therefore Married her
Privately, without the King's Knowledge; flattering himself, perhaps, That when
the Thing was done, and that the King came to understand it, he would only look
a little Gruff upon 'em for two or three Days. But he took a quite different
Course: for though he loved 'em both very well, yet he would never consent to
let the Marriage be made Public; and in regard there was some Reason t^ fear
lest the Princess should be with Child he sent the Count to Bastille; and
thence removed him to Pignerol, where he remained Sixteen Years; that is to
say, t^ there was no longer any Danger of their Interviews: at the end of which
time, Mademoiselle purchased her Liberty, with the Loss of the Sovereignty of
Dombes.

Louvois was not very sorry for (...) Misfortune. He was always a Favorite at
least, and not a little formidable: for though they were all Three leagued
together as I said before, to exclude all others from the King's Favor, and
particularly the Princes of the Blood; nevertheless, the^ was no depending upon
Lausun.

But the King, who had been lon^ hatching the Design of Universal Monarchy,
hearkened very much to the Councils of Father La Chaise; with whom Cardinal
Mazarine had left excellent Memoirs upon that Subject, and who of himself
proved greatly serviceable toward it, by means of the Jesuits, People prepared
for any Undertaking, and of whom he had always a hundred in his sleeve ready
to Obey all manner of Commands. The Draught of this Design which he had drawn
up, looked with as fair a Prospect as any in the World. The King of England was
to be lulled a-sleep, whatever it cost; which appeared to be no difficult thing
to do, provided you fed him with Money. Then was the King to fall upon Holland,
and make himself Master of it. Which done, the Spanish Low Countries, the
Bishoprics of Liege, Munster, and Cologne, could not have made any long
Resistance. Then an Alliance was to be made with the Turk, to fall upon the
Emperor on both sides, and then divide the Spoils. Thus you see the Design was
laid; and if it has not had that good Luck which was expected, it has not been
for want of Conduct; for all the secret Tricks, and scandalous Artifiees of
Knavish Policy, have been made use of to bring it to pass; except of latter
Years, wherein I must confess they committed some Capital Faults which are
never to be recovered: Of which I shall speak in due place.

Now in regard the first step they were to make in this great Enterprise, was,
to make sure of the King of England, 1670.
the King resolved to send thither his Sister-in-Law, against the Advice of
Father La Chaise, who had no Kindness at all for her; and who, as he said, was
not good Catholic enough to be entrusted with such a Negotiation. However, she
set forward, and arrived at Dover; where she was met by the King her Brother,
to whom she made those Proposals with which she was entrusted; which were, To
have an Alliance Offensive and Defensive against all Princes; To break the
Triple League; and, To make War upon Holland in particular.

But whether it were that the King had no Inclination to the Propositions of
himself; or that the Princess not thinking they would be of any Advantage to
him, dissuaded him from meddling, she returned without doing any thing. Nor did
Father La Chaise fail to lay hold of the Opportunity, to render her suspected
to the King, by putting him in mind, that he had told him what would come of
it, before she went. But whether it were that the King bore her any Grudge, or
any other Person, she died at St. Clou, within Three, or Four Days after her
Return. God knows how, for we could never hear of any thing else, but that she
was very well in the Morning; only after she had supt up a Mess of Broth, she
cried out I am Poisoned. So died that poor Princess in the Twenty sixth Year of
her Age, and Fifteen Days over.

Now, though they were not so Successful the first time to involve the King of
England wholly in their Interests, yet the Design was not given over. To which
purpose Father La Chaise proposed to the King to make use of the Jesuits. It Is
certain, Sir, (said he) that they are the fittest Persons in the World to
manage both King Charles, and his Brother the Duke of York. For not to reck'n
upon their being both Catholics at the bottom of their Hearts, in regar'd they
have been bred up in our Religion, Your Majesty knows that they are deeply
obliged to the Society. Had it not been for the Supplies of Money which they
furnished 'em withal, they had been in danger of making but a small Figure in
the World. Our Fathers of France, alone by themselves, allowed him Twenty
thousand Crowns a Year, which there is little likelihood will be ever re-pay'd
'em. I speak this, (added he) to let your Majesty know, that a Jesuit will be
no ominous sight to that Prince. I believe it (replied the King) nor am I
ignorant of the Kindnesses he has received from your Society: So that there is
good Reason to hope, that he will do much upon their Solicitations. But with
what an Eye do you think will your Fathers be looked upon in England? Do you
believe they will be safe there? Never think it; and if they should once come
to be known there, the Character of Agent, or Envoy will never protect 'em from
the Fury of the People. I should rather choose to employ the Duchess of
Portsmouth, who has hitherto served me faithfully in several little Affairs,
that I have entrusted to her Management; and I am persuaded, she will be no
less useful to me in great Ones. She is very nimble, and dexterous in Business,
and possesses altogether the very Heart and Soul of the King; and frankly to
tell you a Mistress has a Hundred Opportunities, and Tricks, to improve
Persuasion, which the most cunning Ministers can never meet with. Sir, (replied
La Chaise with a Smile) your Majesty may speak knowingly in that particular: I
have nothing to object against it. I am also convinced, That the Duchess of
Portsmouth is now the only Person that can undertake this Affair with Success.
There needs no more then to instruct her well in your Majesty's Intentions, and
it is only to that purpose, that I have proposed to send some of our People into
that Country. Very good, (replied the King) I consent to it, but whom shall we
send? Your Majesty, (answered La Chaise) cannot make choice of a better Man
then Father De Carne. He is near of Kin to the Duchess, and well-belov'd by
the Duke of York; and besides that, he is one of the most Politic Head-pieces
in our Order. The King agreed to it, and sent him away Fifteen Days after,
furnished with Three or Four Suits of Modish Apparel, by way of Disguise.

So soon as he arrived at London, he went to wait upon the Duchess of
Portsmouth, who entertained him in a very courtly manner, for above a Quarter
of an Hour, not knowing who he was. However, she bethought her self that she
knew (...) Face, though after long tormenting her Brain, she could not call to
mind where she ha^ seen him, or how she came acquainted with him; so that at
length she was constrained to ask his Name.

I find (said the Father) that Fortune, and Grandeur have made you forget you^
old Friends, else you could never have banished poor Father Carne so utterly
from your Thoughts. Is it possible (cried the Duchess) that it should be you,
dear Cousin, (embracing him) i^ truth I beg your Pardon. But, good God, what
Business brings you hither? Do You know the Danger you are in? Should you once
be discovered by the Mobile, there would be no way to save you. Is your Zeal so
warm as to embolden ye to come hither, in search of Death, with so much
Gayety, and Briskness? I knew the time when you were more sparing of your Life.
The time past is not the present, Madam, (answered he.) It Is true, that in my
Youth, I loved my Pleasures, perhaps a little more than became a Person of my
Coat; but now I am become a Man that only seeks to serve God, and his Prince;
and it is upon that account only, that I come hither. It Is from the King,
(continued he) that I come. He expects from you an Important piece of Service;
and as I know you will be overjoyed to have the Opportunity, I shall not
trouble you with long Remonstrances, but only deliver his Letter into your
Hands, together with another from the Reverend Father La Chaise, who has
written to ye likewise: and I am to give ye notice, that you are beholding to
him for the best part of the King's Resolutions to make choice of your self to
serve him before his Ambassador M. de Croissy, the Lord Treasurer, who is
wholly at his Devotion, and Twenty others, who would have been glad to have
given his Majesty Proofs of their Fidelity to him. And so saying, he presented
the Letters to the Duchess, who opened 'em immediately with a great deal of
Earnestness. The First of which from the King, was as follows.

Madam, Duchess of Portsmouth,
THE sincere and true Affection which I bear the King of England, my Brother,
and good Friend, which I have endeavored to make known to him upon all
Occasion, having made me passionately desirous a long time since, to join with
him in a strict and lasting Alliance, which uniting both our Empires in the
Bond of Peace and Amity, might enable us not only to repel the Assaults of our
Enemies, but also to repress their Boldness, I sent to him Madam Henrietta
Stuart, our dear Sister of happy Memory, to propound a Treaty which could not
have been but very Advantageous to him. But she found him so pre-possess'd by
the Councils of certain Person about him, who minding nothing but then
voluptuous Pleasures, would be at their W^^ end to see him undertake any thing
to his Honor, that it was impossible to obtain any thing of him.

Nevertheless, in regard I cannot, without great Grief of Mind, behold him
under such a Lethargy so contrary to his Interest, especially when the
Hollanders out brave him to the highest Degree, I thought it fit to write to
your self, requesting you to represent to him, in my name, how prejudicial such
an excessive Love of his Repose will be to him a last the apparent Aim of the
Hollanders being to establish their Commerce, upon the Ruin of the Trade of
England, and to make themselves Masters of the Sea, from which they do not
think themselves far off, since they already refuse to lore Sail to his Men of
War, and have violated the Laws of Nations, in driving his Merchants from their
settled Factories, and Places of Trade. Besides, I cannot believe, that he has
altogether forgot these zealous Sentiments which I have formerly observed in
him for the Catholic Religion, and the Re-establishment of it in England,
which would be one of the most Glorious, and Christian-like Designs that ever
were set on Foot. In the first place therefore, the Pride of the Hollanders
must be humbl'd, and they themselves disabl^d from being in a Condition to
embroil their Neighbor Kingdoms. I see nothing of Difficulty in it; that
Republic has more of Pride, then Strength: So that if the King my Brother will
but join with me, I make no question of Conquest, by God's Assistance.

I flatter my self that he will do me so much Justice, as to believe that it is
not my own Interest which makes me thus Importunate. He is concerned at least,
as much as I to bring 'em down; it being certain, that while that Commonwealth
subsists, (...) will never suffer any Alteration in England, either as to the
Government, or in Religion; and that the Parliament who are well assured of it,
will take all opportunities to set their Feet upon his Neck; so that if he does
not betimes prevent the Effects of their Independent, and Republican Humor, he
will f^ himself reduced to be no more then the first Gentleman in his
Parliament.

It Is with a great deal of Sorrow that (...) foretell the King my Brother, a
Misfort^ of this Nature: However, I shall have (...) least, this Satisfaction
within my self, the I have neglected nothing to let him know it, and hinder it
from falling upon him.

As to what remains, in regard his Parliament, whose Aims are far remote from
when they ought to be, will never consent to a We^ that will be so ruinous to
it, and therefore will never give him Subsidies to maintain it, I offer to
supply him with all the Money, and Ammunition which he shall stand in need of
for the setting out of his Fleet.

Besides all this that I have said to you* Father Carne will more fully inform
you of our Intentions. I make no question but you will make use of all the
Credit which your Deserts have acquired in the good Thoughts of the King my
Brother, so that I never stopped in my Considerations about the choice which it
behooved me to make of the Person fit for this Negotiation. Do me then, if it
lies in your power, this Service which I promise my self from your Friendship,
and leave to me the Care of Acknowledgment. God have you in his Keeping, Madam,
Duchess of Portsmouth.

Fontainbleau, November the 18th. 1670.

La Chaise's Letter ran thus: Madam,
YOU will understand by the King's Letter the Glorious Distinction which he
makes between Your Self, and so many Persons, whose Devotion, and Fidelity for
him are Inviolable. He relies upon you for a Negotiation, upon the Success of
which depends the Destiny of Europe. A Great Princess was entrusted with the
same before you, and though the Pains she took proved Unsuccessful, His Majesty
has better Hopes in Yours. He knows, Madam, how difficult a thing it will be,
to refrain from yielding to the Persuasions of a Person, whose particular
Privilege it is to prevail over all Hearts. Besides, We are easily inclined to
believe, Th^^ a Wit so piercing, so solid, so insinuating (...) Yours, will
easily find a way to accomply what you undertake; and so much the rather,
because, upon this occasion, His Majesty proposes nothing to the King of
England, (...) what is for his great Advantage.

However it be, Madam, the King expect from you the most important Piece of
Service that can be done him by a Subject, since (...) concerns the most
dazzling and most magnificent Act of conspicuously glittering Honor, that a
mighty Prince could ever aim at; (...) mean the universal Monarchy, which it i^
in your power to facilitate him, or rath^^ which you will assure him, if you
prosper (...) the Affair which he entrusts in your Hands Judge, Madam, what
Blessings, and wh^^ Honors are reserved for You. Make i^ therefore of all the
Power which your Beauty and your rare Endowments have given y^^ over the Heart
of a Monarch that loves a^^ doats upon you. You can never do it upon (...)
juster occasion, since it concerns the Honor of your Prince, the extirpation
of Heresy, and the exaltation of our Mother the Holy Church, I dare be bold to
say, That whatever Courses you take, of what Nature soever they be, will be
extremely meritorious before God, provided you direct your Intentions right,
and will, infallibly, procure ye eternal Bliss.

You see, Madam, that all manner of Reasons, both spiritual and temporal,
oblige ye to leave nothing unomitted: and I engage to make the King take
notice of the Zeal and Affection wherewith you shall be pleased to serve him in
this Affair.

Moreover, Madam, be convinced of my most humble Respects, and of the real
desire I have to give you Proofs of my profound Esteem, by all manner of
Services: Grant me the Favor to accept my unworthy Offers; and by that means
rid me of the Trouble which it would be to me, to think that I am in vain, and
unprofitably Yours, etc.

Fontainbleau, November the 18th. 1670.



When this Letter came to my Hands, could not forbear laughing at the pleasant
Method which Father La Chaise pre^crib'd the Duchess to gain Paradise: (...)
know no body but would easily pur^ue it, could they confide in the Father's
Assurances, or could they believe that the Morals of this worthy Casuist were
true.

The Duchess who has a world of Wit, ^ould not choose but be sensible of it;
but in regard that every body loves (...) flatter themselves, she took but
little notice of it. Certain it is, that without making the least semblance of
it to Father Carne, who would by no means have relished the least Jesting upon
this particular, she testified an extraordinary Satisfaction for the Honor
which the King had done her, and promised him largely whether the thing were
feasible, or whether it would be to her Honor or no.

This Duchess of Portsmouth was the Daughter of the Marquess of Kerouel, (...)
of the most considerable Gentlemen (...) the Province of Bretaigne, whose
An^^stors possessed a large Estate in Lan^* But as there are few Families that
sta^ for many Ages together, this was also (...) much sunk in Reputation and
Authority* But for all that, the Marquis had 1500 good Livres a Year, when he
present his Daughter to serve the Princess Herietta Stuart. It Is true, he owed
as (...) as he was worth, but he lived never a wi^^ the less at his Ease for
all that; it being ^ natural to the Bretaigne Gentlemen, n^ to pay what they
owe, that it is a comm^ Proverb among the People of the Country, What, a
Gentleman of Bretaigne, a Pay his Debts?

But to return to the Duchess of Portsmouth. She was put to wait upon Madame,
as I said before; where the King of England first saw her, and loved her ever
after. So that when he came to be restored to his Crown, he begged her of the
King of France and his Sister, who could not deny him so small a Favor.
Presently the King sent a Yatch and a Frigate to Breast, to bring her from
thence into England. Where her Wit, and her Beauty, and her meddling with
State Affairs, raised her a great number of Enemies, some in the Parliament,
some among the People, and others among the Court-Ladies, among whom there were
few that equaled her in Beauty. But for all this, the Love which she had for
the King, or her own Good Fortune, which was the most likely, enabled her to
surmount all these Difficulties with an extraordinary Courage. The chief Maxim
of her Politics, was to keep in with the Duke of York, and side with France;
and by that means she so well ordered her Business, that she held on a Ruling
Favorite till the Death of King Charles II, and should I say, till the
Advancement of King WILLIAM, I should not tell an Untruth.

She is moderately Tall, well-Shap'd, having the Air and Gate of a Queen. She
has the loveliest Mouth and Teeth in the world, and her Smiles penetrate to the
bottom of the Heart. When she has a mind to be Complaisant, she is altogether
lovely; but the mischief is, that she will not be Complaisant to All. And this
is that which has procured her such a world of Envy and Ill Will. She has a Wit
so piercing, that it is impossible to disguize any thing from her. Her
prevailing Passion, or rather her Idol, is Ambition; to which she sacrifices
her Repose, her Pleasures, her Honor, and all things in the World. Now in
regard she pants after nothing but Honor, and that for several Years she has
made a Considerable Figure in the World, she has assumed such an Air of
Grandeur and Business, which she will never leave off as long as she lives.
There is no Woman living so Proud as this Woman: but the last Revolution in
England, by which she lost above Fifty thousand Crowns a Year, caused a great
Alteration in her Affairs. However, she put a good Face upon the Matter, in
hopes the Times would change again, or else that the King of France would give
her a Considerable Pension for the Service she did him. But that sort of
Gratitude is no longer in Fashion: the Partridge must be plumed while you have
her in your Hands; for if once you let her go, it is in vain to expect she will
ever return. The Duchess of Portsmouth is a fair Example of this. She defied
all England, to serve her French King and Country; and for that reason was
thrown out of all. Since that, she has been reduced to that necessity, as to
sell her Coaches, Horses, Movables, and to turn off three fourth Parts of her
Servants, no body offering her so much as a Pension of a Thousand Pistoles. So
that when all her Hopes failed her, and that there was no likelihood of King
James's Return, she sent her Son into England; where he became a Protestant,
and married the Lord Bellasis's Widow, with whom he had a great Fortune. By
which means he is upon as sure Grounds as before; and I think he has done very
well.

But leaving this Digression, the Duchess of Portsmouth was so overjoyed that
she was become so necessarily Instrumental to the Designs of a Great Monarch,
that in the Evening she returned this Answer to the King.

SIR,
THE Honor which Your Majesty does me, surpasses far my Hopes and my Ambition.
I shall have henceforward some good Opinion of my self, since my King has not
thought me unworthy to do him the utmost of my most humble Services upon an
Occasion of so high Importance. But I dare be bold to say, That Your Majesty
did me ample Justice, when you thought that my Zeal and my F^delity would be
inviolable. Though I am removed into a Foreign Country, yet I have not forgot
the Advantage I enjoy, to be b^^^ your Subject; nor that my Mother, my Brother,
and all my Relations, are still in your Kingdom. And lastly, That I am
beholding to you for my good Fortune, since it was your Majesty your self that
gave me to the King by whom I have the Honor to be beloved. Th^^ Love, Sir,
however it may Charm me, dis never as yet render me so Glorious as now, that it
has procured me the Means to be serviceable to your Majesty; and that you w^^
find by my extraordinary Diligence in performing your Commands. But in regard
the King has not hitherto appeared to me so we inclined, I beg your Majesty to
give me a little Time, and to afford me Leisure to take my Opportunities. It Is
certain, That many good Designs are ruined by too much Precipitation, that
might have been brought to a good Conclusion by Temporising a little. And I am
apt to think, Sir, that this is a Design of the same nature. Should I open the
Business to the King at an unseasonable minute, and he should absolutely forbid
me never to speak of it more to him, should I not fall into a Misfortune to be
unprofitable to your Majesty? Which would be a Grief past Consolation to me.
Not but that I believe he will be brought to Reason. But your Majesty your self
acknowledges, That the deceased Madam, of Glorious Memory, failed in her
Attempt. And therefore, if you please to give me leave, I will proceed gently
in this Affair; which by the Blessing of God will have a happy Issue; at least,
I will not be sparing of my Endeavors to bring it about. I am with a most
profound Respect,

SIR, Your Majesty's most humble, etc.
London, December. 14. 1670.

Afterward she wrote the following Letter to Father La Chaise.

Most Reverend Father,
NEver complain more of the slender Occasions which have made me take the
liberty to beg Favors of you. That which you have now done me, in persuading
his Majesty to honor me with his Commands, is so great, that I shall be
obliged to you as long as I live. And it would be a violent Trouble to me, not
to be able to discharge the Obligations you have laid upon me, did I not know
that it is always, your desire I should be beholding to you upon that account. I
consent then, since it must be so; but know, Most Reverend Father, That if it
were in my power to repay you as great Services as that which you have now done
me, by an extreme Acknowledgment, or an earnest Desire to do my Utmost for them
from when I have received 'em, I should owe you nothing.

There is no need, Most Reverend Father, of proposing me magnificent Rewards,
to engage me to do my Duty in the Negotiation wherewith you have entrusted me.
You will fa^ by the exact Account which I shall give you of all my Proceedings,
that I shall leave nothing omitted to bring it to a good Issue, upon no other
Motive then my Obedience to the King and to do him faithful Service. But in
regard this Affair requires a great deal of Precaution I think it the best way
to proceed slowly; and dexterously to lay hold of Time and Opportunity. This is
the Course that I have resolved to take till I receive new Orders.

London, December. 14. 1670. I am, etc.


These Dispatches finished, she sent away a Courier immediately, giving him
other Letters for the Pretense of his Journey; but sowed up her Answers with
her own Hand, within the Lining of his Coat, under his Badge.

In the mean time she sounded every day the King's Inclinations to the Proposal
she had made him; and not finding him so averse as she thought he would have
been, she expected with Impatience an Opportunity to speak to him in plain
English.

Nor was it long before she met with one: for the King having demanded a Sum
of Money of the Parliament, which they would not grant him, the King complained
of this Refusal, and told the Duke of Buckingham, That they used him like a
Boy, whose Parents denied to give him Money, for fear he should mis-spend it.

But this was nothing to an Affront which he received a few Days after. There
is a Custom at London, which has been time out of mind, and which, though abusive
and insolent, is very much in use among the Vulgar Sort. This is a certain
Liberty the People take to abuse all those that go by Water, let their
Condition or Quality be what it will, not excepting the King and Queen
themselves who are often forced to hear themselves miscalled and abused,
without being able to help themselves. But this is only in Sport, and lasts no
longer then they are upon the Water: for as soon as they land, those Injuries
cease, and every body has that Respect given 'em which belongs to 'em. This is
a thing so delightful to the English, that many times the Court Ladies and
Lords will go by Water in an Eveing, to provoke the Watermen and Basket-people
to call 'em all to naught, and so return back again as content as Queens. Now
it happened one Evening, that the King went in his Barge with the Duchess of
Portsmouth. Presently the Canaille having espied her, cried out, A Whore! A
Whore! -- and asked 'em whether they were coming from a Bawdy House, or going
to one? and whether they were not the Persons that they saw Dressing at such a
Surgeons. All this the King liked well enough. But when they came to ask the
King how much Money the Parliament had given him to build his Palace? and where
he intended to erect it? whether at London, or at Windsor? with a thousand
other Impertinencies of the same nature, he could no longer contain his
Passion. Par-bleu (said he) Would any but an unhappy King, as I am, endure
these Insolences? I could find in my heart to put 'em all to the Sword. Then
the Duchess put in seasonably, and told him, That he was not to exert his
Anger against those pitiful Scoundrels, but against the Parliament, that were
the Occasion of all this, and who visibly went about to keep him under
Pupillage. She repeated the same thing to him when she came home. At what time
the King answered her, That 'twas true; and that he began to be sensible of it,
and that he would take another Course. He told her farther, That he intended to
Dissolve the Parliament, and Call another that should better understand their
Duty. Sir, (said the Duchess) Your Majesty seems not to have rightly
considered the Greatness of the Evil, since you go about to apply such Feeble
Remedies. All England; of which the Parliament makes but one part, is animated
with the same Spirit, that will prevail no less in another Parliament, when you
have Called it, then in this. But you must go to the Bottom of the Mischief,
and pull it up by the Root, otherwise you do nothing. Afterward, she laid it
before him, That so long as the Parliament found themselves supported by the
Hollanders, they would be still playing the Masters more and more, till they
had confined his Authority within such narrow Bounds, that when he would, it
should not be in his power to help himself. The King, who was then in the lucky
Minute of Persuasion, jumped with the Duchess in her Sentiments, and told her,
He was very much afraid it would come to that at length, and that he was very
sorry he did not heark'n to the Proposals that were made him by the King of
France. Certain it is (answered the Duchess) that he is the Prince of the
World whose Alliance would be most advantageous for your Majesty. He loves you,
and is much concerned for your Honor. He is Potent, and the only Prince in a
Condition to bring down and sink the Hollanders into Perdition, upon whom you
are to look as the only Obstacles of your Majesty's Grandeur. The King gave ear
to the Duchess in such a manner, as to make her think that he was no way
displeased with her Discourse. So that the Duchess, after a great deal more to
the same Tune, and still finding he took all patiently, told him at length,
That Father De Carne, who was arrived in the Kingdom in the Quality of a
Missionary, had declared to her, That the King his Master was extreme sorry
that his Majesty would not (accept of his Alliance; That he foresaw, to his
great Grief, the unavoidable Mischiefs which this Refusal would draw upon him;
and that the said Father had Orders to engage her to speak of it to his
Majesty; but that for fear of Displeasing him she had always kept her self upon
the Reserve, though with a great deal of Reluctance, because she knew the thing
to be of great Importance. Upon that, the King, interrupting her, asked her
where the Father was? telling her withal, That he should be glad to see him.
The next day she sent for him, and the King discoursed with him a long while.
She also presented him to the Duke of York; who made very much of him, and
promised to do his Utmost with the King. So that in short, the Duchess of
Portsmouth had leave to write to the King, That his Majesty was inclined to
negotiate with him a firm and good Alliance, so soon as he should send any
Person to that purpose. And the Treaty was concluded in the Lodgings belonging
to the Duchess of Portsmouth, who had the greatest share in it. The Conditions
were, That the King of France should defray the Expenses of the Fleet, of which
an Account should be drawn up, and pay down Four millions beforehand. That for
defraying the other Expenses, the King of England should begin the War, by
setting upon the Smyrna Fleet Homeward-bound, by which he would be a Gainer
several Millions; and that at the same time the King of France should enter
Holland at the Head of 100000 Men. The Project was put in Execution Point by
Point; and the Hollanders seeing the King was making great Preparations for the
Sea, and not doubting but it would be against them, for that in all likelihood
it could not be against France, yet could not fully persuade themselves of the
truth, till they sensibly felt the Blow. They always thought that it tended
either to get some Money out of 'em, or else to the re-establishment of the
Prince of Orange, a thing which at that time was in Agitation among themselves;
so that without ever so much as stirring, they quietly expected the whole Force
of their Enemies, which had like to have utterly overwhelmed 'em. They then
found it too true, That it is not sufficient for a Prince to think himself
safe, because he has given no just occasion of a War; and that he ought never
to repose so profoundly upon the Faith of Treaties, as not to have Forces
always ready to oppose his Enemy upon any sudden breach of Peace; or according
to the common Proverb, Not to rely so much upon a Neighbor, as not to keep a
vigilant Eye over him. But go and preach these Politics to People, that love
their Ease better then their Lives, and because they have renounced enlarging
their Territories, think all others of their mind, and you may as well preach to
so many Statues. In short, this Confidence cost 'em dear: For the King of
England had no sooner fallen upon the Smyrna Fleet, but the King of France
filled all Holland with Terror, and Dismay. He took Maestricht, Graves,
Nimeghen, and pierced as far as Utretcht, from whence he beheld but one little
spot more to Subjugate. 1672.
In that City he exercised all the Prerogatives of a Sovereign Conqueror: He
changed the Magistrates, coined Money, and there received a stately Embassy
from England; at what time the Duke of Buckingham, and the Lords Arlington, and
Halifax, were sent from the King of England. These things tickled La Chaise
even to Triumph, and Exultation, insomuch that he could not forbear asking the
King, with an Air of Joy, and Content, whither he would take his Counsel
another time.

He had also Emissaries in all the Catholic Courts, more-especially with the
Emperor, and the King of Spain, into whose Ears they continually peal'd, That
the King had no other Aim in this War, but the Extirpation of Heresy, which he
was going to Attack and Combat even in the Trenches, and in the very Arms of
her most formidable Champions, the English, and Hollanders; that by a visible
Favor of God, there was a Way found to dis-unite 'em, and that they would
themselves destroy one another: and that the Finger of God, and that Celestial
Frenzy which constrained the Enemies of the People of God to fall upon one
another was herein to be observed.

The Emperor, who is a good Prince, and a zealous Catholic, seriously believed
the Tales which the Jesuits told him, and making it a Case of Conscience to
oppose such Holy Arms, remained in a Lethargy that surpised all the World, and
warmed himself at the Fire which devoured his Neighbors House, never minding
the Danger of his own.

At length the Elector of Brandenburgh, a wise, and courageous Prince, could no
longer be a Spectator in a Quarrel that so nearly concerned him. He was the
first that drew his Sword to succor poor Holland, then at the last Gasp; and
so lively laid before the Emperor the terrible Consequences of the King's
Victories, that he obliged him to declare open War, and to send a good Army to
the Rhine, under the Conduct of Montecuculi, with Orders to join the Elector of
Brandenburg, and fight Turenne, after he had well tired his Army; which would
have extremely weak'nd the King's Forces, and reduced him to a Necessity of
quitting his Conquests to defend his own Country. This unexpected Resolution of
the Emperor, extremely encumbered him; for La Chaise had always promised the
contrary; nor was it a small Vexation, and Disappointment to the King. But La
Chaise bid him be of good Comfort, for that he had an infallible Secret to make
him break up the Campaign without fighting a stroke; as he did, by
Counterfeiting a private Order from the Emperor to Montecuculi, which forbid
him positively to join the Elector, whatever Commands he had received to the
contrary, unless they imported an Express, and particular Revocation of the
Order he had sent him. And thus the Business was carried on.

During the time that La Chaise resided at Rome, he had for his Companion a
certain Italian Friar, whose Name was Francisco Pironni, a Graver once, and an
Ingenious Artist in his Trade, but withal, the greatest Cheat, and Rogue, that
ever the Earth bore. La Chaise had made use of this Fellow upon sundry
Occasions; wherein he showed such Proofs of his Ability, and Industry, that he
thought him able to gain him many Creatures among the Jesuits in Germany,
whether he sent him only upon that Design. Pironni discharged his Trust so
effectually, that by means of his Intriegues, La Chaise had settled his best
Correspondencies at Vienna, and it was to himself that they had recourse to
counterfeit the Order which I have mentioned. They had found a way to put into
his Hands some old Pattent, where was both his Imperial Majesty's Sign Manual,
and his Seal affixed; and both the one and the other were counterfeited so
exactly well, that the Emperor himself would have been deceived. So that
Montecuculi, who had incurred his Indignation by his repeated Refusals to join
the Electoral Army, was absolutely justified by showing his counterfeit Orders.
This Villain had engraved the Seal upon a Steel of the same Bigness, and cut the
Sign Manual upon a Copper-Plate; which being applied to the Paper, made the
Impression so exact, that it was impossible to discover the Cheat, though it
had been known beforehand. This being done, and the Order written above the
Sign Manual, a Courier's Habit was procured for Pironni, and he carried it
himself to the General, and then returned to his Convent, where it was not to
be thought that any body would look for him. And this was the Reason that the
Imperial Arms had so little Success that Year: And had not the Prince of Orange
been so prudent, as young as he was, instead of ceasing to besiege Twenty Towns
one after another, to march directly to Bon, which he took, and opened the Pass
of Flanders to the Germans, whom he put into a condition to make a powerful
Diversion, we had the greatest Reason to expect, that all the Remainder of the
Seven Provinces would have fallen into the Hands of the French. But this Course
which the Prince took, broke all their Measures in such a manner, that they
were forced to abandon all, except Maestricht, and Graves.

And as it seldom happens that one Misfortune comes alone, it so fell out, that
the Parliament of England, beholding this turn of Fortune, took courage, and
presented so many several Addresses to the King, that he was forced to make a
Peace with the Dutch whether he would or no. However, he wrote first of all to
the King of France, to let him know, that he could not avoid concluding the
Peace, by reason of the Importunity of his Subjects. I could produce several
Copies of the Letters written upon this occasion; but because I would not be
Prolix, this shall suffice from the Duchess of Portsmouth, to Father La Chaise.

Reverend Father,
IT IS but some few Days ago, That the King of England was constrained to Sign
a Peace full sore against his Will. I cannot tell what his Majesty of France
may think of it, but I cannot forbear telling you, That in truth, he has no
Reason to take it Ill, considering how long it was before he came to a final
Resolution. He stav'd it off to the very last; and without doubt, had never
consented, had he not had certain Intelligence, that the Prince of Orange,
finding Holland free and quitted, began to listen to the Proposals of the
Parliament, who, as your Reverence knows, had invited him into the Kingdom. We
were persuaded till now, That his youthful Years, which seemed not to be ripe
for great Enterprises, together with his natural moderation, and averseness to
Broils, and Quarrels, would not have permitted him to give ear on that side;
but since we understand, That if he were not fully resolved, yet his Wavering
was enough to continue the King's Jealousies, and that the States did no way
disapprove his making a Descent, which indeed would be the most advantageous
Course they could take.

The News therefore of his Hesitation, put the King of England upon coming to
an absolute Determination, who could not in prudence venture the Invading of
his Kingdom by the only Enemy that he had most reason to fear. A Revolution
like that, would have engaged the King to a Diversion that must have been much
to his Prejudice, whereas now he may interpose, as a Mediator, and procure his
Majesty an advantageous Peace if he thinks it convenient; or if not, he may be
in a condition to do him all possible Services underhand; and of this your
Reverence may assure his Majesty. His Britannick Majesty having ordered me to
send you word, that notwithstanding the forced Peace which he has made, he will
never depart from that Alliance which he has contracted with him, n^ from his
Interests which he looks upon as his own. He has given a convincing Proof of
his Constancy, in rejecting the Addresses that were made him, to repeal the Act
which was made sometime since at your Request, in favor of the Nonconformists;
under which Pretense, he also protects the Catholics, and their Meetings. He
will do it for the future as much as he can; of which your Reverence may be
confidently assured,

I am, etc.


William Temple was sent to the States to propose his Mediation, which they
presently accepted. Spain, and the Empire, were more Nice, and the Prince of
Orange who had no kindness for a Treacherous Peace, started all the
Difficulties that could be thought of, which was the Reason, that the Thing was
procrastinated for some time. Afterward he fought that famous Battle of
Seneff, against the Prince of Conde whom he had challenged to a fair Field for
Fifteen Days together; while Conde, somewhat Inferior in number, kept himself
within his Trenches, till at length the Prince of Orange, seeing it was
impossible to follow him, Decamped. Conde, who well knew that the ways were
very narrow through which he was to pass, let him go till he thought his
Vanguard, and main Body were out of reach, and then came out of his Hole, fell
upon the Rear-guard, and utterly defeated it; and had he been so much Master of
himself to have stopped there, the Honor of the Victory had been solely his. But
he had too long withstood that martial Heat that importuned him to be doing;
and as a Torrent stopped for a few Days by some certain Mound, becomes more
terrible, and violent when once it makes way; so Conde's Warlike Ardour, that
had been bounded by his Prudence for Fifteen Days, was no sooner at Liberty,
but bearing now predominant Sway, it made him lose the greatest part of the
Advantage which he had won before: For having passed the narrow Lanes, and
being got into the Plain, he found the whole Dutch Army drawn up in good order,
which received him so co^ragiously that he lost about 15000 Men, and was
constrained to retire, in great Danger to have been pursued, but that Night
coming on, secured him.

Turenne was killed at a time that he thought he had had Montecuculi so fast
that he could not have escaped him. Conde left the Army in Flanders to supply
his room, leaving the Command of the Army to Luxemburgh, who so well ordered
his Business, that the Prince of Orange could not force him to a Battle; only
he took Binch, and demolished it.

Nimeghen, to negotiate the Treaty of Peace. Thither came the Plenipotentiaries
from the Emperor, from the Electors, from the Duke of Lorrain, from Hanover,
from Sweden, from Danemark, from France, and Holland, and England was
Mediatrix, which made one of the most noble Assemblies that had been known.
Nevertheless, whole Years were spent in regulating the Preliminaries, all which
time the War was carried on vigorously, and always to the King's Advantage. For
he took Conde, Bouchain, Valenciennes, Cambrai, and won the Battle of Cassel,
which was attended with the Taking of St. Omer.

This prosperous Success alarmed the Parliament of England, and forced 'em to
desire his Brittanick Majesty to enter into a War; and that with so much
Importunity as gave him to understand that he must resolve upon it. To that
purpose they presented Two Addresses to him, laying before him the Necessity of
opposing such a Torrent of Victory, more especially in Flanders; beseeching him
to make an offensive League with the Hollanders. 1677.
These Importunities very much displeased the King, who feared nothing so much
as that he should be constrained to it. But at last, the Marriage of the Prince
of Orange with his Niece being consummated, there was a Necessity for him to
make a fair show, the best he could; so that after long Conferences with him
concerning the Peace, he consented to the Addresses of his Parliament and
promised to declare War against France, if she stood too high upon her Terms.
Thereupon, Commissions were given out for the raising of 20000 Men; and
Soldiers came in so fast, that in Six Weeks the Levies were complete: so eager
were the English for a War with France.

In the mean time, the Duchess of Portsmouth gave a punctual Account of all
things to Father La Chaise, who not knowing what other Remedy to apply, told
the King, That now was the time if ever, to set his Exchequer at work, 1678.
in regard his dazzling Louidores had a strange Operation upon the King of
England. The Duchess therefore had her part given her, smartly to lay before
the King the Reasons that withheld him from declaring War against the King of
France his good Friend, and his only Friend that could stand by him in a case
of Necessity: That it was but a bad piece of Policy to break absolutely with
him, notwithstanding his repeated Promises, merely to comply with his
Parliament that was in no condition to hurt him: That he was going the way to
ruin all that he had been laboring with so much Trouble, for so many Years,
for his own, and the Interest of Religion, not considering the Honor he would
lose of being a Mediator, and Umpire of one of the most Important Wars that had
been known of a long time, and leave that Advantage to some petty Prince, whose
Favor he would be afterward obliged to sue for underhand.

The Duchess also had Orders, when she had said as much as she could say, to
offer him Twelve Millions, to give the more weight, and Force to her Arguments.

Now in regard this Contrivance was well laid, it had its Effect: The King
suffered himself to be persuaded, and told the Duchess withal, that she was
the only Woman of the World that had the right Notion of things, and spoke the
most to the purpose in whatever she discoursed upon. And now the Design of the
War was to be quite broken off whatever it cost; and the way to bring it about
was to gain some Members of the Lower House, who, when the King desired Money
for the Payment of his Men, proposed that there might be none granted him, till
he had given 'em Satisfaction about the Affairs of Religion. The King made a
show of being very much incensed at this Resolution, then which there could be
nothing more welcome to his Soul, in regard it was the fairest Pretense in the
World that he could make use of, to put off his making Wa^ with France.

Add to this, That the King of France, who was afraid, least the King should be
constrained to enter into a War against him whether he would or no, as it was
very probable, 1679.
considering that he could not avoid making an authentic Treaty with the Dutch
resolved to conclude a particular Peace with Holland, not questioning but that
when Holland was once separated from the League, the rest would be easily
brought to Reason.

By this Treaty the King obliged himself to restore Six Places in Flanders to
the Spaniards, and to quit 'em within Fourteen Days after it was Signed. The
Emperor and the Confederates loudly complained of Holland, for quitting 'em in
that manner, they who had entered into the War, merely in Respect to her, and
for her sake. Which obliged the King of France to send Luxemberg before Mons to
frighten the States, and hinder 'em from altering their Resolutions. And at the
same time he gave 'em to understand, That he would not quit the Places, before
they had engaged the Elector of Brandenburgh to give Satisfaction to the King
of Sweden his Confederate. But that was no more then a false foin to procure
the Peace with more Security. For when the Day came that he was to abandon the
Places, the King's Ambassadors told those of the States, that they would
consent to it. So that the Ambassadors not having time to write, either to the
Provinces, or the States for new Instructions, preferred Peace in that pressing
Conjuncture, be-, fore War. For the King's Ministers gave 'em no more then a
Days time to determine. After which, they declared, They would retire, and
enter no farther into any Negotiation.

The Peace, then, was concluded, and the Six Places in pursuance of it, were
quitted, according to Agreement. The League being thus divided, all the
Confederates were obliged to come to a Treaty by themselves, and every body
made the best of their Market which was passably cheap. Only the poor Elector
of Brandenburgh, who had so generously thrust himself into the War, was the
last, and left alone to bear the whole weight of the King's Arms. But in regard
there was no equality between the Parties, he was glad to treat likewise, and
to surrender to the Swede all that he had taken from him.

Thus ended the War that had been kindled, and fomented by the Instigations of
Father La Chaise; who no sooner saw Europe in Tranquillity on that side, but he
labored to the utmost of his Power, to disturb the Repose of it in another
part. So true it is, that this busy Bon^efeu finds no rest, but in the ruin of
other Men's Quiet; no Pleasures, but in their Calamities. Never was he so
jocund, and blithe, as when he had kindled a Flame in all the Four Corners of
the World, and could say to himself, Hoc est Opus Meum: "This is my Work. This
being then the Humor of the Man, we must not wonder at the Misfortunes, and
Divisions that have hitherto Reigned in the several States of Europe, and which
we must expect will never be at an end so long as he lives.

Till the Year 1673. he confined his Disturbances of Sovereign States to the
Persecutions of the Huguenots, the Jansenists, and several other Persons of
Worth, and Honor. But these petty Crimes not appearing Glorious enough for an
ungracious Wretch so signally distinguished as himself, he resolved to attack
the Holy Father, and the Church it self: as being resolved to make 'em
sensible, That he was destined to be the Plague of Mankind.

I omit for this time, the black Attempts, and Tragical Revolutions which he
medicated in his mind, from that time forward, and which blazed out a little
after: I shall speak of 'em in their Order. At present, the Series of time
engages me to say something of the Regale, which he erected at length upon the
Ruin of so many fair and ancient Churches, without being moved in the least at
the deplorable Misfortunes which it trail'd after it. But how should such
things move him, who made those Misfortunes the only Mark at which he aimed.

The Regale is the Right which the Kings of France have of nominating to vacant
Benefices, and to enjoy the Revenues of 'em, during their vacancy. It Is
pretended, That this Right is grounded upon Custom; and that in the first Ages
of Christianity, the Kings of France made choice of their Bishops at their own
Pleasure. But however it were, this is certain, That the Councils of Constance,
and Basle, from whence the Pragmatic Sanction was drawn, otherwise ordained the
manner of providing for 'em, and decreed, That for the time to come, the
Clergy, and the People should elect their Pastors, and their Bishops, and that
they should be also Consecrated and Ordained by the Metropolitan, and the rest
of the Bishops of the Ecclesiastical Province, without having any need of going
to Rome: after which they should dispose of the Inferior Benefices within the
Extent of their Diocese, or Parish.

Now in regard this Pragmatic was equally burdensome, as well to the Popes, as
Kings, Pope Leo X. and Francis I. made an Agreement together, That the
Nomination to Benefices, and the disposal of the Revenues during their Vacancy,
should belong to the Crown; and that all Lapses, Anticipations, and the Right
of Admitting Resignations should be in the Power of the Pope: so that to speak
the naked. Truth, they shared between 'em the Spoils of the poor Church of God.
This, in short, is the Original and Extent of this Prerogative; which went no
farther then the Lands, and Provinces that were under the French Dominion, at
the time of the Agreement. For since that time, several have fallen to the
Crown that were not subject to it, no more then are certain Congregations, as
that of St. Maur, St. Francis, St. Dominic, etc. The General Council of Lion
also, has made a Decision upon this Point; and being desirous to prevent Abuses
that might follow, forbad the Introducing the Regale into such Churches where
it was not in use. And the Liberties of those Churches have been since
acknowledged, and confirmed by several Ordinances, Decrees, and Declarations of
Philip the Fair, Philip de Valeis, Lewis XII. Henry IV. and Lewis XIII. which
are preserved in the Chamber of Accounts in Paris. However, in regard it is one
of the most beautiful Flowers of the Crown, Cardinal Richlieu, who was the
First who laid the Foundation of that Grandeur to which it is now arrived,
comprehended, among the rest of his Projects, the Extending it over all the
Monarchy. In short, in the Year 1637. he began to set a-foot, by the King's
Counsel, the general Contest about the Regale; at what time there was a Decree
of the 6th. of October, Ordaining all Bishops, and Archbishops that pretended
to be exempt from the Right of the Regale, to send to the Registry of the
Council, the Titles upon which they claimed their Privilege; and which granted
a surceasing of Processes, su'd out, or to be su'd forth upon that Occasion.
The Syndics of the Provinces of Languedoc, Guienne, Provence, and Dauphinate,
presently obeyed the Order: Protesting, Nevertheless, That by that Proceeding
they did not go about to prejudice the Liberties of those Provinces, which were
not obliged to produce any Evidences, provided they were not the Evidences of
Privileges, or Immunities granted by their Kings, but of Liberties, and
Franchises more ancient then the Monarchy it self, in Possession of which,
their Ancestors came under the French Dominion, only that what they did was to
show their ready Obedience, and Respect to his Majesty. This Affair, though it
was not altogether neglected, yet lay in a manner dormant, till the Year 1673.
that Father La Chaise, the Author of all the Misfortunes of Christendom, put it
into the King's Head to move this Stone, under which there lay a most venomous
Serpent. But in regard this Matchiavilist understands, that the most certain
way to please Princes, is to procure 'em temporal Advantages, he never minds at
what rate they are to be purchased. Besides, he was afraid least the War
wherein he had engaged his Majesty should Miscarry, and therefore sought which
way to render himself necessary to the King, upon some other Score, thereby to
prevent the Disgrace that threatened him.

At this time it was then, that the King finished the general Claim by a Decree
in Fbruary, Importing, That the King declared the Right of the Regale to be
Inalienable, and without the compass of Prescription, and to belong universally
to him, in all the Bishoprics, and Archbishopricks of his Kingdom,
Territories, and Countries under his Obedience, those only excepted which are
exempt by Titre Onereux; that is to say, by being liable to particular Duties,
and charges of Fines, Annuities, etc. In pursuance of which, His Majesty
Ordains, That the Bishops, and Archbishops, shall be Bound in Two Months, from
the Day that they take their Oaths of Fidelity, to take out Letters, Pattents
of Discharge, and to Register 'em in the Chamber of Accounts of Paris, and that
they who have taken their Oaths of Fidelity before, and have not obtained their
Letters Pattents of Discharge, shall be bound to take 'em out, and Register 'em
within Two Months in the said Chamber of Accounts; after which, and for defect
of yielding Obedience within that time, their Benefices subject to the Right of
the Regale, and dependant upon Royal Collations shall be declared void, and
subject to a new Grant by virtue of the Regale.

And by another Declaration in the same Month of February, the King in order to
the Execution of the preceding Decree, Authorizes a Roll, containing a
Regulation of the Fees which shall be paid into the Chamber of Accounts by the
Archbishops, and Bishops of the Provinces of Languedoc, Dauphinate, Guienne,
and Province, for the Registring the Letters of Discharge, which they shall be
bound to take forth.

This Declaration, which was procured by the pernicious Counsels of the
Confessor, was the Apple of Discord which divided all the Clergy of France, and
the Pandora's Box, out of which have flown all the Mischiefs that have
overwhelmed in a manner, all Europe, for near these Twenty Years A Work truly
worthy the Author of it, and which he looks upon without question, with the
same Eye as Nero formerly beheld the Flame which he himself had kindled to
consume the City of Rome.

The greatest part of the Court-Prelates, and Bishops, People devoted to
Ambition, and their Pleasures, obeyed without Murmuring; and having obtained
their Pattents of Release, which they were ordered to take out, caused 'em to
be Registered with their Oaths of Fidelity. But others, and among the rest, the
Bishops of Cahors, Aleth, and Pamiers, greatly signalized themselves in
refusing to submit, considering that their Submission would be a tacit Consent
to the King's Pretensions, or rather of his Ministers, who were altogether
unjust. Thereupon, the Court sent to every one of those Bishops certain
Ecclesiastics, preferred, by virtue of the Regale, to some Benefices in their
Cathedrals, which were possessed by others in Canonical Possession for several
Years by lawful Titles, and upon the refusal of the Chapters to admit 'em,
ordered 'em to be installed by force. These manifest Intrusions obliged those
worthy Prelates, the Latter of which Two was 70 Years of Age, and had been
Bishops, the one 38, the other 34 Years, during which time they had rendered
themselves venerable for their Exemplary Piety, and a Residence in their
Diocesses so assiduous, that they were never seen to appear at Court; these
Intrusions, I say, enforced those Prelates to issue forth Ordinances against
the newly preserr'd; and after that, to write several reitterated Letters to
the King, Cardinal Bonsi, and the Archbishop of Paris. They also wrote to the
Assembly of the Clergy, which met in 1675. but there was no Favor to be shown
'em, and the Clergy rejected their Complaints, not vouchsafing so much as to
take Cognizance of the Affair: Nor was it possible they should expect any
other, in regard the Archbishop of Paris, whose Interests, and Father La
Chaise's, were inseparably linked together, presided in that Assembly, and for
that Cardinal Bonsi, Archbishop of Narbonne, and by Consequence, the principal
Person concerned, was gained to all Intents and Purposes, and the Bishops of
Montpellier, and Beziers, were Commissioners from that Province. So that word
was sent to the Dissenting Prelates, that the Affair having been decided in the
King's Council, where the Clergy's Agents were present, and consenting, it was
in vain to make any Opposition. As if the Agents had had sufficient Power to
disannull by their Authority, the sacred Rights of so many ancient Churches.

Toward the end of the same Year, the Bishop of Pamiers was forced to make a
Journey to Court, for the dispatch of some Business which he could not dispense
withal, 1675.
and the Dignity of Archdeacon of the Cathedral Church being vacant by the
Death of the last Incumbent: Father La Chaise who had notice of it, having a
Design to surprise the Bishop, proposed to him to procure him Letters of
Dispatch* in favor of a Priest, whom he loved very well, and upon whom he made
no question but the choice would fall. He offered likewise to expedite the same
Grants for other Beneficiaries of the same Chapter, who had not as yet obtained
'em, to which the good Bishop immediately consented; but afterward considering
the Consequences that would ensue, and the Engagement which he laid upon his
Church, he fearlesly retracted his word, and sent the Father word, That he
could not comply with his Desires. This was cause sufficient for that Hypocrite
to persecute the Bishop even to Rage, and Fury. He peal'd it in the King's
Ears, That he was a Rebel, a Seditious Incendiary, who aimed at nothing but to
stir up the Clergy, and all his Subjects to Revolt: So that notwithstanding all
his Oaths of Allegiance, all his Protestations, and Submissions to the King, he
always looked upon him as a disaffected Person.

But whatever Credit La Chaise had in the Assembly of the Clergy, when the
King's Prerogatives were in Dispute, for the upholding of which he spoke with
great freedom, nevertheless he could not prevent their unanimous Resolution to
write a ^ong and learned Letter to the new Pope Inno^ent XI. to lay before him
the horrid Impie^ies of the Casuists Morals, and the Doctrine of Improbability;
wherein they are set forth after a manner equally Strenuous, and Eloquent.

The Archbishop of Paris, who is of that Religion more then the Jesuits
themselves, opposed it very much, as well for his own particular Interests, as
out of Respect to the Society: 1678.
but that signified nothing to the purpose, so that a Draught of the Letter was
sent to all the Prelates for them to sign it. The Bishop of Aleth was one of
the first that received it; who having thoroughly examined it, found something
in it, which he thought burdensome to the Episcopal Authority, which he
altered before he signed it, and sent it to the rest of the Bishops. La Chase,
overjoyed at this Accident, informed his Majesty of it, painting out the Thing
in the blackest Colors he could invent; and giving him ^o understand, That it
was no more then a Cabal that tended merely to the Disturbance of the State,
and to revive the past Disputes, and Contests. So that the Intendants of
Justice had Orders to write to the Bishops not to sign it, if it were sent 'em;
which broke all the Measures of the Assembly, and left La Chaise Triumphant,
though his Triumphs stopped ^ot there. For he caused all the Canons that ^ook the
Bishops part to be banished, and sup^ly'd their rooms with others, put in by
Force, notwithstanding all their Ecclesiastical Orders: and in regard he had a
particular Spite at the Bishop of Panniers, he caused the Revenue^ of his
Church, which he chiefly made use of for the Relief of the Poor, to be taken
from him: So that the poor Man fell into great Necessity; and though he wrote to
the King to let him know his Condition, it signified nothing, 1679.
in regard the King was pre-possess'd. Now because La Chaise continued still to
give out Grants of the Canonships in the Chapter of his Cathedral which was
regular, but would nevertheless become secular by those Intrusions (all which
was a great Grief to the good old Man) he resolved to write him the following
Letter.

Dear Father,
I Have been designing for some time to write to ye; but on the one side I
thought it would be to little purpose; besides, that People might think I
complained of your Conduct in my regard, rather by the Inducement of some
particular Interest, or some peculiar Discontent, then out of any Zeal to
justify the Rights of the Church. Nevertheless, that God may not lay it to my
Charge, that I have omitted any Means that may contribute to the good Success
of the Affair, wherein I (...) by Providence engaged, for the Liberty of his
Spouse, I submitted to the Counsel of my Friends who advised me to write this
Letter, leaving it to God to bless it with that Success as may be most suitable
to the Designs of his Providence. Certainly if I had any reason of Distaste,
either against you, or your Society, I have met with occasions enough, wherein,
methought, the Love of Truth, Justice, and the public Good, enforced me to
complain, and my Complaints appeared Just to all moderate Persons; but 'twas my
Opinion, That Christian Humility, and Charity required, that I should keep
silence, till some Necessity, not to be dispensed with, obliged me to speak.
Not only my Profession of a Christian, but the Vow of my Order, are sufficient
Engagements, though you, or your Order had any cause of Offense against me, to
restrain your Revenge, to the prejudice of the Glory of God, and the Interest
of his Church. You may be pleased to call to mind, Dear Father, that when I had
the Happiness to see you at Paris, you told me, discoursing in reference to
that Ecclesiastical Crowd that bowed and ^^ing'd to ye for Preferment, that
they were gaping Wolves. With what Conscience can you then bestow upon such
Wolves what is provided for the Flock of innocent Sheep. Nor have you stayed
till those Wolves opened their Mouths, to demand the Prey which you have caused
to be thrown into their Chops; for as the Canonships of my Cathedral bind to a
regular Life, which God had given me the Grace to re-establish in my Chapter,
by the Authority of the Holy See, and the King's together, they who never
desire Benefices but for the Revenues sake, would never have minded the looking
after those, that oblige to Vows of Poverty, and Community of Living, had not
you pre-possess'd, solicited, and drawn 'em on in hopes of procuring the
Secularization of that Church. I know well, That Father Ferier had the same
Design of Secularization upon this, and other Churches* but the Difficulty he
met with at Rome, and the Opposition of the Parties Interested, and legally
possessed, ought to inform ye sufficiently of the Will of God in this
particular. So that I cannot apprehend upon what grounds, you set your self to
be an Instrument for the Destruction of a Work, which your own Brethren, whose
Testimony cannot be suspected in this, have been obliged to approve and commend
it upon several Occasions, by reason of that Glory which is done thereby to
God, and the Edification which redounds to the Church. Much less can I
apprehend upon what score you could publicly say, That God would be more
glorified if the Doors of my Church were shut up. Dear Father, What is become
of that profound Respect, that Submission with which you formerly reverenced
the Holy Church, and the Holy See, that now you go about to destroy what both
have established; and if it be true, as some give cut, not only without
Authority, but against the King's Consent. For it is observed, That in the last
Brevets which you have got dispatched for the Canonships of my Cathedral, that
the Clause formerly inserted at the beginning, which binds the Persons
preferred, to take upon 'em the Habit, or to admit themselves Noviciates, is
left out, and that Expedients are also found out to exempt those who were bound
to those Ceremonies by their Brevets. There are also several Intelligent
Persons, and your good Friends, who attribute this Conduct of yours to a Design
to securalize my Church, notwithstanding Mine, and the Opposition of my
Chapter, and without any Authority from the Pope. Is this the acquittal of the
Promise you made me, as well for those whom you have engaged in those
Benefices, as to some Ecclesiastics of my Diocese? Think you the Public does
not observe how you abuse that Belief which your Quality of Confessor fixes in
the King's Mind; not only in causing him unknowingly to violate the Rights of
the Church, but also to Authorize in his Name, those pieces of Injustice, which
would hardly be believed, did they not appear in open Acts of Violence. It Is
impossible, Reverend Father, that you should have solidly studied the Business
of the Regale, and not understand, That the King has not that Prerogative in my
Diocese, no more then in several others, so that you do an extraordinary
prejudice to my Church, in persuading his Majesty to assume it to himself. Now
if you are not fully acquainted with this Matter, How is it possible for ye to
be so confidently Instrumental to our being handled upon this Occasion with the
same Rigor, as if we were Enemies of the Church, and State. Nay though it were
true, that the King had this Privilege, which it is certain he has not, Can you
have the Conscience to deal is such a rugged, and irregular manner, so contrary
to all the Laws of God, and Man, and a Bishop, and a Chapter, whose only Crime
was their Zeal a little too ardent in defending the Rights of the Church, and
their Obedience to a general Council. The shortness of this Letter permits me
not to set down a Thousand Reasons that prove invinceably the Justice of my
Cause, and the ill Usage we have suffered for so long time under this Pretense.
Besides that, I find you have not so much need of being well informed, as well
inclined, in reference to (...) Which lies not in any Earthly Power, but in God
alone to do. For your fear of incurring the King's Indignation, should he come
to understand how he has been Flattered by him who had a greater Obligation
then any other Man, to tell him Truths so necessary for his Salvation, and his
real Honor; your Reluctance to confess that you have done amiss; your Desire
to Disgrace a Bishop, who cannot but disapprove your Maxims, because he does
not find 'em conformable to those of Jesus Christ, and his blessed Saints, are
Difficulties not to be surmounted by any other, then by him who is the Lord of
all Hearts. Believe me, Dear Father, for as I have the Honor to be a Bishop, I
have the Privilege to give ye good Advice; You have reason to fear incurring
not only the Indignation of God, in violating the Indignation of his Spouse,
but also the Anger of the King, who is too quick-sighted not to come to the
Knowledge one Day of these Things; and too just, not to condemn the pernicious
Actions to which your Counsels have bowed him contrary to his Inclinations. And
instead of God, and the King's being well pleased with your performing the
Office of a Confessor, and solidly laboring the Salvation of his Soul, whose
Conscience you have in Charge, They whom you unfortunately expose to Censures
would be more engaged to ye, if you would exhort 'em to make themselves worthy
of Benefices, and not to possess themselves of 'em, in defiance of the
Ecclesiastical Canons. And all good Men would bless God for seeing you employ
your Credit for the Good of the Church, by persuading his Majesty to content
himself with enjoying the Prerogative as his Predecessors did, according to the
limitation of the Council of Lion. I conclude, Dear Father, with laying before
ye, That it would become your Charity to let a poor Bishop, now 70 Years of
Age, and by whose laboring 34 Years in the Function of his Episcopacy, you may
well guess him not to be far from his end, to dye in Peace; and not suffer an
Assembly of Persons who have consecrated themselves to God, not without the
extraordinary Edification of many, to be dissipated by People the visible
Enemies of a regular Life. I hope that God will give you the Grace to be
Faithful till Death; and for my part, Dear Father, however you deal by me, I
shall never cease to be your Servant, Francis Bishop of Pamiers.


This Letter wrought no other Effect, then only that it more incensed La Chaise
against him, who persever'd in his Hatred to that degree, that after his Death,
he reveng^d himself upon him in the Person of his Grand Vicar, whom he caused
to be condemned to death by a Decree of the Parliament of Tholo^s^ as guilty of
High Treason, because he opposed the Violences of those that were preferred by
virtue of the Regale, and caused him to be Executed in Effigy, clad in his
sacerdotal Habit.

The famous M. Anthony Arnault, Doctor of the Sorbonne, was one of those who
could not approve the Regale. All the world knows what a terrible War he
maintained against the Jesuits, 1680.
for above 30 Years together, in defense of Jansenism, of which he was the
Chieftain. However, he was still supported against their Efforts, by the means
of his Nephew, M. de Pompone, Secretary of State But in the Year 1680. La
Chaise having rendered him a suspicious Person to the King who was made
believe, that he was the stiffest Antiregalist in France, and to be the very
Person that had Poisoned, in such a manner, the Bishop of Aleth, and Pamiers,
he fell into utter Dsgrace, together with his Nephew, who had disclosed to him,
at the time that the King put forth his Declarations for the Regale, That M.
Boucherat, Counselor of State, had given his Advice in Council, That the
Churches should be left free in the Possession of their Immunities, and
Privileges, without any farther Disturbance. Arnault gave Intelligence of this
to the Pope, who could not forbear to insert this Circumstance in a Brief which
he wrote some Years after to the King. The King was much surpised at it, and
endeavored to sift out through what Channel this Secret was conveyed. But
Father La Chaise soon unfolded the Riddle, assuring him that it was his
Secretary Pompone's Discovery, who was confined to his own House; and Arnault
his Uncle, was ordered to quit St. James's Street where he lived, with a
Prohibition to have any Assemblies in his Ho^^ Upon which, misdoubting the
Consequence of such a harsh beginning, and fearing to be put into the Bastille,
he retired into Holland for good and all, where he composed his Apology for the
Politics of the Clergy; which the very well done, and to the King's Advantage
was however condemned, and a poor Prie^^ committed to the Bastille, at the
prosecution of La Chaise, for endeavoring to publish some few Copies in
France. And the Reason that obliged him to it, was not only because the Book
justified the Proceedings of the Antiregalists, and particularly of the Bishops
of Aleth, and Pamiers, but because M. Arnault was the Author of it. This is
(...) Quality peculiar to Father La Chaise, that he would condemn any Book
in the World, though written never so much to the Advantage of Him, and his Party,
if he had an Antipathy against the Author. And this was visibly to be seen at
the same time: For the famous Minister M. de la Rocque, composed an excellent
Treatise of the Right of the Regale, and which is one of the most strenuous
Pieces that have been seen upon that Subject, nevertheless the Confessor forbid
him to publish it, that it might not be said of him, That he made use of a
Heretic Pen, to support the King's Prerogatives against the Church: and
perhaps i^ that he did not do so much amiss.

The same could not be said of M. Chastai^, who was a good Catholic. He had
composed a very excellent Piece, entitled, The true Erplication of the
Concordat: Wherein he made out a very specious Right of Nomination to several
Benefices. The King had also appointed Commissioners to examine it; but what
availed all this to a Person whom La Chaise hated. He was forbid to print his
Book, and that was all the Reward he had for his Pains, to have labored a long
time to no purpose, and perhaps against his Conscience.

Nor were they the Churches only endowed with Benefices which La Chaise
resolved to Subjugate under the Yoke of the Regale, but the Monasteries of the
Urbanist Monks of the Order of St. Francis, who ever since their Institution,
had been Priories Elective only from Three Years, to Three Years. The whole
Congregation of St. Maur, among the Benedictines, under-went the same Fate. The
Abbot of Clugni, who had been Canonically elected, was expelled, and the Monks
enforced to receive the Cardinal of Bouillon, who took possession of it. By
virtue of the same Prerogative, the Abbeys of Chezal-Benoist, which had been
united to that Congregation by the Authority of the Holy See, and the Grants of
several Kings, had every one a secular Abbot imposed upon 'em, as had also a
Thousand others, too tedious here to be inserted. All these Intrusions were
enforced, where Residence was absolutely necessary; for Example, upon
Nunneries, and all this by Force of Arms, and the Ministry of a 100 Dragoons,
who after they had broke open the Gates of the Nunneries, committed a 1000
Disorders, and many times most horrid Violences, and Sacrileges.

These Exorbitances, at length, reached the Holy Father's Ears, by the
Complaints of the Monks and Nuns, at the same time that the Bishops of Pamiers,
and Aleth, made the same Lamentations. And it grieved him beyond Expression to
see, That a most Christian King pre-possess'd by an impious Varlet of the
Society of Jesus, as he styles himself, should yet the Church with Persecutions
so cruel, and till then unheard of under the Reign of a Catholic Prince. He
wrote therefore to the King several Briefs, and laid before him with an
Affection altogether cordial and paternal, the Injustice wherein he had
unwarily engaged himself by the Counsels of his Ministers, and particularly of
Father La Chaise, who had given him an Idea of Things contrary to Reason, and
Equity. Beseeching him, for God's sake, to surcease a Proceeding so unbecoming
those great Actions, which had otherwise extolled his Fame; and no longer to
permit the Sighs, and Groans of so many pious People, consecrated to God, to
ascend to Heaven, and implore Assistance against the Violences, and
Profanations which they suffered under his Authority. He also wrote to the
Cardinals Bonzi, and D'Estrees, to the Archbishop of Paris, and Father La
Chaise, which wrought no other Effect, but only that it procured the sending of
D'Estrees to Rome. Who to persuade his Holiness to swallow patiently this
bitter Cup, set forward in August 1680.

The Clergy, who were then assembled, had received a large Brief from his
Holiness upon the same Subject, to which all the answer they gave was this,
that they wrote a Letter to the King, wherein they told him, that the Pope took
upon him to concern himself in a business which they could by no means approve,
in regard that instead of submitting to the common good of the Church, he only
gave people an opportunity to cabal together, to increase Confusion and Schism,
and to encourage and embolden seditious spirits, the consequences of which
would be very pernicious.

Reimes, Ambrun, and Albe, the Bishops of Rochelle, Autun, and T^oye being
Commissioners, it was pronounced that the Regale was a Right annexed to the
Crown not to be alicnated, without the compass of prescription, and against
which no opposition could be made directly or indirectly, without palpable
injustice.

The poor Bishop of Pamiers, well understanding the unworthiness of these
Prelates who had sold themselves to Court Favor, and had so perfidiously
betrayed the Rights of the Church entrusted in their Hands, and finding himself
alone, poor, feeble, dispossessed, and no way able to support 'em, was seized
with such a lively sorrow, that he soon followed his Brother, the Bishop of
Aleth, who died some months before. During his sickness, he wrote three
Letters; one to the Pope, desiring his Prayers and his Protection of the
Church, which most assuredly after his death would be subjected to the Regale;
another to the King, to ascertain him, that he had never taken the liberty to
oppose his Ordinances and Decrees, but to satisfy the duty of his Function,
and the Character he wore, which obliged him indispensibly to defend the
interests of the Church, which had been deposited i^ his hands: otherwise that
he had been always careful to preserve that affection and respect which he owed
his Majesty: and at last concluding, besought his Majesty to be persuaded of
his good intentions, and that he died his most humble Servant and Subject.

His third Letter was to Father La Chaise, which I thought fit to insert in
this place, in regard that I am not otherwise concerned to speak of the Regale,
the^ as it relates to him who was the first promoter of it, as also of that
great difference between the Courts of Rome and France that afterward ensued,
and which are events of his Life of too great importance to be omitted, tho
with all the brevity that may be, for fear of tyring the Reader. The Bishop of
Pamiers Letter ran thus.

Dear Father,
BEing now just about to surrender my soul to God, and to answer before his
Sovereign Tribunal for all my Actions, Words and Thoughts, I have employed
these last minutes of my life, to attempt the obtaining from your Charity a
perfect reconciliation with me, and a more gentle usage of my Church. You know
dear Father, in your Conscience, that she was never subject to the Yoke which
you would impose upon Her; she is exempted from it, not by any privileges
granted by Kings, but by Immunitys with which she was born. Recover your self,
then, dear Father, and let not your desire to please a great King, whose
Confessor you have the honor to be, transport you to Combat the Cause of God,
by representing things to the King in a false mirror. God is now calling me to
give an account of my Administration; but remember, Dear Father, that the time
will come, which may not be, perhaps, far off, that you must do the same. Think
seriously what you will have to say for your justification at that great day. I
cannot conceal from you, Dear Father (for now what signifies dissimulation to
me?) you undertake not only for your own soul but for the Kings, which you have
fallaciously becalmed, by saying to it Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace.

Take not amiss, I beseech you, these admonitions of mine. I may pretend to
advise you as a Bishop, but the point of Dea^^ gives me a new privilege. As to
what remains, if I have done any thing to offend you, I beg your Pardon with
all my Heart, with this protestation, that I never did it willingly or on
purpose: farewell, Dear Father; assist me with your Prayers; I am, etc.


La Chaise was as little moved at this Letter, as he was with another before
it; nor was it any obstruction, but that he caused Father Cercle, the Bishops
grand Vicar, to be hanged up in Effigy, as I have already related, after La
Chaise had him expelled, from his Benefice, and intruded one Fortassim into it.

The year 1682, began with an Assembly of the Clergy, who deputed the
Archbishop of Paris to the King, to return him thanks for upholding the Rights
of the Regale, protesting with all, that they would be ready to support 'em to
the utmost of their Power, and menacing the Pope himself, to take steadfast
resolutions as becoming great Prelates, in case he persever'd in his
precautions, and prayed his Majesty that he would enjoin his Ambassador the D.
d' Estrces to signify their determinations to his Holiness.

But these were only Roses and Flowers in comparison of the famous Decree of
the same Assembly dated the 19. of March, which is now the grand occasion of
all the present difference between the two Courts, and which contained the four
ensuing Propositions.

I. That neither the Pope nor the Church had any Right of Jurisdiction over the
Kings Temporalities; and that their Subjects cannot be absolved from their
Oaths of Fidelity upon any pretense whatsoever.

II. That a General Council is above the Pope.

III. That the Popes power ought to be limited by Canons, and that he cannot
determine or establish any thing contrary to the Ancient Canons and Liberties of
the Gallican Church.

IV. And lastly, that the Pope is not infallible, neither in Fact, nor of
Right, unless he preside at the Head of a Universal and Oecumenic Council,
which decides and renders the Pope infallible, by authorizing that
infallibility which otherwise would never be.

After this the Clergy sent other Deputies to the King, beseeching him to order
that this Doctrine should be taught in all Colleges and Universities, and that
the Decree might be registered in Parliament, which was granted by an
Authentic Declaration of the Kings, importing very severe prohibitions to all
Professors, Doctors, Readers in Theology, and Preachers to teach any Doctrine
opposite to it, and it was also registered in the Universities.

There were many worthy Ecclesiastics that would not admit of this new
Doctrine; who for that reason were imprisoned, banished and dispoil'd of their
Benefices and Estates. So that there were two great persecutions in France at
one time; one against the Huguenots, and the other against the Popelings the
one against Heretics, the other against the Orthodox. The way to live at
liberty, was then to be as a man my say, neither Flesh nor Fish; the rigid
Catholics being then equally odious and criminal. Thus was the poor Church
oppressed by the Jesuits, the real Tyrants over France; and so much the more
cruelly, because she was not permitted the liberty to complain: the Persecutors
boasting all this while of the mighty things which they did for her. But what
signified all their zeal for the extirpation of Heresy, seeing they set up
another Heresy at the same time? Was not this to bind up the Wounds of the
Church with one hand, and Stabb a Dagger to her Heart with the other?

The Holy Father, having perused this Determination of the Clergy, was grieved
to the Soul, and sent several Briefs to the assembled Clergy, to persuade 'em
to recant, of which they took very little or no notice. He also ordered
Cardinal Sluza his Secretary, to write in his name to Father la Chaise; which
he did in the following Terms.

FATHER,
I Write you these Lines, by the Order of his Holiness, who is highly offended
at the audacious and hairbrain'd Propositions, advanced and upheld in the
Assembly of your Clergy upon the 19th. of March last: and in regard he is
absolutely persuaded that your self has as much a hand in 'em, as they
themselves who decreed 'em, he exhorts you out of his paternal Charity to
acknowledge your Egregious swerving from the Truth, and the Erroneous sins
whith you commit against God and his Church; by destroying, as you do, to the
utmost of your power, the Authority of the visible Head of it upon Earth, whom
you are obliged to uphold with the expense of your Blood; first as a Christian
and a Catholic, and more particularly, by the fourth and most strict of your
Vows, which you have so treacherously broken, you and all your French brethren,
who have admitted the Decrees of that Assembly, and loudly teach 'em in your
Schools, as the Decrees of an Oecumenic Council. Among you, the Holy Father is
no longer the Vicar of Jesus Christ, assisted by his particular Graces and
enlightened with Divine Illuminations, but a man of the vulgar sort, subject to
all manner of Errors and Failings, to whose decisions there is no credit to be
given. What new Doctrine is this? and how is it possible that a Jesuit should
be the Author of it? Have you forgot the Thesis's maintained in the College of
Clermont, in the Month of December. 1661, which upheld that the Pope had the same
Infallibility in Fact and Right as Christ himself, and therefore it was a
matter of Divine Faith to believe that Jansenius's five Propositions were
rightly condemned. Since that time you have strangely changed your note, but I
know the reason. Lewis is become Potent, and you expect only from him vast
Wealth, high Dignities and Honors. Now speak your Conscience Father, and tell
me, do you fear God or no? and that same specious Title which you bear of being
a companion of Jesus, does it not sometimes put you in mind of the duty which
you owe him? If you have forgot it, Father, tremble, and dread his judgments
that will fall upon your head. These are the Apostolic exhortations and
Admonitions which his Holiness was willing to give you; make use of 'em Father,
and do not enforce him to a necessary of acting severely with you. I am, etc.

Rome August 25. 1632.

Monsieur Arnault also wrote him the following Letter upon the same Subject.

Reverend Father,
I Began to hope something favorably of you, after my having so long suffer^
your Persecutions, since you begin to retract so publicly some things which
you have acted against me. Formerly I was a Heretic (...) for nothing but Fire
and Faggot; not because I justifi^d the five condemned Propositions, but because
that having read Jansenius from one end to the other, I could not find any such
things there: Which was the same thing, said you, as to deny the Papal
Infallibility directly in fact, and consequently a Heresy equal to that of
Calvin. This is that which you maintained in your Thesis's, and which you
ordered to be decided against me in the Sorbonne; but now thanks be to the
Regale, I am pronounced to be Orthodox, by a solemn decree of all the assembled
Clergy, which it cost you as little trouble to obtain as the censure of the
Sorbonne. I flatter my self, most Reverend Father, that after this restoring of
me to my former abilities, which you your self have solicited for me, you will
no longer be my Enemy, nor of M. de Pompone my Nephew; who both of us suffer in
cruel Exilement all the effects of your unjust Malice: You may put an end to
'em when you please, Most Reverend Father, and you will find me always ready to
style my self and be, etc.


Father la Chaise, however was not so taken up with the Affairs of the Regale,
but that he had a hand in several other concerns. More especially, that of the
Huguenots he made his business, and ever since his being Confessor, he has bent
all his endeavors to destroy 'em without mercy. However in this respect, I
cannot believe that he was truly moved by the Kings interests; for it is
visible, that he impoverished the Kingdom, furnished his Enemies with Soldiers,
fomented an intestine War; and lastly, raised an obstruction not to be
surmounted, to impede the great design of the King upon the liberty of Europe.
I should therefore be rather inclined to think, that the Huguenots being
without question the most formidable Enemies the Jesuits have, they would fain,
at any rate, be rid of these troublesome Overseers, who pry so narrowly into
'em, and never let 'em be at rest, either as to their Morals or their other
Irregularities. However it be, this is most certain, that those most
unfortunate people are to look upon him as the Author of all their miseries. It
was he, who together with the Archbishop of Paris, the Marquis of Louvois, and
others of the same Gang, set forth those terrible Declarations that appear^d
from the year 1679, to 1685, and which were the Preliminaries to their total
ruin: for all this ended in that fatal blow which they so much feared, that is
to say, the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, which was annulled the 18th of
October 1685.

It Is true, that la Chaise, two years before, had found a much shorter way to
exterminate 'em; and to which, by an Enchantment not to be imagined, he had
obtained the King's consent; from whom he had extorted an express Order for the
Massacre of all those of that Religion: and thus the thing was to have been put
in execution. There was an Order for the marching of four or five Regiments,
and dispersing 'em into those places where the Huguenots lived, under pretense
of keeping them within the bounds of their duty. After which, Orders for the
Massacre were to be sent to all the Bishops, who were to have caused the
Soldiers to have been drawn together upon a certain day appointed, which was to
have been the same over all parts of France, and after they had made a Speech
to 'em, to encourage 'em against Heretics, they were to have signified the
Kings pleasure to 'em, and at the same time to have delivered the King's
Letters sealed with his Signet into their hands. But Monsieur the Prince, who
was a man of Honor, and besides, had a greater love for the Soldiers then to
suffer 'em to embrue their hands in so detestable an Action, prevented the
execution of that Enterprise.

I have already set forth, how la Chaise had always opposed him ever since his
being made Confessor, and of the League that M. de Louvois and the Father had
entered into, to remove him from the public management of Affairs. They had
left nothing unattempted during the Life of the Prince, and they beheld with an
extraordinary jealousy the Honor which he had acquired in the year 1668, by
the Conquest of Franche-Conte, which he subdued in less than two Months.

During the War of 1672, he had signalized himself at the Battle of Seneff, and
the next he performed as much as could be expected from so great a Captain. The
King also judged no body so fit to supply the Room of Marshall Turenne, who
was slain in Germany. All this extremely perplexed the Confessor, who was
afraid of nothing so much, as that the Prince should be again admitted into
Favor: From which he had always found the knack to debar him till then.
Therefore to prevent it he redoubled his Efforts; and prepossessed the King in
such a manner, that after that Campain he never was any more entrusted with any
Command. He laid before the King without Intermission, that the Prince being
extremely Ambitious, it concerned his Majesty not to put such opportunities
into his hands for the aquisition of Glory; nor to permit him by that means to
become more considerable in the Kingdom than he was already: that it behooved
him to remember the trouble he had put him to during his Minority, when his
designs made such a noise that the Queen Mother was constrained to seize his
Person; and with what Animosity, from his Enlargment in 1651, to 1659, he had
made War against his Majesty, who was forced by Treaty to receive him, tho
without advancing him to those high Places and Dignities which he had before:
that if at that time he thought it good Policy to keep him in a midling
Condition, to prevent him from attempting any thing to his prejudice, the same
reasons obliged his Majesty to look more narrowly after him: That the Prince's
Vexation and Discontents were visible, and that maugre all the care which he
took to conceal it, he could not forbear to display his dissatisfactions upon
several occasions, by comparing his present condition with what he had been
formerly. So that his Majesty had all the reason in the world to be assured,
that his Great Heart and his Ambition importuned him without ceasing to
extraordinary Attempts; and that all things being well considered, he was the
only Prince in a condition to oppose if not to stop the Career of his Majesty's
Glorious Designs: that he ought to consider seriously the encumbrances he would
meet with, if the Prince should go about to Head the Huguenots of his Kingdom,
and at the same time make an Alliance with Holland: that would not only be able
to stop his Progress, but also to introduce the Enemy into the Heart of his
Kingdom; and then the least mischief that could befall him would be to make an
ignominious Peace, and restore the Huguenots their Ancient Privileges.

All these Reasons being urged by la Chaise, and seconded by Louvois, made the
King resolve to confer no more Employments upon the Prince, who on the other
side perceiving the suspicions which the Court had of him, and how he was looked
upon with an evil Eye, retired to his Palace of Chantilli, where he was in
hopes to live and dye quietly, without pretending any more to public business.
But it was ordained that his Generosity and his great Heart should always be
the cause of his misfortune. For about the end of the year 1683, being informed
by M. Montauzier of a Cruel Order which la Chaise had obtained of the King, and
which he was preparing to put in excution, he could not endure such Barbarities
without declaring his Mind. Thereupon he went to the Court, and throwing
himself at the Kings Fleet, laid before him how great a stain such a foul
Action would be to his Honor: that he himself had several times obliged
himself by promise never to make use of Violent Courses and sanguinary Ways;
but tho he had never engaged his Royal Word, yet that the Interest of his
Honor and his Fame were sufficient to divert him from so black an Eterprize,
and so misbecoming a most Christian King as that was; that there were other
ways for his Majesty to reduce the Protestants: that they were already in so
low a condition, that they were not able to make Head against him: and if the
worst came to the worst, he might banish 'em out of his Kingdom.

These Remonstrances of the Prince wrought so effectually upon the King, that
he revoked his Order, and la Chaise was disappointed.

But his Animosity upon this redoubling, he made use of this occasion to let
the King understand, that the reason why the Prince of Conde opposed with so
much heat the destruction of the Huguenots, was only because it would utterly
ruin those designs, which he was meditating to put into their Heads: and the
Cunning Priest made use of several kindnesses which afterward the Prince
desired in favor of the Huguenots, to render him odious to the King, and cast
him absolutely but of his Favor; wherein he succeeded but too well; it being
certain that after that, the King could hardly endure to see him.

1686. At length this Great Prince died the 16th of December 1686, at Fontain
Bleau, whither he went to see his Grandaughter, the Duchess of Bourbon, who
lay sick of the Small Pox; and many People were of Opinion that the Jesuits did
not a little contribute to hasten his Death.

He wrote a very Pathetick Letter to the King, wherein he expressed his sorrow
for having born Arms against his Majesty, protesting withal, that since his
return, he had never had any other than Sentiments of Respect and Affection for
his Person, and Fidelity to his Service, whatever suspicions had been infused
into him to the contrary: as in regard he had been in part the cause of the
Prince of Conti's misfortune, he begged his pardon with an extraordinary
submission in that Letter, assuring the King, that the Prince was as good and
faithful a Subject as his Majesty could wish or desire; adding withal that
Father la Chaise knew well what he said to be truth, if he would vouchsafe to
testify the Truth.

Cardinal Camus also had incurred the Confessors displeasure, much upon the
same account, and for the same Reason as the Prince. He wrote to the King a
Letter wherein he laid it before him, that it was neither for his Honor, nor
did it become his Justice to use violent means; that for his part he could not
approve of 'em, and therefore besought his Majesty, not to take it amiss, if
within his own Diocese, he qualified and softened such boistrous proceedings as
much as lay in his Power. At which the King being provoked, wrote a threatening
Letter to the Intendant of the Diocese, against the Cardinal, with orders to
show it him. There upon the Cardinal wrote to the Intendant that Famous Letter,
wherein he proves, that Rigorous and Bloody means are not to be made use of to
reduce People to the Religion they have forsaken, and that there is no other
way to deal with the Conscience but by persuasion.

Our Jesuit therefore, who is a sworn Enemy to all those who concur not blindly
with his designs, incensed the King against him withal his might, and obtained
a Warrant also to send him to the Bastile, which was revoked soon after, at the
intercession of the Duke of Montauzier. However afterward this worthy Prelate
was haunted with a thousand vexations, tho the only person that we have in
France that lives a life so exemplary and so like a true Bishop.

He was formerly a Courtier and one that had very far engaged himself in vanity
and a luxurious Life; but at length retiring from the world, leading a very
Virtuous and Pious Life, the King made him Bishop of Grenoble. For which when
he went to return thanks to his Majesty, he took his leave of him for all his
Life after: where upon the King demanding the Reason why he bid him so long a
farewell, he answered that residence was of Divine Right, and that he thought
himself obliged to reside in his Diocese, as he had resolved to do, till death.

After he came to be a Bishop, he lived altogether upon Pulse, and gave himself
entirely up to all the care and Functions of a Charitable Pastor, Preaching
himself to his people, visiting the Poor, the Widows and the Orphans whom he
always relieved to the utmost of his power: Such eminent Virtues and so rate a
Piety, produced him the Cardinals Cap, and the particular affection of Innocent
XI. And this was that which rendered la Chaise so irreconcilable to him, that
he could not expect from him for the future any other then the utmost of
mischief that he could do him.

It Is impossible to speak of all things at once; so that I had like to have
omitted one of the blackest Circumstances of la Chaise's Life, which was very
injurious to Christendom; and therefore I must be forc^d to run backward for
some years.

All the world knows, how the King fell upon Strasburgh, by means of the
Correspondence which he held with the new Burgomasters, under pretense that
that City was the Capital City of Alsatia, and belonged to him as a Dependence
of that Province which was surrendered to him by the Peace of Munster. The
Emperor and all the Princes of Germany highly complained of this Breach, which
together with the Blocking up of Luxemburgh, and detaining the Castle of
Dinant, which was to have been restored to the Prince of Liege, were causes
more than sufficient to renew the War, with which they threatened him in
Conjunction with Spain. Expedients were proposed in Council to prevent all
this, and it was de Louvois's advice, to make an Alliance with the Turk, the
Truce between whom and the Emperor was ready to expire, and who would be able
to make a Powerful Diversion with never so little Assistance. With all, that it
was necessary to engage the K. of Poland in the same League, who had been
beholding to France for his Crown; to which purpose he should be tempted with
the Conquest of Silesu that lay so convenient for him. M. de Boncherat and M.
Montausier were of a Contrary Opinion, and laid before his Majesty that besides
the stain it would be to his Honor, it would be to call in an Enemy that would
not be so easy to be driven out again, whereas it was easy to dissipate this
appearance of a League by raising the Blockade of Luxemburgh, and letting his
pretentions to the County of Alost sleep a while. Which would suffice without
doubt to oblige those Princes patiently to suffer the taking of Strasburgh. But
the Marquis of Louvois still insisted that an Alliance with the Turk was the
only way to keep all the Princes of Germany in in awe, who would be glad that
his Majesty would grant 'em Peace, which he might or might not do as he saw his
Advantages. But that he had great probability of a much better Progress; it
being certain that if the Turks got the upper hand, and that the King of Poland
acted his part, the Princes of the Empire would of their own accord be forced
to call his Majesty to their assistance, and perhaps would be easily persuaded
to declare him Emperor, or at least, the Crown of the King of the Romans could
not fail the Dauphin.

Upon this there was at that time nothing concluded; the King delaying the
matter, till he had consulted his Council of Conscience, or rather his
Confessor, with whom he is infatuated; for he hearkens to him as an Oracle* The
Father assured him that he might not only do it with a safe Conscience, b^^
promised to set so many Engines at work that the thing should be successfully
brought about. And indeed it was by his instigation that the Jesuits of Vienna
persuaded the Emperor to torment the Protestants of Hungary more then ever,
that so they might be provoked to revolt; and furnished Court Tekeli with means
to support himself; who unless that Persecution had been redoubled, would have
run the hazard of being abandoned by his own Party. He was also supplied from
France with what money he wanted. And Father la Chaise it was that recommended
to the K. the person, who was most of all employed by him in that Negotiation;
one Rouvrai of Normandy, a new Catholic, and allur^d with a good Pension. He
was a Man of Wit, and bold even to daringness. And as he had occasion several
times to pass to and fro through Vienna, he performed the Office of a Spy, to
observe what past in that Court, not at all terrified with the accident at that
time newly befallen the Secretary of M. Seppeville the French Agent. That
Secretary was another Spy, who conveyed many a French Letter to Count Tekeli,
and gave an account to both Parties of what past in Vienna, by the assistance
of one Bohan, a French Officer in the Service of the Count, and who for a long
time drove the same trade with Rouvrai. But the Secretary was surpiz'd in this
dangerous Calling, and put in Prison, from whence he had never got out again
safe and sound, had not the King, so soon as he heard of it, seized upon Count
Mansfield the Emperors Ambassador at Paris, by way of Reprisal. When this
Secretary was taken, there was found in his Pocket a Letter which la Chaise had
written to Rouvrai, and which was seen by all that were then at the Court of
Vienna, of which that which follows is a Copy.

SIR,
I Have spoken to the King very earnestly about what you wrote in your last,
that Count Tekeli wants Money for the payment of his Men; and moreover that he
desires to be well supported from Turkey, without which he cannot long subsist.
As to the first, you may assure his Excellency, that the difficulty of finding
a way to return the Money has been the only reason that the King's Promises
have been hitherto delayed. But I spoke to an Armenian about two days since,
who has promised to pay him a hundred thousand Livres in two Months, and M.
Colbert has orders the said sum to be paid him within a Week*

As to the other point; the Kings Ambassador at the Port, makes us believe
'twill not be long now before he comes to a conclusion. He has wrote to his
Majesty, that there only are wanting two Millions of ready Money, three
thousand Muskets, and a duty of five per Cent. upon all Merchandise that shall
be Exported or Imported under French Colors. Which are obstruction which will
not be insisted upon. As to what remains, his Excellency may be sure of all the
Service that M. de Nointel can do him, who has the Kings order for so doing;
and besides that, was an intimate friend of Count Tekeli's Father deceased, and
Count Serini: this he told me positively in one of his Letters.

I have also thus much more good Ne^^ to tell you, that the King of Poland he
required time to give an Answer to wh^^ the Marquis of Vitry proposed to hi^ in
his Majesty's Name; but that the Queen told him in private, that when the King
her Husband came to his Vltimate determinations, whether in favor of the
Emperor or the King of France, he should always be mindful of his Obligations
to our great Monarch.

You may impart to Count Tekeli what I have wrote to you, and present him my
humble Respects.


This Letter discovered some part of the Fathers Plots and underhand Practices,
and tho he stiffly denied that ever he wrote it, which he might the more easily
do, because it was not signed, nevertheless the Secretary imprudently confess^d
that it came from him. His importunitys in Poland were also understood; and the
knowledge of 'em contributed not a little to prevent the Effect. For M.
Zierowsky the Emperors Ambassador at that Court, so lively represented to the
King the injury it would be to his Honor and his Interest, to assist the
Conquests of the Infidels in Christendom, which would indeed be no more then a
preparing of Shackles for himself (since it was very evident the most dangerous
Neighbor he had in the World was the Turk) that he entered into a strict
Alliance with his Imperial Majesty. He also hearkened to the complaints of M.
Zierowsky against the Sieur Vernay Baucault, calling himself extraordinary
Ambassador at the Court of Poland, and against several others who held
intelligence with Tekeli, and the Malcontents, and fomented the Rebellion in
Hungary; so that Vernay was Expell^d out of Poland, after the Emperors
Ambassador had showed the King and the Senate his Letters written to Count
Tekeli, and Fagel Governor of Cassovia, with their Answers, which were
intercepted by the Castellane of Presmslia.

In the Mean time the Infidels having forced the Pass of Raab, which they never
stayed to besiege no more then they did Comorra, advanced with a formidable
Army as far a Vienna; which they besieged, and struck terror into all the
Countries round about. At the same time also, the King of France, who was very
much tempted to lay hold upon the occasion, brought four Armies into the Field,
one in Flanders, another in Alsatia, a third upon the Saone, and another upon
the Saonr, Which alarmed no less this part of Europe, then the Ottamons did the
other. And certainly these were no frivolous fears, for to speak the Truth, the
King had laid aside all Scruples, and had made a most terrible Invasion, if la
Chaise had not stopped him. And this was the only time that his Councils were
favorable to Europe. But we owe him no thanks for this Obligation; for if he
had thought he had done well, he would never have done it.

He advised the King not to enter by force of Arms into a Country which he
might subdue when he pleased by bare persuasion. That all the Princes of the
Empire were generally in such a Consternation, that if he did but send any
person of Wit and Reputation to act among 'em, 'twas certain they would call
him in themselves of their own accord, and that he might reckon himself sure of
the Elector of Cologne, who without question possessed the fairest Countries
upon the Rhine: And as for the rest, it would be no hard matter to gain 'em.
But Sir, said he, should not this way succeed, your Majesty will be always in a
Condition to make use of your Power. The King believed him and recalled his
Armies. Presently the Furstembergs were written to, in order to this Affair,
who faild not to do their utmost; more especially William Bishop of Strasburgh,
a Creature so devoted to the King, that he had not a person in all his Kingdom
so much his purchased Slave as he. A person who will afford us ample matter of
discourse in the following Sheets, and therefore it will not be amiss that the
Reader should have a little taste of his character before hand.

He is a German by Birth of a Noble and Ancient Family which has done the
Emperors great Services at several different times, for which they have
received considerable advantages, and were advanced to the Highest Dignities in
the Empire. The Emperor now Reigning raised this very Person to be a Prince of
the Empire in his Youth, and besides that, bestowed upon him and his Brothers
several fair Fiefs of the Empire, as well in the Circles of Austria, as
elsewhere. But the Accumulation of so many Favors could not make him ere the
more Greatful to his Benefactors; he quitted his Party, and went into France,
where the King, who had his desire, received him very nobly, gave him a Pension
of six thousand Crowns a Year, and made him Colonel of a Regiment which he
commanded several Years. All this while his Brother was in the Service of the
Elector of Cologne, whose Prime Minister he was, and whom Prince William gained
over to the King in such a manner, that while he lived, he was no ill wisher to
his side.

The War of 72, being broke out, they began to talk of Peace as soon as it was
begun, and the next Year there was a Congress at Cologne of Plenipotentiaries
from all the Princes of Europe. Prince William was nominated for the Elector of
Cologne, but the Imperialists would not acknowledge him; and which was worse,
he was seized and carried to Vienna as a Rebel to his Prince, and guilty of
High Treason against him. This mannner of proceeding, which the King pretended
was against the Law of Nations, put an end to all the Negotiations, and broke
up the Assembly.

Tho the Court of France were very much afraid least the Prince of Furstenburgh
would have been very severely proceeded against, whether it were that the
Emperor feared thereby to render the King irreconcilable, or that he thought
he had a pledge in his hands that would facilitate a Peace when he pleas^d
himself I shall not dispute; but however it were, he only kept him Prisoner.
When the War was at an end, he was released, and the King observing that as
great a Bustler and as much a Boutefeu as he was, he was no Soldier, caused him
to exchange his Sword for a Breviary, and made him Bishop of Strasburgh. Nor
did his kindness for him bound it self there, for he nominated him to a
Cardinalship, and put the Bonnet himself upon his Head in Jan. 87, and the next
year caus^d him to be elected Coadjutor to the Archbishop of Cologne, which was
done the 7th of Jan. by eight a Clock in the Morning.

But to return to the matter in hand, he was employed during the Conjuncture of
the Siege of Vienna, to persuade the Princes of the Empire to have recourse to
the King; but his employing a suspected person was not the way to succeed: he
was too well known, and it was enough for a proposition to come from him, to
render it suspicious. So that all his jaunting to and fro signified nothing,
but only to give the King of Poland leisure to join the Duke of Lorrain, and
Relieve Vienna, into which they entered triumphant after the defeat of the
Infidels, of whom they made a most terrible Slaughter, and put the rest to the
most dreadful Flight that ever was known. This Glorious Victory reviv^d the
Courage of the drooping Empire, and every body coming again to themselves,
considered which way to make their best advantage of it. So that Heaven
continuing the blessing of success upon the Christian Arms, they prosper'd to
their own Wishes.

The King, having beheld this Great Deliverance, alter^d his Sentiments, but
not enduring to let his Neighbors be at rest, he teiz^d the Spaniards about
the County of Alost, considerable for the Extent and Revenue of it, which he
claimed as a Dependence upon his Conquests; and upon the King of Spains
refusing it, he Besieg^d Luxenburgh, and took it in lieu of an Equivalent. All
people thought that then the War would have broke out again more furiously then
ever. But the weakness of the Emperors Forces, and the Emperors desire to
prosecute his Victorys in Hungary, were the reason that all their differences
were put an end to, and laid a sleep by a General Truce concluded in the Year
1685.

While these things thus passed on, Charles the II. King of England died, and
left the Crown to his Brother the Duke of York, who tho generally ill beloved
by the People and a declar^d Roman Catholic was nevertheless proclaimed
without any Opposition. So happy a Success, and perhaps so little expected,
spread an Universal joy among all the Jesuits, who promised themselves no less
then the entire reducing that Kingdom under their Dominion, in three or four
Years at most: and they had already devoured in imagination all the Noble
Bishoprics and Considerable Benefices in the Realm: nor indeed were their
hopes so Chimerical, but that they might have reason to have some assurance of
it: they were absolutely Masters of the new Kings Heart and Soul, who was
wholly governed by them; as being to speak properly, no more then their Prime
Minister of State in his own Kingdom. Besides, they were protected by France,
extremely Potent, and near at hand to pour in thirty thousand men into England
when ever he pleased. It Is true this could not have been done without a
prejudice to the King, whose Authority would have been not a little diminished
thereby; but what car^d they, provided they had got their ends.

Now as the whole company in general had great reason to be over joy'd at such
a promising Event, Father la Chaise, in particular had more engaging motives of
Exultation and Triumph. The deceased King Charles had willingly listened to his
Councils, and had done several things in complacence to his advice; but at the
bottom he was a prudent Prince, and one who, otherwise loving his Pleasures and
his Ease, did not always do that which was desired of him; nor was he of a
humor to hazard the whole for nothing, like his Brother, who not having all
the foresight imaginable, but persuading himself, in imitation of Lewis the
Great, that there needed no more for him to do but to attempt and Prosper,
blindly and erroniously delivered himself up to Evil Counsels. Upon which
Foundation la Chaise erected his project to set all Europe in a Conflagration
of War, the most violent that ere was known, and hugged himself in his design,
which he looked upon then as infallible.

Some prosperous successes, as the defeat of the Duke of Monmouth and his
Death, render^d K. James so vain, that he never thought England able to
withstand him. So that from that time forward, he began hardly to observe any
Measures; wherefore in a short time, the Kingdom was full of Monks of all
Orders, and particularly Jesuits, who were become such favorites at Court,
that there was nothing to be there obtained but by application made to them.
And upon theirs and Father Peters^s recommendation it was, that Tyrconnel was
made Deputy of Ireland, where he committed extremities of Cruelty against the
Protestants, of whom he put a great number to Death.

This Tyrconnel was an Irishman by Birth, and low in Fortune; he came young
into England, where he served as a kind of Page for above ten Years at the end
of which time, he met with a Catholic who preferred him to the Duke of York, in
the quality of a better sort of Gentle man. This was the Rise of his Fortune.
But to return to King James.

He received a Nuncio from the Pope into London; which had not been known for
above an Age before: this was the Abbot Dada, since made a Cardinal. Some few
days after his arrival he was consecrated Bishop of Amasia in St. James's
Chapel, by the titular Archbishop of Armagh, and two other Bishops; and in the
Afternoon coming to pay his Respects to their Majesty's, they fell upon their
Knees before him, to receive his Benediction. Hitherto the Nuncio had only
appeared incognito; which not satisfying the King, who pretended to do nothing
in Hugger Mugger, he resolved that he should make his public Entry, and chose
Windsor for the Place. To this purpose, he orderd the Duke of Somerset first
Gentleman of his Chamber to go the next day to wait upon the Prelate at his
Lodgings, and conduct him to his Audience. The Duke would fain have shifted off
the Employment, by telling the King, that it was absolutely contrary to all the
Acts of Parliament that had been made upon that Subject: but then the King
casting an Angry look upon him, Do, said he, as you are commanded, I ask not
your Advice. Nevertheless, the Duke continued his Excuses, declaring to the
King that there were several others who would obey his Orders with less
Reluctance, and therefore besought his Majesty to lay his Commands upon them,
rather then upon him; Very Good, replied the King, I shall do it, but it shall
cost you your Employment of First Gentleman; and so turning to the Duke of
Grafton who was then in the Chamber. Duke of Grafton, said he, go to morrow and
fetch Monsieur the Nuncio in my own Coaches of State, and be you henceforward
first Gentleman instead of the Duke of Somerset. Nor did the Kings Wrath
against the Duke of Somerset end there; he took from him his Regiment of
Dragoons, and cast him quite out of his Favor. The next day the Nuncio made
his Entrance, in the view of all the People, in a Violet Habit, his Rochet and
Habit of a Purple Color, resembling a Captains Gorget, worn by a Pontifical
Bishop above his Rochet, and reaching down to the bending of his Arms.
Camail.

All this was done at the instigation of Father Peter's, who was something more
in England, then la Chaise was in France. And this latter seeing to his great
satisfaction King James's weak side, is reference to Peter's, resolved to make
him serviceable to advance his own Grandeur. That ambitious Jesuit la Chaise
had been a long time aspiring to a Cardinals Cap; but in regard that since the
Pontificate of Innocent XI. the Holy See had never had a more implacable Enemy
then himself, he justly questioned whether the Pope would grant that favor to
the K. of France, tho he should demand it, unless some other should level the
way beforehand, and that upon his Holiness's having granted the same Honor to
some other of his Character, he might claim a Privilege to pretend to it. Not
that he hoped to attain his Ends while the Reigning Pope lived, who had no
kindness at all for him, but after his Death.

Therefore he put it into the King of Englands Head to demand the Purple for
his own Confessor, and at the same time to make him a Bishop, giving him to
understand, that it would be the easiest thing in the world to obtain it, and
that the Pope would be glad of the opportunity to oblige him. But it fell out
quite otherwise: for when the Earl of Castlemain was about to have propounded
it to the Pope, he imposed silence upon him with a Benediction; which in the
Vatican is a Language that all men understand. And as for the Dispensations
which he demanded for the Archbishopric of York, to which Peter's was promoted,
the Pope returned for answer, that the Jesuits, having by their institutions
renounced all manner of Ecclesiastical Dignities, they could not so much as
think of those things without a Crime, in regard it is a very heinous Crime for
a Religious person to violate the Constitutions of his Order. 'Twas in vain for
the Ambassador to tell him a Story, that the Rules of their Order did not bind
em so indissolubly but that they might have a Dispensation when the good of the
Church required it: that his Predecessors had made no scruple to advance
several Jesuits to the Episcopacy, and some to the Purple: besides that, these
Institutions had now no more the same force then formerly, as consisting only
in the free will of the Pope: in regard that Paul and Julius the Third, had
permitted by express Bulls, that the form of 'em might be altered in one or
more Cases, according to the nature of the business. But the Pope remained in
exorable for all these plausible reasons, and Castlemain was forced to desist
his solicitations. The greatest vexation for the miscarriage of this Affair
was la Chaises, who had blink'd a long time upon the Archbishopric of Lion, as
a Benefice to which he had a kind of claim to suply the defect of the Red Cap.
For as to what concerned Father Peter's, the King found a way to comfort him for
the loss of what he never had, by appointing him his Grand Almoner, and by
making his Kinsman the Lord Peter's Lord Lieutenant of Essex.

Father la Chaise no longer questioning that there was any favor to be
expected from the Holy See, laid aside all reservedness, and harkening only to
his Revenge, spurred on the King to all those extremities that afterward brake
forth. The Bull which the Pope in a little time after thunder^d out, to abolish
the privileges of Ambassadors Quarters, importing Excommunication, ipso facto,
against all those that should go about to uphold 'em directly or indirectly,
served him for a good occasion. And tho the King of Spain and the Queen of
Sweden submitted voluntarily to it, yet the Confessor gave the King to
understand that it was a diminution of his Honor to follow their example, and
that the Franchises being a Prerogative belonging to his Crown, established in
Rome, not by a bare Connivance of the Popes, as they might perhaps in respect
of other Princes, but by Custom and special Privilege, of which he had been in
Possession ever since Charlemain, and lately acknowledged by the Treaty of
Pisa, he was not to give an Inch of Ground upon that point.

It Is no difficult thing to persuade Princes to those things which they deem
for their advantage; more especially, when they have the Power in their own
hands. The King was convinced the very first time, that the Father spoke
nothing but reason, and finding him so well skilled in a matter that he had
studied, he gave him order to draw up Instructions himself for the Marquis of
Lavardin, whom he had made choice of for his Ambassador, in the room of the
Duke d' Estrees, and to discourse him particularly upon the Subject, that he
might not be ignorant of the least Circumstance. So that it was the Confessors
spirit that animated and enlivened the Marquis, and by which he acted
altogether after that.

The Pope who was faithfully advertised by Cardinal Ranunci, his Nuncio at
Paris, of all these Proceedings; and to whom the King himself had refused
Audience, because he would have delivered him the Bull revocatory, offered
Cardinal d' Etree, that if he would submit to the Bull which he had set forth,
which was a very just one, and which he could not revoke without extreme
detriment to the Church, that the Sbirri or Officers of Justice, should forbear
making any Assaults upon the Quarters, and that nothing should be done to the
prejudice of the Kings interest. The Cardinal who found himself at a loss in
this Negotiation, approved the Expedient, and advised the K. to it in a Letter,
which being imparted to Father la Chaise, he opposed it, and said that the Bull
being an abuse, there was a necessity of Appealing and referring the matter to
the Parliament. Which the Pope understanding, wrote to him very smartly,
complaining, that since he was become his Confessor, instead of persuading the
King to sentiments of Piety and Goodness, he had always incensed him against
the Holy See, as in the business of the Regale, and now upon this occasion,
where the most just Rights of the Church were concerned, which he incited his
Majesty to violate; and which would be attended with very evil Consequences,
which would all light heavy upon him, and for which he must answer before God.

The Resolutions of the Holy Father to uphold his Pious design, put a stop for
some Months to Lavardins departure. But at length he setforward in November 87.
and made his public Entry in despite of the Pope, who would not acknowledge
him for an Ambassador. It was also debated in Council, whether they should shut
the Gates of Rome against him. But the Plurality of voices not being for
carrying things to that extremity, the Pope thought it sufficient to forbid the
Cardinals and all the Princes and Lords to send their Coaches to meet him; he
also forbid the discharging of any Great Guns, and all other public marks of
rejoicing. But for all these Inhibitions there were above a hundred Foreigners
Coaches, besides those of the several Ambassadors. The Cardinals d' Estree, and
Maldachi^, went also in Person to meet Lavardin, three Miles from Rome, and
went into the same Coach with him. They accompanied him likewise to the
Vatican, where the Ambassador having demanded Audience, it was refused him;
after which he went to the Palace of the Farnesi. He was attended by three
hundred French Gentlemen, who staid in Rome, as long as he did; not reckoning
in a considerable number of the Officers of the Gallys, who arrived in a short
time after; and I know not how many Lords that resorted to him from all parts
of Italy. More then this he kept five hundred Men in Pay, to whom he gave a
Julio a day, and these Soldiers guarded his Palace a Foot and a Horseback, and
went the Patroll every Night in his Quarter.

Upon the day of his Entrance, the Pope caused the Bull which he had set forth
before against the Franchises, to be fixed up a new, forbidding all People to
acknowledge Lavardin for Ambassador; who had no sooner notice of it, but in
opposition and to be even with the pope he caused Placarts to be pasted up in
all the Corners of the Streets, forbidding the Sbirri to presume to approach
within five hundred Paces of his Quarter, threatening to put all to the Sword
that should be met within that compass. The next day he sent again to demand
Audience of the Pope, who returned him for answer by Cardinal Colo^^^ That it
was a vanity for him to demand Audience as Ambassador from the Most Christian
King; that he never would acknowledge him under that Character; so far from
that, that if he continud to act with the same rashness and indiscretion, he
should look upon him as no other then an Enemy of Jesus Christ and his Vicar
upon Earth; whom he was come to Affront and Persecute even in the Sacred Chair,
and that he should find a way to tame his audaciousness and his impiety, by
those Ar^^ which God had put into his hands, i^ he did not prevent him by a
filial an^ Christian Submission.

But Lavardin laughed at all these threats and within an hour after dispatch^d
away a Courrier to the King his Master to give him an account of all these
passages. He also wrote to Father la Chaise observing to him all along what ha^
been said to him by Cardinal Colo^^^ To which the Father answered him wit^ a
Congratulation for having so punct^ally acquitted himself in the discharge o^
his duty, and exhorting him to continue steadfast, without fearing the Arms of
his Holiness, which could do him no harm, In regard that the King having given
him his Letters of Credence, had invested him with a Cuirace proof against all
the Cuts and Slashes of Apostolical Weapons. A noble Sentence and becoming the
Author of it.

In the mean time, when the Queen of Sweden, and the Marquis of Cogolludo, the
Spanish Ambassador saw, that Lavardin made good the Right of the Franchises by
dint of ample Authority, they began to repent of their having so easily
submitted, and represented to his Holiness that so long as they believed that
the French would have surrendr'd to his Paternal Remonstrances, they were
willing to contribute toward an accommodation, and to be the first that should
quit their Rights of Sovereigns, to the end the Most Christian King might have
no pretense to allege from their Example; but since it was visible by the
proceeding of his Ambassad^^, that he would not abate the least Tittle of his
Claim, they besought his Holiness to give way that they might resume their
Rights, since it was not to be thought that the King of France had any
Privilege above them; protesting that they would ever be ready to give his
Holines^ any satisfaction, when ever they sa^ France willing to comply.

Things stood at this stay, till the ne^ month; at what time, Lavardin going
one Christmas night to perform his Devotions at St. Lewis's Church, the Pope
looked upon that action as a new affro^ to his Bull, by which he had
Excommunicated all those who abetted the Privilege of the Franchises; so that
the ne^ day there appeard a Brief of Excommunication fixed upon the Church of
Saint Lewis, under the name of the Cardinal Vicar. Which, because it is very
short I shall here insert.

By virtue of the Apostolical Authority, and by the special Command (...) our
most Holy Lord, the Pope, (...) pronounce, that the Parish Church o^ St. Lewis
is subjected to Ecclesiastica^ Interdiction, because the Rector, the Official
and the Ministers of the sai^ Church have presumed upon the la^ night of the
Nativity of our Lord, to admit to Divine Offices, and the Participation of the
Sacrament Henry de Be^manoir, Marquis of Lavardin, who (...) notoriously
Excommunicated. Given at Rome, in our Palace, December 26. 1687. The Cardinal
Vicar.

And below the Brief was written,

The present Sentence is forbid to be pulled down under the Penalty of
Excommunication, reserved to our Holy Lord. De Rubris, Notarie.

The Marquis of Lavardin on the other side, delayed no longer then the next
day, before he published a large Protestation against the said Breef; wherein
after he had mustered together a great number of reasons to prove that the Pope
did very much amiss to proceed in that manner, and that the Franchises of Rome
were a Right that belong^d to the King not to becontested or controul^d, he
concluded his Protestation with these words, that without summing up so many
reasons as had already been alleged against the Bull, in Caena domini, against
which the whole Assembled Gallican Church had always exclaimed, as being of no
efficacy in respect of France, and published by a Pope that had declared
himself a Capital Enemy of that Crown, without entering, said he, either into
those reasons, or such as might be objected against the other Bulls, that
served for a foundation for that which is now pretended to be set forth by his
Holiness, which ca^ never be published in the Kingdom for the reasons before
receited, it is sufficient to say that he the said of Marquess Lavardin is the
Most Christian Kings Ambassador, and by consequence exempted from all
Ecclesiastical Censures, so long as he is invested with that Character, and
that he will execute the Orders of the King his Master.

Therefore the said of Marquess Lavardin deems it not necessary to appeal from
this pretended Excommunication, not well examined by his Holiness, when he
shall be disabus'd, s^ soon as he shall grant an Audience for the removing
those false impressions, that restless and turbulent people, the Enemies of
France have imprinted in his mind, such as labor to break off the good
intelligence between the Holy Father and his Majesty. He believes it also
needless to appeal to a future Lawful Council; nevertheless at present, as much
as is or shall be requisite, he protests the Nullity of all that is done or
shall be done for the future; declaring that if any one of any Quality whatever
fails of that respect and due regard which ought to be paid to his Character,
he shall be responsible before God and Man for all the mischiefs he may draw
upon himself, through the offense committed against his Majesty, in violating
the Law of Nations, in the Person of his Ambassadors. Given at Rome, December
27. 1687.

Lavardin, sent a Copy of this Protestation to the King, who approv^d it, and
ordered M. Harlay, the Proctor General in the Parliament at Paris to put in an
Appeal to a future Council in reference to what the Pope had acted; and this
was done Jan. 22. 1688. But this Appeal, how injurious soever it were to the
Holy See, was nothing in comparison of the Decree that was given ou^ the next
day, and the famous Plea that accompani^d it, to which I refer the Reader,
being too long to be here inserted, tho it were a piece that was hammerd in la
Chaises Shop, to whom the King gave order to consult the drawing it up with M.
Talon, under whose name it appeared. It Is true that Talon drew up the first
draught of it, and showed it to the King, but Father la Chase who was present
and read it to his Majesty, told him that the Writing was excellently well
penned, but that it was not smart enough, neither did it sufficiently set forth
his Majesty's causes of complaint against the Pope; and that it was of great
Importance to show to all the World and to Posterity, the Partialy and Passion
of the Holy Father upon that occasion. Thereupon the King bid 'em meet both
together in the afternoon, and to add or alter what they thought proper. This
order very much displeased M. Talon, who could not digest it, that a Priest
should be put upon him to teach him his Trade; and two days after he testified
his resentment to Villeroy, to whom he said in express terms, that tho every
body should meddle with his Trade, the Cows would be never a whit the better
kept for all that.

However, he obeyed without saying a word, and all that day they labored about
that famous declamation which has made such a noise, and which is only stuffed
with threats of a National Council, which would empower the Bishops to
Consecrate one another, if the Pope refused to do it, and to Excommunicate his
Holiness himself, if he went about to thunder out his Excommunications. Si
Excommunicatus veniret, Excommuicatus abiret.

Passion, desire of Domineering, Usurpations of the Court of Rome. The Holy
Father was contemned and slighted, as a man of a weak and shallow Pate, not
able to bear the burden of Affairs, and sometimes they called him declared
favorour and Protector of the Quietists and Jansenists. In short they Cursed and
Anathamatiz'd him in express terms. A Curse and Anathema, says the Writing, on
all those, who either through Interest or Capricio trouble the correspondency
that is to be between the Priesthood and the Royalty, who seem to have no other
Prospect but to raise Schism in the Church, and with fatal Divisions to disturb
the Peace of all Europe, which has been procured by the Wisdom of our
Invincible Monarch.

That which was more to be wondered at was, that Lavardin caused both the Plea
and the Decree to be fixed upon the Doors of the Vatican. The Pope surpised at
such an act of daring presumption as that, forbid all the Churches to admit the
Priests who had officiated in the Parish of St. Lewis: And one poor Almoner,
belonging to the Ambassador, having taken a walk imprudently toward the
Vatican, was seized upon and clapped into the Inquisition, for having audaciously
adventured to say Mass in the Ambassadors Chapel. In the mean time, in France,
the King ordered the Bishops to send for the Superiors of the Convents, in
their Dio^^sses, and to forbid em under rigorous Penalties to suffer any one of
their Monks to write or teach any thing contrary to the Rights of his Majesty,
or the differences between him and the Pope. The Archbishop of Paris among the
Rest, zealous as he always uses to be, for the Kings Interest, put this Order
exactly in execution. He chose to that purpose for his Official one Cheron, a
man learned and fit for business, whom he sent to all the Conventual Houses, to
let 'em know the Kings intentions. And indeed the Generality of the
Ecclesiastics, as well Monks as others, surrendered themselves, to that blind
obedience that was expected. Only some three or four Doctors of the Sorbonne,
and some Capuchins and Dominicans took the Popes part: but they were reduced to
reason by a Privy Signet Letter, that sent 'em to make a noise above a hunder^d
Leagues off: upon which all the rest laid their Fingers upon their Mouths.

The Pope, informed of all this, would not make use of his Ecclesiastical
Thunders, for fear of exposing 'em to the derision of a Prince that little
regarded 'em; but rather desiring to find out some expedient for an
accommodation, he ordered Cardinal de Estree to be acquainted, that he would
willingly hearken to him, in reference to the Differences which he had with the
Most Christian King.

The Cardinal answered the Pope, that he was infinitely obliged to his Holiness
for his particular goodness toward him, and that he was at his wits end to see
that he could not correspon'd with it, the King his Master having tied up his
hands in this Affair, and forbid him to meddle with it so long as his
Ambassador was at Rome.

An answer so dry and sapless, did not however extinguish his Holinesse's
desire to contribute all that lay in his power toward an Amicable conclusion of
this Contest, and touched with the misfortunes which his Excommunication would
bring upon Christendom, through the King of Frances obstinacy, which he had
made appear by so many public Acts, he resolved to take it off. By this means
St. Lewis's Church became f^ee to all the world, and as well Italians as French
resorted to it. This manner of procedure was looked upon as a great Weakness in
the Holy Father, and a most inexcusable want of Courage, after such a Stiffness
as the Pope had showed: but if we rightly consider things, we shall find that
the Pope never did a more prudent Act, nor more charitable, or more becoming
the Vicar of Christ. He knew those spiritual Weapons, so terrible to all the
truly faithful, were not put into his hands but only to reduce under obedience
such as obstinately strayed from the Truth; and to prevent others through a
holy fear from following their Example. For these reasons therefore he thought
it behooved him to make use of 'em upon this occasion, piously persuaded, that
Corruption and Error were not got up to that high degree in France, as to be in
sensible of such Celestial Chastisements. But when he saw they had not that
success which he expected, rather quite the Contrary, that his proceeding in
that manner, how just so ever it were, had exasperated the minds of men against
him; that all the Clergy was ready to revolt, and that he had all the reason in
the world to be afraid of a Schism in the Church, he relented on a sudden, to
stop the Torrent of Perdition. He never consulted Flesh or Blood, but without
any regard to what all the World could say of him upon such a Relaxation, he
thought it his duty to sacrifice a vain point of Honor to the Glory of God.

During these Transactions the Elector of Cologne died, leaving three fair
Episcopal Principalities vacant, and several pretenders to 'em. The Cardinal of
Furstenburgh was one of the first that appeared upon the Stage. He was already
Coadjutor in the chiefest of these Principalities, but he had not been
confirmed by the Pope; and so all things were to begin again. And indeed 'twas
he who lost the most by the quarrels between France and Rome.

For the Pope who perfectly well knew which way that Prelate was devoted, never
minded the doing any thing for him at such a time as that. So that the
Cardinal, who was not ignorant of his condition, wrote several times to Father
la Chaise, and endeavored to make him sensible that the Affair of the
Franchises could not be of that importance to the K. as a concern, which indeed
was the concern of all the Lower Rhine, and of something more then that; and
therefore that it would be convenient to release it to the Pope, at least for
some time till the King might be more at leisure to reassume his Challenges.
The same things were likewise several times represented to the King by Prince
Ferdinand of Furstenburgh; and certain it is, that the King had given way, if
la Chaise, who mortally hated the Pope, out of a desire of revenge, had not
diverted him, telling him, that he might if he pleased himself procure the
Election of Cardinal Furstenburgh, without having recourse to such a burdensome
expedient: That there needed no more for that purpose, t^en to let the Chapters
understand his pleasure; or to make the business more sure, he might order some
of his Forces to advance that way: which the King did, under pretense of
securing to the Capitulars the Freedom of their suffrages; but in reallity to
deprive 'em of it, and force 'em to comply with his good Will and Pleasure.

His Ambassador d' Avaux declared at the same time to the Sates of Holland,
that his Master understood that the Three Chapters were to be left to their
free choice; and that no Prince was to meddle in their Affairs; and therefore
he threatened that if any Prince should pretend to busy himself in what
concerned him not, he would be ready to side with the Chapters that were
interrupted and injured in their Rights.

But nothing was so pleasant, as the compliment which his Envoy made to those
of Liege. He told 'em, that the King his Master out of that Affection and
Friendship he had for 'em, had sent ten thousand men to quarter near their
City, at a vast charge, to support 'em in their freedom of Election; which
however, he hoped would be in favor of Prince William, Cardinal of
Furstenburgh; otherwise that he could not forbear to put 'em in mind, that the
half of their City depended upon the County of Chini, which belonged to him.

These menaces, how terrible soever they were, how ever wrought little other
effect, then to make the Chapter incline, not to Cardinal Furstenburgh, for
they looked upon him as an Enemy of their Country; but in favor of Cardinal de
Bouillon, whom they offered the King several times, to Elect.

But Father la Chaise put a spoke in his Wheel. He was Bouillon's Enemy; and
therefore without ceasing laid before the King, that if once that Cardinal
should arrive to that degree of Sovereignty, he would infallibly call to mind
all the acts of Injustice that, as he pretends, have been done his Family, and
his late Imprisonment in the Bastille. He supported all this with the secret
causes of that Prelates disgrace, which made a deep impression in the Kings
mind, and put him in fear in earnest, that if he should once come to be Prince
of Liege, he would presently side with his Enemies. However it were, we know
not, but we have since found that la Chaise was no Conjurer, in regard we have
seen by what that Cardinal did at Rome, how faithful and Affectionate he was to
the King.

I have formerly said that Father la Chaise did a great deal of Mischief, but
no body any good; which, to speak generally is very true; but as there is no
general Rule without Exceptions, there may be found an Exception in this, as
well as in others; and the Count of Marce, Nephew to Madam Maintenon affords us
one. He sought in Marriage the Daughter of M. de Boisfrane, Superintendant of
Monsieur's House; but turned out of his Place by reason of his Rapines and
Extortions. Father la Chaise was very much his Friend, and therefore Madam
Maintenon desired him to assist her toward the concluding of that Match, which
otherwise they durst not propose, in regard the young Lady had refused the Duke
of Roquelaure, when the Duke his Father was at the highest of his Gandeur.
However she had a great Portion to the value of eight hundred thousand Livres,
which was a Sum sufficient to tempt a more considerable Nobleman, then the
Count of Marce. He therefore looked upon the Lady as one that might be the
making of him; and thought he could never make the Confessor amends for the
great pains he had taken to bring about the Match: tho he did nothing but what
he was bound in gratitude to do. For Madam Maintenon had done him greater
services then that, and he stood in need of her assistance every day.

But we cannot say the same in reference to the Marquess of Richlieu, a person
of as little Reputation as ever any at Court; ill shaped, and very slender
witted; yet married about two years before to one of the Loveliest and the
Richest Heiresses of the Kingdom, Mademoiselle de Mazarin, Daughter of the Duke
of Mazarin, who married one of the Cardinals Neeces, upon condition that he
should assume the name and Arms; for, as for this man, he was the Son of
Marshall de Meilleraye, Governor of Brittany. Every body knows how he liv^d
with his Wife, by the report of several Stories, and therefore we shall say no
more, but only this, that by that Marriage he had two Children, a Son who is
called the Duke of Meillaraye, and a Daughter, the Lady we are now speaking of.
In regard she was very much like her Mother, both in the Features of her Face,
as in her Humor, and that the usual Proverb in the Duke of Mazrins Mouth was,
That good Dogs hunt by Kind, he was very much afraid that she would likewise
no less resemble her in her Life and Behavior. To prevent this, he resolved to
keep her so short, and to bestow such a virtuous Education upon her in her
Infancy, as might vanquish the proneness of his Daughter to evil. To this
purpose he always kept her in Nunneries; in the custody of Good and Religious
Governesses, who discoursed to her of nothing but God and his Saints; and for
recreation, read to her nothing but the Lives of St. Reine, or St. Catherin of
Siena, who had deserved so much by her Devotion as to be married to Christ
himself, who descended from Heaven on purpose to espouse her. Now tho all this
bigotry did no way agree with her Genius, she was forced to be contented with
it, till she came to be Seventeen or Eighteen years of Age. At what time the
Bent of her Wit and disposition beginning to fix, she grew wily and cunning,
and began to converse with the young Nuns that were less reserved, who
discovered to her many things of which she was ignorant before, procured her
Romances and Novels, and many times the Courtship of Young Gallants. Of which
the Duke being informed, he resolved frequently to shift her from one place to
another, to the end she might not have time to enter into familiarities:
besides, he never ^ntrusted her but to the custody of certain old Nuns, of whom
he was secure. But what signified all these precautions to force back the
nature of an Amorous young Girl, that glori'd in deceiving her Overseers, and
thought it no less necessary to boot. I saw her at Hennebout which is a
Government in Bretagne belonging to her Father. He had placed her in the Abbey
de la Joye, under the Tuition of an Ancient and virtuous Matron, called Madam
de Pleve, who was own Aunt to the Duchess of Portsmouth. There for some Months
the Orders of the Duke of Mazarin were exactly obeyed, and she was kept very
close. But in a little time she had so well learnt to win the heart of her
Governess, and the other. Nuns by her Flatteries and Complacencies, that they
thought it not so reasonable to be so rigorous and so severe, to so amiable a
young Girl. But he that contributed most to her liberty was one Father
Cronier, Director of the Convent, and Confessor to Madam de Pleve, in whom she
had as great a Faith as in St. Bernard himself, the Founder of the Order. This
Monk was fallen in Love with Mademoiselle de Mazarin, and left nothing omitted
to please her. He put himself into red habit, carefully cleans'd his Teeth, and
cast as many smirking looks upon her as a young Gallant in a white Perriwig
could have done. The young Lady who the very first time took pleasure in
hearing the Gayities of his wanton Addresses, nere gave him so much as a frown,
but maugre the greasy Fatt, which is inseparable from Monks, she thought 'twas
better to have a greasy swaggbelly'd Lover then none at all. 'Twas observed
also that she went dressed more then she was wont to do, when she was to see him,
and that their Cheek-by-jowles lasted a long while. This half-Inclination
lasted till she had got her Arms at Liberty, and that it was permitted her to
be visited by Sparks and Gallants of this World. But then she found such a
difference between them and Monks, that she utterly and without compassion
abandoned the poor and unfortunate Bernardin, who was ready to dye for Madness.
I never saw a young Girl so wild. She would come sometimes into the
speaking-room, in the Habit of a Nun, with her veil over her face, and tell
those that stayed for her, that Mademoiselle de Mazarin was very ill, and could
not come to 'em. At other times she would appear in Man's Apparel with a huge
Perriwig and a Hat and Plume of Feathers; and in that disguise would play a
thousand apish Tricks, and what ever habit she had on, her wild Humors were
still the same. She frankly confessed that the sight of a Hat rejoiced her, and
that nothing was so Melancholy to her as Company without a Hat. But she told
me one day a thing that was much more pleasant then that. We were talking one
day of the excessive Devotion of her Father, at which time she never scrupl^d
to call him Fool and Visionary, and recounted to me, that while the Duke and
the Duchess lived together, he would never lie with her, before she had
repeated a whole Rosary in his presence, and had been at Prayers with him every
Evening upon her Knees, which together with the Litanies of the Virgin, lasted
at least an Hour: So that, said she, the poor Lady my Mother, for want of
Patience, was often forced to go without her Husbands kindness.

This was the Character of Madem^iselle de Mazarin's Genius, who seeking all
manner of ways to free her self from the flavery wherein she was confined, took
a passionate fancy to a young Gentleman who had no other good qualities to
recommend him, but only that he was the Son of the President of the Parliament
of that Province: and that was no great matter. For there are some of those
Presidents that make no great Figure: nevertheless the business was gone so far
that measures were taken to marry her privately, and get her out of the
Convent, over the Walls that join to the River, where there was a Bark ready to
conveigh the two Lovers to a Bark that was hired on purpose to carry 'em into
England, where the Duchess of Mazarin, protected by the Queen her Kinswoman
had promis^d to receive her. This hairbrain'd project was just ready to be put
in execution, when Providence that takes care of Madfolks and Children,
disappointed the contrivance, by means of the confidence which they put in the
Seneschal of the City, from whom they expected assistance. He promised to lend
'em two thousand Crowns, and by that means delayed 'em fifteen days, while he
in the mean time gave notice to the Duke, who came Post to Hennebond, and took
his Daughter from thence, not without letting her taste of his displeasure in
the terrible Reprimands that he gave her. Afterward he carried her to Paris,
where he locked her up among the Capuchins; hoping she would be there more
strictly kept, as being a House that observed an exact Austerity, and where
there would be always a watchful Eye over her. He also most devoutly
recommended her to the custody of the Blessed St. Clement, who arrived there a
little before, and who in all the usual forms accustomed among the Saints, was
to signalize his coming by some authentic favor. But all these precautions
proved fruitless: for the Female Capuchins being in a hurry upon the change of
their House, could not so diligently look after their Prisoner but that she ran
away with the Marquess of Richlieu; at least the Monks told the dispairing D.
of Mazarin so, who went to throw himself at the Kings feet, and baule out his
misfortune all over the Court: which serv^d to make sport for those unlucky
waggs that lie in wait for such opportunities.

But perhaps he would not have made so loud a noise had he known the truth of
the story, for you must know that his good Friend Father la Chaise was the
occasion and contriver of it. He is related to the Abbess of the Convent, and
spared for no pains at this time to persuade her that the Duke of Mazarin was a
Churl or Cynic, that would make his Daughter run mad, if he had her much
longer in his keeping. That a Young Lady of her condition was not to be so
rudely dealt with; and that assuredly the least mischief that could befall her
House would be this, that she would dishonor the Convent by some Foppish Trick
or other: to prevent which, the best way would be to marry her privately, and
send her to her Mother, till the Duke could be brought to hear reason, which he
would undertake himself to do. After which he proposed the Marquess of
Richlieu, which the Abbes at first did not think a suitable match;
nevertheless, she submitted to his Reasons. What do you find a miss in the
Marquess, said he, is he not descended from a Wedlock equal to that of the Duke
of Mazarin?

It may be he is not so rich; but good Cousin, be pleased to consider, that the
Riches of this World are but Vanities; and when the eternal salvation of a ^oul
is the thing in question, as it is ^ow the case of Mademoiselle de Mazarin, we
are not in the least to insist upon Wealth.

Thus the business was concluded between the Father and the Abbes, and the
Bishop of St. Malo's was in the Plot. For that Bishop, who has actually a Wife
and Children living, many times busies himself with other matters besides
saying his Breviary, and was one of the Principal Actors in that Comedy

There^pon the Marquess of Richlie^ was presen^ed to the fair Lady, and the
marriage discoursed of at the same time. It Is true likewise, at first his Mee^
and his want of Wit did somewhat disrelish her, but at length she rather chose
to accept him than to live all her days in a Cloister. Presently she was
marri^d in the Convent it self, and the Prelate before mentioned performed the
Ceremony. Which done, they procured a Man's Habit for the new Marchioness and
in that dress she went into her Husbands Coach. They drove directly to Course la
Rheme, where they found one of the Bishops travalling Coache^ ready, which
carried 'em to St De^ where they took laid Horses, rode Po^ to Callies, and
thence got over into England.

But some scrupulous persons, that would have an Author give 'em an account of
every thing he sees, will ask me perhaps, how Father la Chaise came to intrigue
himself so far in this Affair? I can say nothing as to that, unless it were
perchance out of his Affection for Madam de Mazarin, who was his Patron and his
Benefactors Neice. It might be also that the fifty thousand Livres which the
Marquis of Richlieu charged upon the Banker Grusle, for his Brother M. la
Chaise, might contribute something toward the matter. For he knew not well
other wise how to raise the money which he was to pay for Captain of the Guards
of the Gate, which he had purchased of the Marquess of St. Va^ier for four
hundred thousand Livers; which was a cheap penny worth, considering it had been
sold for five hundred. However 'twas too much for a Beggar as he was to raise:
and if beside the fifty thousand Livres, the Confessor had not made a shift to
sell some Benefices in hugger mugger, he had never had, as now he has, the Keys
of the Louvre in his Custody.

But let us leave these trifles, and proceed to Affairs of greater consequence.
About this time Monsieur Sebret, Envoy Extraordinary to Siam, returned home,
and with him came Father Tachart, a Jesuit, Ambassador from the New Convert, to
his Holiness, and his Most Christian Majesty. He was accompanied by eight
Mandarins, who attended him as his Gentlemen. This Father brought to the King
the Ratification of the Treaty of Alliance made with the King of Siam, by
virtue of which that Prince surrendered into his hands several Places of great
Importance. The Chevalier Fourbin returned also in the same Vessel: whose too
great favor had rendered him odious to M. Constance, who was afraid of being
thrown out of the Saddle by him, and therefore could no longer suffer him in
Place. So that Fourbin was forced to give way to the strongest, and be gone.
But this giving way did not satisfy the others Ambitious and Revengeful
spirit. He wrote therefore to Father la Chaise upon this Subject, complaining
highly of Fourbin, calling him Braggadochio and Boutefeu, who setting a high
value upon himself, yet having a very small Fortune, was more like to spoil
then accomodate Affairs. However fearing he should not be believed upon his
word, and that his Majesty should resent the ill usage of the Chevalier, he
engaged Father de Fontenay, Superior of the House of Siam, to write in the
same style, wherein he served Constance so well, that the poor Chevalier, tho
Nepew to the Bishop of Beauvais, was glad of a Fregate of twelve Guns, after he
had been Admiral of the Siam Seas. More then this, they seiz^d all his Baggage
in Britagn under pretense of goods that were liable to pay Custom; nor could he
get 'em again without a great deal of trouble, after they had been searched and
detained above six month. But 'twas no wonder they were so kind to the Sieur
Constance, in regard he was the Man to whom the King was beholding for all the
Power which he has in Siam.

This Man was a Grecian by Birth, born at Cephalonia, an Island belonging to
the Venetians, of very mean extraction, tho Father Trachart will have him to be
the Son of the Governor; wherein he is much deceiv^d; for I have been at
Cephalonia my self, and know his Family. His name is Constance Queralcky, and
not Phancon, as the same Father asserts: or if he assumed that name, it was
only the better to conceal himself. Now in regard he was reduced so low as to
beg Alms, his Mother got him to be a Ship-Boy in an English Vessel, where he
was instructed in the Protestant Religion. Afterward he came to be a common
Seaman, and as such a one went to the East Indies, where it was no difficult
thing for a young fellow that had wit to get money, with which he traded for
himself, and in process of time was Consul for the English. By that means he
became known at Court, and particularly at that of the Baccalon, or Prime
Minister of Siam, who at the end of his Consulship took him for his Secretary.
In that Employment he won the very heart of the Boccalon, and he the Affection
of the King by his Secretaries management; so that offering to undertake an
Ambassy at half the expense which the Moors required, he was sent, and upon his
return, the Boccalon being dead, he was preferred in his Room. At that time it
was, that the Jesuits perceiving how useful he might be to 'em, ceased not to
haunt him, till they had over ruled him to quit the Protestant Religion, which
he abjured before Father Thomas, and Father Maldonnar; who immediately wrote to
la Chaise, jointly with Father Verbiest, and then proposed to him the Project
of settling the French in that Kingdom, and by consequence the ruin of the
Dutch Trade in that Country. This design pleased the King, and Father la haise
was ordered to write a Letter to Con^^ance, congratulating his Conversion, and
withal to send him a Prayer Book ^ichly bound. Good God! how was Constance
over joy^d when he saw himself prevented, and sought to by a Great King. He
answered the Kings kindness with all the marks of Protection that he was able
to afford the French; and besides that, he wrote to his Majesty to ^ffer him
his most humble Service, pro^esting withal that he should be always ^ady to
undertake any thing in order ^hereunto. He did the same to M. la Chaise, with
whom he enga^d himself ^^om that time forward to hold a most ^^timate
Correspondence: and to show ^im that he intended to be as good as ^is word, he
insinuated the Jesuits into ^^e Kings favor, by means of the Ma^^ematicks,
which won him to that degree, that he suffered 'em to Convert his Subjects in
his very Court; and more then that, he bid 'em not be out of hopes of
Converting himself. And upon these hopes it was, that Father Couplet, a
Dutchman born, was sent into France with two men, who styled themselves
Mandarins, to hear what was become of their Ambassadors, tho the King of Siam
never dreamt of any such thing. This was so concerted, to tempt his Majesty to
send an Embassy thither, which no body could take an oceasion to comment upon,
or tax him from thence for having begged the Friendship and Alliance of the
Indian Prince.

Father Couplet had long and frequent Conferences with la Chaise concerning
this Enterprise, and showed him the great advantages that would redound to the
Society, which could hope no less then to engross the greatest part of the
Immense Wealth which lies in the Pagods of those Countries. And as for his
Majesty, not to speak of the great Honor it would be to him, to have procured
the Conversion of a Kingdom so far distant, he had all the probabilities
imaginable to make himself Master of it in time, if the King of Siam could be
once persuaded to admit French Forces into his Country, upon pretense of
defending him against the Hollanders, after they had once persuaded him that
they were his mortal Enemies, who only sought an occasion to pour themselves
into his Country and complete the Conquest of it; the business of Bantam very
much assisting 'em to make him give credit to their Story. The Father added,
that this design would be so much the more easy to the King, in regard the
Indians being nothing near so well trained in War as the Europians, they could
not make any formidable resistance, unless they were first instructed and
exerciz'd by the French who were perfectly skilled in military Discipline. But
in regard the King was a Prince extremely Generous, and who made renown the
only mark of all his great designs, it might be readily believ^d that he would
not be sparing of Commanders and Officers. This, said Father Couplet, is the
Posture of Affairs which seem to me to be in such a very good condition as not
to be neglected. For in short, although there be no great likelihood of subduing
this Empire so soon, yet the King will have always one great advantage by this
means, viz. to be a perpetual Thorn in the Hollanders sides, and so settle a
good Trade for his own Subjects. However certain it is, that if the King
undertakes this business, he will prove more successful then. I dare promise to
my self. M. Constance may be safely relied upon; for he is a man who is already
at our beck: and a few more Ca^esses and Marks of Distinction from he King will
bring him entirely to his Devotion.

^^ther la Chaise being thus convinced, himself, easily overrul'd the King, who
appointed the Chevalier de Chaumont for ^is Ambassador, and gave him six
Jesuits learned in the Mathematics to accompany him. Father la Chaise wrote
also to Father Verbiest, at P^quin, to recommend 'em to him, and that Letter
was made public: however there is no credit to be given to it; for it was a
counterfeit Piece, to hide from the Eyes of the World their old Practices and
designs.

In the mean time the Hollanders, who suspected the worst, engaged Sultan Agni,
King of Bantam to refuse the French Ambassador all manner of Audience, Relief
or Harbor in his Ports, and to send him Orders to depart his Roads, so that he
was constrained to continue his Voyage for Siam, where he was well received:
and when he went away he left the forementioned Chevalier de Fourbin, whom the
King desired to have for his Lord High Admiral, and in the Presence of the
Ambassador gave him a Magnificent Scimitar, which is the Present which he makes
to all his Generals. At the same time, he sent Ambassadors to our Monarch, who
were received with extraordinary Magnificence, and who were carri^d over all
the Conquered Countries to imprint in 'em a high Idea of France. They concluded
a Treaty of Alliance with his Majesty, and carried away with 'em a great number
of Officers and Soldiers of the Kings Guards for the King their Master, who
had but a very ill time of it. For the then King of Siam coming to dye, and his
Successor not enduring to be a King only in shadow, while the French who were
Masters of all his most considerable places were the real and substantial
Kings, caused his Subjects to fall upon 'em pell mell and put em all to the
Sword, especially the Jesuits. It Is true some few of the French escaped and
fled to the Hollanders who were so generous as to Protect 'em, tho but a little
before they had been with their Men of War to attack Paramaribo, with a design
to have made themselves Masters of Surinam, from whence however they were
repuls^d and forced to retire with loss.

Thus unfortunately ended the business of Siam, which had been carri^d on by
the Jesuits, and undertaken by the Counsel and Advice of la Chaise, which cost
the King above three Millions, and the Lives of above two thousand Men. Now
then let us return to Europe again. The King of England being resolved to
abolish the Test and Penal Laws, set forth a Declaration for Liberty of
Cons^ience, and ordered the Archbishop of Canterbury and the rest of the
Bishops, to cause the said Declaration to be read in all Churches of their
Diocesses at the end of Divine Service* but the Bishops refusing to give
obedience to the Kings Commands, several of 'em who alleadg^d that it was
contrary to the Laws of the Land and their own Consciences, were sent to the
Tower; and orders given to proceed against 'em according to Law. The King
therefore finding he could not compass his ends this way, took another course;
which was to send Commissioners all over England in order to persuade the
people and Magistrates to admit of this new Imposition. But they returning and
declaring to the King the little inclination which they found in the People to
so great a Change, and that they did not believe that any of the Justices of
the Peace would consent to it, the King entered into a design of laying aside
all the Magistrates in the Kingdom, that refused to yield him Obedience in this
particlar. As bold a Project, as ever was; but in my opinion not to be compared
with the rashness of the means which he went about to make use of, to bring it
to pass. He knew he could not do this unless he had a good Army on Foot, ready,
and in a condition to second his commands, and in which he might confide. This
was a Gordian Knot: but he thought to have cut it easily, by forcing all the
Officers to change their Religion, especially those of the Fleet, which he
thought would be of more use to him. Thereupon he began to send his Monks and
Priests on board the Men of War, with orders to say Mass: which they went
roundly about to have done: but the Seamen all in an uproar, presently seized
upon their persons and would have thrown 'em over board, had not their Officers
interposed their authority to save those miserable Creatures, who were sent
packing out of the danger. The King of England judging advantagiously of the
defference and respect of the Officers upon this occasion, resolv^d to make the
best of it. To that purpose he went aboard the Admiral, and order^d all the
Officers to bring their Commissions thither. After which he declared to 'em
all, that it was his pleasure that they should quit their old Heresy and
embrace the Roman Catholic Religion. To which the Officers made this resolute
answer; that they were ready to obey him in all those things that were just and
reasonable, but that they would never betray their Consciences. The King would
fain have persuaded 'em that what he required of 'em was neither contrary to
Justice nor Religion, and that he had no other aim then to procure the
salvation of their Souls. But finding he could not bring his design about, he
declared to 'em that he would give 'em no longer than twenty four hours to
consider of it; after which, he would take away the Commissions of all such as
would not obey his orders, and so away he went. However finding 'em as resolute
as before after the time expired, he told em 'twas an Affair of two great
importance to be resolved in so short a time, and therefore he granted a longer
respit. I must confess I cannot comprehend what King James thought of himself
to undertake an Affair of this nature in so short a time, and with so much
huffing Haughtiness. How! -- in six Months to stuff his Capital City with Monks
and Friars; to take away the Colleges of Oxford from the Protestants; to settle
the Catholics in their Churches! Give Liberty of Conscience, abolish the Test
and Penal Laws, which the English look upon as the Touchstone of their
Religion! Imprison their Bishops, for whom they have so high a Reverence!
Threaten the Magistrates to turn 'em out of their Places! and lastly to order
all the Naval Officers to change their Religion in 24 hours upon pain of
loosing their Commissions; and himself to go aboard the Men of War, in the
midst of 'em, to give his commands, in Person, at a time when he was hatching
to impose a suspected Prince upon em, is that which Posterity will hardly
believe. He must needs be a great Enemy to his Repose and his Grandeur, who
labour^d after this manner to ruin both. Who ever drove the Chariot of
Arbitrary Power thus Jehu-like? The Most Christian King, who perhaps has done
as much as any other before him, durst never carry it so high. But King James
thought himself to be a Hercules, a Mars, who was able of himself to subdue a
whole Nation. Now if he had continued to make good this character of Authority
and Undauntedness, we should have said that all this had proceeded from a
Courage truly Heroic; but he flagg^d, when adversity befell him, and all that
can be thought or said the most in honor of him is this, that all that while
he was seeking for a Crown of Martyrdom.

While these things were thus transacted in England, they were preparing for
War in France. For the Pope had granted a Bull to dispense with Prince Clement
of Barvaria's Age; and in regard he was the most formidable Competitor with
Cardinal Furstenburgh, 'twas greatly to be feared that he would be prefer^d in
the Chapter of Cologne; more especially because the Pope opposed the latter.
Thus the Business of the Franchises, that signified nothing in the Main, was at
length very prejudicial to the King: for he drove it on with that Passion, that
he forgot the Cardinals Interests which were more substantially his own. And
tho the Cardinal had often enough implored his aid, and frequently written to
la Chaise about it, he never thought it worth his time to hearken to him, till
the Pope had granted Prince Clement a Dispensation. But then the King
reflecting severely what a considerable advantage the advancement of the
Cardinal would be to him, began to think of it in good Earnest, and to that
purpose wrote a submissive Letter to the Pope, which he ordered the Cardinal d'
Estree to deliver to him. He also made very advantageous offers to Ranonci, the
Popes Nuncio upon condition that his Holiness would give his confirmation to
Cardinal Furstenburgh, and take no notice of Prince Clement. But the Pope, who
could not rely upon the King, considering the affrontive usage which he had
received at his hands, remained inexorable, and had the satisfaction to see
himself sought to with as much respect, as before he had been treated with
disdain and contempt. In short, whithin a few days after he gave out a Bull of
Eligibility for the young Prince, not having vouchsafed so much as to see or to
hear the Agents for Cardinal Furstenburgd. He also forbid his Envoy to style
himself from that time forward Agent for the Elector of Cologne. Who finding
that he could not be admitted to Audience, caused Placarts to be set up in all
the Corners of the Streets, containing an Appeal to a future Council, in the
name of his Master, against the Abusive Proceedings of the Pope. But the
Cardinal knew that if he stayed for justice to be done him by the future
Council, he might wait long enough for that which would come too late.

At the same time news was brought to Rome of the election of the Baron d
Elderen to the Bishopric and Principality of Liege, of the Baron of
Plettenburgh to that of Munster; who both sent to the Pope, to desire their
confirmations, which were forthwith granted 'em accordingly.

All this ill success vexed the King of France to the Soul; who then too late to
his cost acknowledged the irrepable errors which he had committed. The first in
spending so much time to support with that heat as he had done the Right of
the Franchises, and loosing the opportunity of having an Elector at his
Devotion. The second, in obstinately insisting to have Furstenburgh made Bishop
of Liege, and refusing the Election of the Cardinal Bouillon, to which the
Chapter had so many times endeavour^d to gain his consent. So that he could not
forbear manifesting his displeasure against la Chaise, by whose advice he had
been guided more then by any other man's. In so much that he told him in very
harsh language, that never any business that was managed by a Jesuit came to
good: And that it would be better for em to mind their Paedagoging in their
Schools, then to meddle with State Affairs. After which he was above a month
before he would so much as speak to him again; so that the Father thought
himself lost forever.

He came to Madam Maintenon all in an Alarm, importunately beseeching her to
speak to the King in his behalf, who went about to make him answerable for the
ill success of his Affiairs: And yet, Madam, said he, you can bear me witness,
that there is no man more purely zealous for his Majesty then my self, and that
for these twenty years I have labored day and night in his Service without
taking any rest. You know it Madam, you have seen with your eyes the greatest
part of what I have done; Nevertheless, as the reward of all my labors, the
King forsakes me quite forlorn, and treats me as if I had betray^d him and his
Kingdom; and all this, because the business of Cardinal Furstenburgh, wherein
God knows, I took a world of pains, has not succeeded to his wish. Tell me,
replied Madam Maintenon, what^s the reason you have thus engaged him in a War,
the consequences of which are enough to be feared? could you be ignorant that
the advancement of Cardinal Furstenburgh to the Bishopric of the Deceased
Elector of Cologne might have secured us against the League of Auspurg, which
is now pouring down upon Us, like a flight of Vultures. For in short, when once
the Hollanders Arm, it is a signal to all the rest. Oh! Madam, replied the
Father, they were well beaten in the preceding War, tho England did not take
our side; what may we not then assure our selves now England and we are joined
together. The King of England, replied Madam de Maintenon, has need of his
Forces at home; and believe me he is in no condition to succor his Neighbors.
Let it be never so little replied the Father, it will be always something.
After all, the King is in a condition to prevent his Enemies by a strong
Invasion of the Rhine, and by renewing his Alliance with the Turks will find
'em work enough. But suppose nothing of all this were true or probable, must I
bear the blame of a misfortune, which in good Policy could not be prevented? I
do not say so, reply^d Madam Maintenon, interupting him, but that his Majesty
ought to have regard to the integrity of your intentions, and the services
which you have done him, and should restore you to his favor. I promise you to
do my utmost, and I make no question but easily to bring it to pass: for the
King is a person of too much reason, not to consider the Fatality of the Thing.
Never then torment your self so much, but assure your self this storm will soon
blow over: You are not accustomed to Disgraces. No indeed Madam, answer^d the
Father, and I must confess, it is a very hard case, to see my self thus ill
treated by a Prince, to whose Interest^d have without the least scruple of
Conscience sacrificed the Church, the Holy See my own Order, and my self to
^o^t: and so saying the Tears dropped from his Eyes, as big as Pearls, such was
his Grief and Anguish of mind.

But Madam de M^i^^^^^ spoke to the King in his behalf, and within a few days
he was admitted, and his Oracular Counsel as much consulted as ever.

The K. sent to Rome the Sieur de Chauh to deliver a Letter to his Holiness,
touching the differences that were between 'em, but the Pope refused to receive
it, so that Cardinal d' Estree was constrain^d to Print it. In the mean while
the King seiz^d Avignon, and threatened to enter Italy. He also forbid Cardinal
Ranonci to stir out of Paris; and told him he should have the same usage as his
Ambassador met with. And in regard the King was afraid least the Pope should
come to excommunicate him together with all the rest of his Subjects, to
prevent that blow, he appealed to a future Council, in reference to all
whatever the Pope might do against him, and confirmed his Appeal by a Decree of
Parliament.

In the mean time great Preparations were made for the War on every side. The
Hollanders more especially set forth a potent Fleet; which gave great jealousy
to the Kings of France and England, who were both persuaded that these
preparations concerned Them.

Their Ambassadors therefore presented Memoirs to the States, to represent
their just suspicions, upon their setting forth such a Fleet, and at a season
when others began to lay up their Ships, and therefore they desired their High
and Mightinesses to let 'em know to what end all these preparations tended. The
French Ambassador added, that he made no question but that their Fleet was
designed against England; but if it were, his Master declar^d that the strict
Alliance and Obligations that were between that Prince and Him, would not
permit him to suffer such an Innovation, without succouring him with all his
Forces; of which he was willing to give 'em notice, before it came to open War,
to the end they might not plead ignrance. He told 'em more over that the King
was resolv^d to uphold the Cardinal of Furstenburgh and the Chapter of Cologne
in the full and free enjoyment of their Rights and Privileges, against all
that should give 'em any disturbance. And in regard he was informed of new
motions and new Cabals to their prejudice, he was no less desirous to let 'em
understand his Sentiments in that particular.

This was the Declaration of the French Ambassador, by which it may be seen,
that the King was not absolutely ignorant of the Hollanders design; at least
that his suspicions were conformable to the truth. Nevertheless, through a
Fatality, which I apprehend so much the less, because it is not usual for that
Prince to be guilty of such failings, he heard the Thunder grumble, and saw the
Arm just lifted up to strike, without taking any just measures to ward off the
Blow: and upon this occasion where there was no need of any more then following
the Light of common Sense, to guard himself from the danger that threatened
him, it seemed as if he had been well pleas^d to have it fall upon him. In
short, if instead of sending the Dauphin with an Army to the Rhine, had he
marched directly to Mastricht; or had enter^d Holland by the way of Bon, of
which the Cardinal of Furstenburgh was then Master, as he did in the year 72,
or had got ready his own Fleet, as the Hollanders advanced in their Marisine
Preparations, is it not true that the Hollanders being oblig^d to look after
their own defense would never have permitted the sending away their Army by
Sea? For it is in vain to object that the King of Sweden had lent 'em Men; and
that the Elector of Brandenburgh had a considerable force ready to march.
Fifteen or Twenty thousand Men would never have been sufficient to stop the
Army of France; the sole approach of which would have utterly disappointed the
great and brave design which they had upon England, and which was so
fortunately accomplished.

But instead of this, the King allurd by the certain hopes of taking two or
three Places, not able to make any resistance, snapt at that Bait, and sent
away the Dauphin with a mighty Preparation to conquer a pitiful Nook of Land,
while on the other side the Prince of Orange called in by the English, and
assisted by the Hollanders, made sure of three powerful Kingdoms, the
preservation of which was of such vast importance to his Majesty, and King
James his Confederate. In the name of God, was ever such a sottish clumsie
mistake committed; or was the like ever seen or heard of since Kings first
reigned and wag^d War one upon another? For my my part I must, in this,
acknowledge the effects of an unknown and superior Providence.

By what I have said it is apparent, that the end of that year was fatal to two
Kings: nevertheless, when the Dauphin returned to Court he was overwhelmed with
Congratulations. All men cried out Victory, Victory: the Sovereign Courts, The
Magistracy of the City harangu'd him; the Poets squeez^d their Brains for
Panegyricks, and the King himself spoke his Elogy several times in public
before all the World, and he mist but little of having a Triumph designed him.
For my own part who was an eyewitness of all this, and knew what it behooved me
to think of it, I sigh^d in private to behold the weakness of men, that oftimes
Laugh, and Feast, and Dance, when they have much more cause to Weep. I could
not think they had so much reason to be merry for winning three Towns the on
side, and loosing three Kingdoms on the other. But the French are of this
Humor; they look upon all things through prospective Glasses; and those things
that are to their disadvantage they behold with that end which lessens the
Objects, but those things that please 'em they view through the other end that
magnifies whatever they see and brings it close to the sight.

However it were the Prince of Orange embarked his men and set Sail. It Is true
he was a little delayed by a Tempest that did him some damage; but that being
soon repaird he set sail again, and fortunately continued his voyage. The news
of it arrived in France, and according to custom, the general report was, that
the greatest part (...) the Ships were cast away, and tha the Prince of Orange
was drowned; and this rumor was supported by the following Sta^^a of
Nostredamus, which then made a great noise.

En mil, six cent, Octante huit
Albion sera deliveree,
D'une Emprise mal digeree
Qui ne produira aucun fruit;
Et par un Accident estrange
Poissons se nourriro'nt d' Orange.
In thousand one, six hundred eighty Eight
Endanger^d Albion shall deliver^d be
From a Contrivance lay^d but sillilee,
The fruit of which shall blasted be by Fate.
And through an accident by Heaven decreed.
The hungry Fishes shall on an Orange feed.
This was shown me by an Advocate in a most Triumphant manner, who told me that
I was no longer to complain of the Fortune of France, for whose prosperity all
the Elements fought. I knew not what answer to give him, for I had never
study^d Nostredamus: but the next day I went to visit my old Friend Cousinet, a
Counselor in the Parliament of Bretagne, a person of Learning and good Sense,
to whom I shew^d my Prophecy. In answer to which, my worthy friend, said he, I
have read the Centuries of this Astrologer several times from one end to the
other, and I assure you this Stanza is not there: it is a piece made at random;
and with that he told me a Story; how that in the time of Mazarin's troubles,
he being engag^d in the contrary Party, and the Cardinal doing all he could to
ruin him, he made a Stanza, which he inserted among the rest, and had 'em
reprinted on purpose. He repeated it to me, but I have forgot all but the last
Line, which I remember concluded thus.

Les Rouges Rouges le Rouge assommeront.
The Red Red, the Red shall knock oath Head.
By the Red Red he meant the Parliament, and by the Red the Cardinal.
Nevertheless, it proved as false as that of the Prince of Orange. After which,
I suspected all the Centuries that were produced upon the present Affairs.

So soon as the Prince was ready to set Sail, he put forth a Declaration
wherein he declared that being several times earnestly solicited by a great
many Lords both Spiritual and Temporal, and by many Gentlemen of the English
Nation to deliver 'em from a Despotick Power, under which they were ready to be
subjected, to the destruction of their Privileges and the Laws of the Realm,
and at the same time to free the Church of England from the Persecution which
it suffered; moved therefore with the misfortunes and the seve^^ Captivity
which both Religion and the State were likely to fall under, he could not
refuse 'em the Succor which they desired. That his intentions were not to
inv^^^ the Crown, as his Enemies gave out, (...) to make any alteration in the
Legitim^^^ order of the Succession; but on the other side, that he came to
facilitate and procure the Meeting of a Free Parliament, wherein every Member
might speak his own Sentiments without Constraint, and all together labor the
restoration of the Laws and Liberty of the Kingdom to their Primitive vigor,
and the nesetling Religion in a flourishing condition, as it was before the
Kings unjust Attempts, which tended only to the entire Destruction of it. That
the King of Englands Designs were sufficiently visi^^^ by his strict Alliance
with the Most Christian King, and the intimate Union the was between 'em, tho
the King of France had long professed himself the declared Enemy of the Kingdom
England, the United Provinces, and particularly of the Protestant Religion,
which he persecuted even to Rage and Frenzy. That it was clear that King James
was governed wholly by his Counsels, that his Politics were regulated by his,
and that he aimed at the same ends. And therefore seeing it was the interest of
the People of England not to endure any longer such terrible Innovations he
hoped they would receive him as a Friend, who only came to succor and protect
'em and concur with 'em in restoring Peace to the Church, and Repose and
Freedom to every Private Person.

This Manifesto no sooner appoar'd in England, but he undid in one day all that
he had done before. He restored the Bishops to their Diocesses, vacated his
High Commission Court, shut up the College of Jesuits and all the Chapels where
Mass was publicly said, restored the expelled Fellows in Oxford and Cambridge,
and surrendered back to the City their Charter and their Franchises. Which
done, he put himself at the Head of his Army, where he stayed not long, his
heart failing him; and tho he had promised the King of France that he would
either beat the Prince of Orange or dye upon the Spot, yet he forsook his Men
and retired to London, where he said and did many things so unworthy a great
and Courageous Prince, such as till then he was thought to be, as surpasses
imagination; and when he was alone wept and lamented himself like a man in a
kind of desperation. At last, for an accumulation to all the rest, he poorly
betook himself to flight and retired into France, and so verified the Proverb,
He that quits his Country, loses it.

As for the Prince of Orange, it is evident, that he never ambition'd the Crown:
and I believe that his intentions were really the same as he declared in his
Manifesto. For first, it is certain he is a Prince the most steadfast to his
Religion of any Prince in the World, and that Religion was the Primum Mobile
that caused him first to act. Besides, it is notoriously known, that in the War
of 72, he constantly refused the offers that were made him both by France and
England to make him Sovereign of the Low Countries; and that in his answer to
those that made the proposal, he used these noble expressions, that will remain
a Glorious Testimony, to future Ages, of his Moderation and Justice. God
forbid, said he, that I should ever think of raising my Fortune and my Grandeur
upon the ruin of my dear Country. The same thing also appear^d at V^recht in
the year 75, at what time the Province of Guelders being quite broken and
overlay'd by the excessive expenses they had been at, and not knowing which way
to raise new supplies, willingly offered to obey him as her Sovereign. But the
Generous Prince who saw that what the People did was out of pure necessity,
return^d 'em thanks and told 'em withal, that he would be always their Friend,
but never their Master. These are strokes that will appear lovely in the
History of this Prince: nor do I well remember where we may meet the like.

In the mean time King James, the Queen his Wife, and the supposed Prince of
Wales arrived in France, where there reception was as great as if they had come
the reigning King and Queen upon a Visit. The King gave 'em the Castle of St.
Germains magnificently furnished, and ordered 'em to be served by the Officers
of his Household. He assigned 'em also a hundred thousand Crowns a Month for
their expenses, and ap^ointed the Guards of his own Body to attend 'em; besides
that, his Court was no less throng^d than that of Ve^^^illes. In short, he was
almost as much K. at St. Germains as he had been at White Hall: and had it
lasted, I should have thought him very happy in his misfortunes. But I know not
how, the Courtiers, who saw there was nothing to be got there, slunk away by
degrees; the Exchequer was not so flush as it was before; so that the Castle
became at length such a forlorn Desert, that the King and Queen have been often
constrained for want of Company to play by themselves at Chess, for three or
four hours together to pass away their ti^e.

Nor did the misfortunes of this Prince render the Pope a jot the more
tractable. He deny^d his Ambassador twice the Cardinals Cap which he requested
for Father Peter's, and thought he did him a great favor in promising to afford
him a place of shelter. The little indulgence which his Holiness had for King
James proceeded from his intimate Union with the King of France; for the
Quarrel between the two Courts began to fester every day more and more; and it
was come to that, that the King fearing least his Holiness should take up some
sinister resolutions against Lavardin, had caus^d Cardinal Ranonci to be seized
in the Convent of St. Lazarus, caused him to be guarded in sight by the Sieur
de St. Olon, Gentleman of the Chamber in Ordinary, who was put upon him under
pretense of keeping him Company: and he stayed with him, till the Kings
Ambassador was got safe out of the Territories of the Church. He left Rome in
April, after he had given notice of his departure to his Holiness by Cardinal
d' Estree, who declared to him, that since his Holiness had constrained his
Majesty to recall his Ambassador, he could no longer hope for any
accommodation, or of entering into any farther Negotiation, his Majesty having
revoak'd all the Power which he had given him till that time. However he
departed with the same Pomp that he entered, being accompanied by the Cardinal
d' D^stree, and Maldachini, and attended by above five hundred Gentlemen. Some
few days after the Marquess of Cogolludo, the Spanish Ambassador, made his
public Entry, never standing upon his privilege of Franchises.

The next Month, there happend great contentions and scufflings among the
Jesuits at Rome. For Father Goswin Nichel, their tenth General being dead, hot
canvasings ensued about election of his Successor. The French, who had never
had a General of their Nation, stood all for Father la Chaise, and alledg^d in
favor of him, not only his great merit, his long experience in Affairs, and
his credit with the King, but the important services he had done the Church,
both against the Calvinists and the Jansenists, and by the infinite number of
Conversions which he had procured as well in France, as in England, and even as
far as Siam. Others objected, that what ever he had done upon those occasions,
was not out of any kindness for Religion, but merely out of self love, or else
because his own or the Princes interest, to which he was entirely devoted,
inclined him to it. All which was visible by his having so violently supported,
and by his still supporting the interest of the Regale, and by his connivence,
or to say more truly, by the share which he had in the the injurious and rash
proceedings of France against the Holy See: which if nothing else, was
sufficient to exclude him forever from the Dignity of General. These contests
lasted above two years, during which time both Parties did all they could to
strengthen their own interests. La Chaise used all his utmost endeavors to
engage the Prelates that adhered to France. For tho he did not look upon this
Preferment as the bounds of his ambitious desires, he considered however, that
it was always one step to the Purple; and that tho he should miss of a
Cardinalship, the Dignity of General being for Life, it would be no bad Post
for a Jesuit. But for obtaining it, there was a necessity of the Popes Favor,
and he had justly provoked him to be his Enemy: and by that means he ruin^d all
his Pretensions: for otherwise, I am apt to belieee, he might at length have
proved successful in his attempt, He being therefore rejected, Father John Paul
d' Oliva was elected, in despite of the French, who protested against him, and
gave advice of it to Father la Chaise, promising withal to do whatever he could
desire of 'em upon this occasion. Thereupon the King sent an Order to all the
French Jesuits to return into France, to the end they might there unanimously
join with others in the choice of a General of their own Nation, which had no
dependence upon the General elected. Which Order was signified to Father d'
Oliva, with a Protestation of the French Jesuits before they departed, not to
acknowledge, for the future, either themselves or their brethren of France any
other superior than the Vicar General whom the King should appoint to govern
the Company.

This division happening in the Society of Jesus made a great noise; and no
body questioned but there would be very suddenly two great Schisms in the
Church: the one General, by a separation of the Gallican Church, which
threatened a National Council; and other particular of the French Jesuits, who
were about to make a Body by themselves.

Nevertheless, nothing of this fell out; for as to the first, every body knows
the reason; the Pope died, and his Successor proving a very good French man,
the French never scrupled to acknowlegde him. And as to the second, it is an
Affair that has something more of mystery in it. Father la Chaise, who was very
near being nominated, considering that this Preferment would signify no great
matter, and would oblige him to quit his Place of Confessor to the King, which
was of more moment to him, besides that he could not enjoy it without the Popes
approbation, who would never allow it, but rather excommunicate 'em all; that
then he should be constrained to have recourse to Indulgence, in quitting the
Generalship, and so between two Stools he should quite fall to the Ground,

These Reasons, well weighed, caused him to change his Battery: and therefore
resolved to make the honor of a forced acquital of his Interest redown'd to
himself, he told the King, after he had prepossess^d him by thousand returns of
submissive thanks, and acknowledgments of his goodness in this Particular, that
having seriously considered the thing, he found it would prove prejudicial to
his Majesty's Service, because this Schism in the Order would divide his most
considerable interests; and for that they, from whom his Majesty might expect
considerable Services, would no longer be engaged. Which he had already
experienced in Father Vaudorn, who sent him no more intelligence from Vienna,
and in Father Ferres in Spain, who had written frankly to him, that he would no
longer have any Commerce with him. So that your Majesty, said he, will loose
your best Correspondencies, and your most faithful Servants. I will not be the
cause of so much mischief, and therefore beseech your Majesty to forbear
carrying the business any higher for my sake. Afterward he gave the King to
understand, that he had sure expedients to set all things right again, without
engaging the Kings Honor. That there needed no more then to propose under hand
to General Oliva the writing a submissive Letter to his Majesty, wherein he
should assure him of his extraordinary respect; with a Protestation that he
never thought his Majesty concerned in the oppositions that were made against
his Election, and that if he had known it, he would never have accepted the
Preferment; to which he was to add, that if it pleased his Majesty to vouchsafe
him his consent, he would endeavor upon all occasions to make known his
inviolable Zeal and Devotion for his Service: upon which his Majesty might
relax his Pretentions. The King had much ado to yield, foreseeing it would be a
feeble conde^^ension in a matter begun with so much noise and heat. But at last
he suffered himself to be overruled, and great applause was given to la
Chaise, who in his opinion had ^offer'd the King a very fair Sacrifice. Paul d'
Ervaux, Auditor of the Rota, was employed to manage this accommodation, which
was soon brought to a conclusion; the Party that sought it standing upon their
terms; and so the French Jesuits returned to Rome, together with Fontaine, who
was appointed Assistant General.

But this advantageous return, could not preserve 'em from a very great
mortification that befell 'em, a little after their arrival under the new
Pontificate of Alexander the VII. This was the condemnation of their two
Thesis's maintained in their Colleges, the one at Pont a Mousson, in Lorrain,
Jan. 14. 1689. the other at Dijon three years before, in 1686, which were
declar^d Rash, Scandalous and Heretical, by a Decree of the Inquisition at
Rome, the Pope then Present, bearing date August 24. 1690. 'Twas the Archbishop
of Reims who was the occasion that this misfortune befell 'em, as being the
Scourge of the Society: and tho his Brother were la Chaises intimate Friend,
^^^nere a whitt the less their Enemy for all that. He is always lying perdue to
examine the Conduct of those worthy Fathers, and when he finds any thing go a
miss, he never pardons 'em: for he is inexorable as to Them. So soon therefore
as these two Thesis's came to his hand, he faild not to send 'em to the Pope.

In the first is to be discovered that fundamental opinion of the Society,
which is the Source of all their irregularities. It dispences with the Command
of loving God, in the course of a moral Life; and maintains, that it is
sufficient to render our actions good, if they tend to the supreme end, which
is the glory of God, interpretatively and indirectly. Which is just the
Doctrine unfolded before in the conversations of Father de Vaux with Father la
Chaise. The second contained a Doctrine as damnable as the former.

Philosophic sin, according to this Doctrine, is a Humane action, contrary to
that which agrees with rational nature, and right reason. This is their
definition of Philosophical or Moral Sin: Now hear their Proposition.

Philosophical Sin, how grevious soever, being committed by him who has no
knowledge of God, or who does not actually think of God, is a grievous sin, but
it is no offense to God, nor any Mortal Sin which breaks off the Amity of God
with man, nor which merits eternal Pains.

This foundation being allowed, there needs no more than for a man never to
think of God, to the end he may never be guilty of sin during the whole course
of a moral Life.

Innocent XI. died upon the 12. of August 1689. of the same faction with
Innocent the XI. The French give out that he was a Colonel of Horse, and that
playing one day at Picquet with a near Kinswoman of the Popes, of whom he won
considerable sums of Money, he found the Lady had three Aces in her hand, and
that he had three Kings besides a fourth that came in to him: upon which both
ventured roundly, till it run up to a very considerable sum which the Lady lost
upon Honor; and not being able to pay him without great inconvenience to her
self, she persuaded the Colonel to lay aside his Sword and put on a Cassock,
and that she would pay him the Money she owed him in Benefices. They farther
add that it 'twas by this means that he obtain^d the Cardinalship, and that he
had not been elected Pope in 1676. but only because 'twas thought he would not
live long by reason of certain wounds he had received in his Youth. I cannot
say whither this be true or no, he was chosen Clerk of the Chamber under Urban
VIII. which was 20 years before the Pontificate of Innocent XI. and he could
not be a Colonel at that time. He was born at Cosmo, in Milanois, and was
called Benedict Odescalchi The Jesuits rejoiced very much at his death, for
they accounted him their mortal Adversary, and loudly accused him of Jansenism.
But that was not a thing to be wondered at; since that in those days, as now,
it was not required to make a man a Jansenist, that he should only profess the
five propositions, but if he were no friend of the Holy Society, that was
sufficient. Now as for the Holy Father, he had held correspondence with M.
Arnauld, and had refus^d his approbation of Father la Chaise for the
Generalship; and that was a thousand times much more then needed to make him a
Jansenist.

When the Father first received the news, he was then with the King, and as
Politic as he was, he could not moderate the excess of his joy. Yet fearing to
display it too apparently before the King, he withdrew a little to recover
himself, and at the same instant met the Archbishop of Paris. But then it was
impossible for him to contain himself any longer. A thousand Pistoles, said he,
accoasting him, and your Benediction, for the news which I have to tell you. As
for my Benediction, replied the Archbishop, there it is, and as for the
thousand Pistoles, they are always ready at your service: but then keep me no
longer in suspense; let me know what your news is. News, replied the overjoyed
Father, that will make you a Cardinal, or I Will turn Jansenist: the old Lubber of
the Vatican is dead, and has left ten Caps unbestow'd: one of 'em will never
let you catch cold of your Head. Do you tell me true, quoth the Prelate
interrupting him. I tell you nothing but truth, replied the Father. They held
on this conversation the same tone above a quarter of an hour, in the Guard
Chamber, and congratulated each other a thousand times over, upon their
approaching promotion to the Cardinalship, never minding all this while the
Guards of the Body and about fifty other Persons that heard every word they
said; such were the transports of their exultation. At length perceiving their
error, they retired into the Kings Chamber.

Presently the King appointed another Ambassador for Rome, who was the Duke of
Chaulnes, and who departed forthwith, together with the Cardinals of
Furstenburgh, Bonzi and Bouillon, to be in time at the Conclave. As for
Cardinal Cainus, he had orders to stay at Grenoble. He was fallen again into
new disgrace. For Father la Chaise had given advice to the King, that he held
correspondence with the Pope, and particularly with the Bishop of Vaison hated
by the King, because he had offered his Holiness to go to Versailles and
Excommunicate him. Upon which the Cardinal wrote to la Chaise, complaining that
he had violated the Laws of Nations, and the Church in the person of that
Prelate whose Bishopric was not in France. The Father showed the Letter to the
King, who was highly insens'd at it; and that was the reason that he had not
the Order of the Holy Ghost bestowed upon him, at the Promotion which the King
made fifteen days after, tho he had designed him Commander of the Order, as
indeed he well deserves to be. So soon as the Conclave began to sit, the
Cardinals enter^d their Protests, for that their Intelligence assured 'em that
the Clergy of France had not recanted the five Propositions which they
maintained, and that the Most Christian King had not made restitution of the
County of Avignon, nor renounced his Pretentions to the Franchises. Eight days
after that, the Duke of Chaulnes arrived at Rome with the French Cardinals, and
upon his giving the Cardinals advice of his arrival, he was visited, admitted
to Audience, and acknowledged Ambassador, in despite of their Protestations.

The three French Cradinals so bestirred themselves in the Conclave, especially
Bouillon, who to regain the Kings favors did impossibilities, that at last
Cardinal Ottoboni was chosen the sixth of October. 1689. This Election was not
made by way of Scrutiny, but by a tumultuous Adoration, the like to which was
never seen. For the Cardinal de Bouillon having made his Party as numerous as
he could, tho it was hardly sufficient to have voted the Exclusion of any
other, sallied out of his Chamber, and ran about the Conclave, crying ou^,
Ottoboni is Pope: upon which signal the rest of the Faction coming out of their
Cells, flew about, crying out in like manner, Ottoboni is Pope. Upon that they
all hastened to his Cell, took him upon their Shoulders and set him upon the
Altar. All the rest of the Cardinals surpised at so sudden and unexpected an
Election, and not having leisure either to consider, nor to count the Number of
those of their Party, followed the rest, every body believing the thing done,
and no body being willing to draw upon himself singly the ill will and future
Revenge of the Holy Father, by a fruitless and rashly undertaken Exclusion.

In the first Congregation which this new Pope held, he released to the
Cardinal of Bouillon, in acknowledgement of the service he had done him, the
sum of 30000 Livres which he owed the Apostolik Chamber, and gave him the
Bishopric of Alb^no, by that means advancing him from the rank of Cardinal
Priest to the degree of Cardinal Bishop. The Prince of Turune, his Nephew, soon
after arrived at Rome, and the Pope ordered him to sit down, and put on his
Hat; an Honor allowed to none but sovereign Princes.

1690. And upon his importanate Solicitations it was that he granted a
Cardinals Cap to the Bishop of Beauvais. It Is true, he had a great deal of
trouble to obtain it, and that he despaired of it above four times. For I my
self have seen several Letters which he wrote to the Bishop of Marseilles upon
that subject, wherein he had still these Expressions, I do what I can, but know
not whither I shall succeed or no: However I promise ye not to give over, till
his Holiness absolutely forbids me to speak no more of it. He also took a world
of Pains to make him grant his Bulls, and was the first that had one.

So many favors granted for his sake by his Holiness, deservedly required that
he should do something a fresh for the Holy See. To that purpose he persuaded
the King to satisfy the Pope upon the Affairs of the Franchises, and to
surrender his pretentions freely; of which Tidings he was the Messenger himself
from the Duke of Chaulnes. At which his Holiness was so overjoyed, that he
promised the Cardinal at the same instant, powerfully to succor King James
with Money, and in short, seemed to be altogether inclined to take part with
France. Cardinal Furstenbergh also, making the best of his Opportunity,
demanded a Review of the Affairs of Cologne, and in a word the Pope ordered an
Assembly of Lawyers to meet at Sieur di Ervaux's, the Auditor of the Rota's
House; but not with that success as was desired. For the Bulls granted to
Prince Clement of Bavaria, by Innocent XI. were confirmed. Which the Cardinal
took so hainously, that fearing withal, lest the Austrians should put some
scurvy trick upon him in a place where he thought himself not very secure, he
decamped by the Advice of La Chaise, who sent him a Letter to return to Paris,
and accept of the Abbey of St. Germans de Prez, which the King bestowed upon him
at his arrival.

But the Capitulars of Cologne, that were of his Party, would not desist for
all this: they took a journey to Rome, to supplicate the Pope to restore 'em to
their Canonships and Benefices. The Pope lent 'em a favorable Ear, and used
his Endeavors very strenuously with the Emperor and Elector of Cologne to
that effect. But all to no purpose; for they wrote so effectually to the
Cardinal de Medicis Protector of the Affairs of Germany, beseeching his
Holiness not to trouble 'em any more about that Affair, that he was forced to
give it over. Nevertheless, in April following, he took off all the
Interdictions and Excommunications that had been thundered out against those
outed Priests, and admitted all their Appeals in reference to every thing that
had been acted against them to their prejudice. These things astonished many
People, and much more the Nomination of the Archbishop of Paris to the dignity
of Cardinal, to which the Pope gave his Consent. For till then, that Prelate
was thought a person forever excluded from that preferment; and Pasquin had
said a long time before, That the Archbishop of Paris had sufficiently
prosecuted the Holy See, but he would never blush for it. The Archbishop of
Reims had not the same advantage, and tho he had been nothing near so obstinate
in opposing the Pope, nevertheless he had the vexatious misfortune to see his
rival and hated Competitour preferred before him.

Besides all this, the Pope was not contented with the Right of the Franchises,
which was conceded to him; he vehemently insisted for satisfaction in reference
to the Assembly in 82. and the Proceedings that ensued upon it. On the other
side, the King, who was unwilling to give him a Repulse, in hopes to gain the
Bulls for his Bishops, and some other Favors more, made a show of acquiescing
willingly, and summoned an Assembly of the Clergy; but this was only to amuse
the Old Gentleman. Nay, he entered into a more particular Negotiation, and
received a Project of an Accommodation, which was brought him in his Holinesses
Name by the Abbot of Polignac; and appoin^ed Father La Chaise, the Archbishop's
of Paris and Reims, and the Bishops of Orleans and Meaux to examine it, who
rejected it, alleging that it tended to dishonor and blast the Bishops and
Prelates that had been present in that Assembly; to which they could not
consent, and that there were other ways anow to satisfy his Holiness in that
particular.

This was as much as to say, that they meant not to come to any Accommodation;
for what Expedient could they ever think of unless it were a Recantation. It Was
not to be imagined that the Holy See would ever be satisfied with less; and
that is a Thing, which I am apt to believe the King will never endure so long as
he lives. And it is apparent that the Pope understood him in that sense; seeing
that finding himself surpised by Death before he could bring this Affair to a
conclusion; he thundered out, upon his very deathbed, a Bull, that cancells,
disannuls and condemns as bold and Erroneous the Decisions of that Assembly
about the Regale, and the four Propositions maintained against the Authority of
the Holy See. This was a Thunderclap to the King, which he never expected.
Father la Chaise therefore, who had no more kindness for this Pope then for his
Predecessor, was plain with the K. in these words, I have foretold it more
then once, that Your Majesty was not to expect any good from this Knave of a
Pope. I knew him at Rome, when he was no more then a bare Priest, and one that
bedaggl'd his Cassock with trotting from morning till night to the Houses of
the Prelates of Rome, into whose favor he insinuated himself by carrying 'em
the News of the Town. He was a kind of familiar Spy, who was no sooner gone
out of one House, but he went to another to tell what he had seen and heard. I
never knew a Person of such a double heart, or of such a Treacherous Soul. The
Father still continuing his discourse, endeavored after that, to render the
Cardinal suspected to the King, by putting it into his Head, that he had not
done him so great a piece of service as he imagined by raising that Man to the
Holy See: and talking of the extraordinary honor which he had paid to the
Prince of Turrenne, and of the 10000 Crowns he had given him, he sought to
infuse into him, that the Pope and the Cardinal understood one another. But
that Hook did not take with the King; nor was he known to look upon the
Cardinal with a less favorable Eye for la Chaises Story.

At the same time the Father lost a good Friend, with whom there had been
always (...) and Understanding. I mean M. Louvois, who died so suddenly, that
he had no time to settle his private Affairs. Some people suspected him to have
been poisoned: nevertheless, when he was opened, there was not the least
symptom of any such thing. True it is, that it was an End which he very much
dreaded in his Lifetime; whether it were out of a natural Weakness, or that
having made use of that means, perhaps, to send some body else into the other
World, he was afraid of being paid in his own Coin, I will not determine.
However it were, this is certain, that he omitted no precaution against Poison:
and because he knew that Lacqueys were the most formidable Instruments for
administering those deadly preparations, it was his rule to oblige his own by
all manner of Favors, while they served him; and never to part with 'em,
without giving 'em some Employment, to the end that the hopes of raising their
Fortune by him might retain 'em in that Fidelity, which the fear of God, or
love of Virtue would never have done. So that in his House the Lacqueys came to
be Valets de Chamber, and thence rose to be Commissaries of the Provisions,
Receivers and Controllers in the Farms, and many of 'em Commissaries at War;
not to mention the credit which they had with their Master, who never denied
'em such Employments they begged for their Kindred and Friends. So that it was
a common saying at Pariis, when the Lacqueys of this Minister had lost their
Money, they sported away 3 Ensigns upon a Knave of Diamonds, or two Lieutenants
upon a Queen of Hearts: But these were stories made at pleasure. This is
certain, that if you gave twenty Louidores to a Valet de Chamber, you very much
shortened your way. But in regard that Cooks were the most dangerous of all,
they were the best used. I know one that left his Service about five Years ago,
after he had got vast sums of Money. When he desired of M. Louvois that he
might have leave to quit his Service, he told his Master, that having the
Honor to serve him ten or a dozen Years, he had gained an Estate sufficient to
maintain him, and therefore he would be glad to take his ease, if he might have
his permission to retire, and that he would resign his place to some poor
honest Fellow that was in necessity. M. Louvois returned him answer, That he
was very glad he had done his business, and gave him leave; promising him
withal his Protection as long as he lived. This man was no sooner out of his
Service, but nothing would serve him but to set up for a Lord, even in Paris it
self, without seeking to go any further. And the beautiful House of the
deceased M. de Bizeul, being to be sold, he out-bid the Count d' Estampes ten
thousand Livres, who offered sixty thousand Crowns for it. The Count being
offended at such a disappointment, complained to the King, who severely rebuked
M. de Louvois, and told him 'twas a crying shame that People should go out of
his House so rich, as to bid for Purchases that few Dukes and Peers were in a
condition to cope with. Upon which, the Marquis of Louvois sent for his Cook
the next day, and gave him such a rattle as he deserved. But this Minister is
dead, and M. de Pompone recalled and put in his Place, which made F. la Chaise
ready to eat his Fingers for madnes^. 'Twas in vain for him to remonstrate,
that the man who had once betrayed his Secrets, would never serve him
faithfully, but that he was every way to be suspected; for the King knowing
upon what grounds he spoke, gave little or no heed to what he said. Besides, he
begins to understand the revengeful humor of the Man, and since the Affair of
the Franchises and the Bishopric of Liege better instructed him, he hearkens
not so much to him as he was wont to do, where any one is concerned for whom he
has no kindness. More then this, he has had the misfortune to fail in several
Enterprises, which the King never naturally loved. (1690.) Lately he miscarried
in one of his own contriving; which was a Conspiracy at Turin; which was to
have had that City betrayed to the French, and which was carried on by the
Jesuits of that Place, who had received a great part of the Money to gain the
Traitors: but the Treason being discovered, all came to nothing. When I say it
was of la Chaise's contrivance, I do not assert it for a truth, but upon the
Report which was then spread abroad in Paris, and they named one Father Campo,
an Italian, who made several journeys from Paris to Turin for that purpose.
However if it be not true, it is very probable; for there is nothing more
agreeable to the Genius of those Good Fathers, then such sorts of Enterprises.

All this while the War was carried on with the utmost ^eat imaginable on both
^i^e. The year 1689. was signalized with the Reduction of Mayence, Bon,
Keyzerwaret, Rhineberg and other Places, taken by the Imperialists from the
French, who not having Forces sufficient to make opposition, contented
themselves with laying the Palatine and Wistemberg in Ashes without undertaking
any thing more warlike upon the Terra Ferma. Nor were they more Fortunate in
Ireland, whither King James had carried two Millions in new coined Lovidores,
before which he thought the Walls of the Cities would have fallen, like those
of Jericho; for I do not believe he depended much upon the Courage of the
Irish; but he was amazed that Londonderry should force him to stop short in his
Career. Thither he returned a second time, resolving to swallow up that place,
wherein there were only some of the Country People and Inhabitants, with one
Walker, a Minister for their Governor; but he was constrained to retreat a
second time with considerable loss. This bad Introduction to Conquest,
discouraged those of his Party very much, which otherwise would have been very
numerous; for besides the Irish, part Catholics, part purchased, he had many
Friends in Scotland, who held things in a kind of Poize for some time, and a
greater number in England then were thought to have been, and who were
discovered every day by scatt^ring seditious Pamphlets, and holding
Correspondence with the Abdicated King. The famous William Penn, who had made
himself Chief of the Quakers, under King James's Reign, that he might with more
ease destroy the Protestant Religion, not caring by what Contrivances or Means,
so he brought about his Ends, was one of those who became suspected for a
Jesuit. He was thereupon committed to Prison; and being asked whether he were a
Jesuit or no, he stoutly deny^d it. God preserve me, said he, I have ever hated
to Excess, that cursed Gang; I am a Protestant, and a Protestant will dye. He
ought to be believed, because he said it; but if his ill Fortune should so
order it, that he should fall into the Clutches of the Inquisition, either in
Spain, or otherwhere, and then, like the Flittermouse in the Fable, should
change his Note: Who, I a Protestant! should he say, I swear to you, Gentlemen,
you do me wrong, Abrenuntio Protestants, vadite retro, I know not those sort
of People, if they were to be hanged all, I Would find a Rope. I have one here in
my Bonnet. I am a Jesuit, at the Service of the Holy See, and the Inquisition,
and a Jesuit for my Life. Long live the Triple-Horn'd People. If this should
not be then the Jargonrie of the Quaker, I must acknowledge my self to be
deceiv^d.

The next Year, the King of France, who had discovered the secret Treaty which
the Duke of Savoy had concluded with the Emperor and the King of Spain,
earnestly pressed that Prince to declare himself, or if he would continue still a
Neuter, (1690.) to put into his hands, for the assurance of his Word, the
Citadel of Turin, Verue, and Verceil: To which the Duke had no mind to consent;
because he knew it would have visibly subjected him under the power of a
Master, who has not the Reputation of being very tractable. Constrained
therefore to resolve one thing or other, he chose the best course, I mean, the
least evil of the two. For in that Conjuncture, he had no choice to make that
was positively good. And in the short time of his entering into the War, he had
experimentally found, by the loss of Savoy, how unfortunate a weak Prince is,
whose Territories serve as a Barrier between two potent Monarchs. Till then,
all things succeeded the best that could be for the King. He had been
victorious at Sea against the Hollanders, who were reduced to such an unhappy
Condition, that hardly a Ship had escaped, had not the Night favored their
Retreat. It Is true, that though in that Engagement the French Pleet had all the
Advantage, the Dutch won all the Honor. For I believe 'twas never known, that
Two and twenty Men of War should fight so long, and so furiously, against a
Fleet of above Fourscore Sail, while the English Fleet, under the Lord
Torrington, looked on all the while, and did nothing.

In Flanders, the Duke of Luxemburgh had defeated Prince Waldeck; at which time
the Confederates lost above 5000 Men, not counting in the Prisoners, of which
there were a great Number.

But, in the Conclusion, what use did the French make of these Victories? Did
they take one Town in Flanders? Did they make any Attempt upon England? Nothing
of all this: only the Chevalier Tourville burnt two or three Fishermens
Cottages, and then, as proud as an Ass of a new Packsaddle, returned for Breast,
to be Complimented for it. King William taught 'em another Lesson. He knew
better how to make His Advantage of His Victory over K. James, or rather, over
Tyrcennel and Lauzun. For as for K. James, he had packt up his Baggage, so soon
as he saw the Combat grow warm. He Is not so improvident to thrust himself into
an Army in the heat of a Fight: it is a little too much for common Nature to
endure. However it were, King William having passed the Boyne, in despite of
His Enemies; and, which was worse, having put 'em to the Rout, made Himself
Master of Drogheda, Dundalk, Dublin, Waterford, etc. And had not foul weather
come on too fast, had taken Limerick, their last Retreat. But the Conquest of
that City was reserved till the next Year; for the Earl of Athlone, who took it
October. 3. 1691. and granted the Governor Mr. Boesselot very honorable
Conditions.

This last Misfortune threw K. James into utmost Consternation, so that he knew
not what measures to take. He often bewailed himself to Father la Chaise, whom
he could not choose but look upon as one of the principal Artificers of his
Misfortune, though he would not seem to take notice of it. What shall I do, and
what will become of me, said he to him one day, transported with grief,
unfortunate Prince as I am? Chased from my Kingdoms, hated by my Subjects,
abandoned by all the World, and pitied by No Body. Oh! how dear has my Easiness
cost me! added he, casting a wistful Look upon the Father, wherein there was
much to be read: It has cost me my Crown, my Honor, and the Repose of my Life.
The compassionate Father, who shared in his grief as much as his Nature would
give him leave, promised him to set all the most hidden Springs of the
Jesuitical Engine at work, and that the whole Society should burn their Books,
or restore him to his Throne. Only, said he, it is your Majesty's business to be
willing to be served; do but concur never so little with us, and you shall see
a sudden Turn of your Affairs. We have more then one String to our Bow: And if
hitherto the Lyon's Skin has not been sufficient to cover us, we must sow the
Fox's Skin to it. And indeed, he kept so effectually to his word, that if
Providence, that watches over things below, had not disappointed the pernicious
designs of his Cabal, we had seen another Revolution, at least as strange as
the former. The Jesuits therefore were ordered to take the Field, and furnished
with good Letters of Exchange, away they hurried into England, where joining
with those that still lay lurking in that Kingdom, and who intreagu'd them with
the principal Jacobites, they hatched that terrible Conspiracy, wherein 'twas
said so many Lords and Persons of all Conditions were deeply concerned, and
which tended only to introduce the French into England, and into London, and so
restore K. James to his Throne: which had that been all, perhaps it had been
excusable in such as thought they owed their Allegiance to no other Sovereign;
but they had suborned a Company of Hell-born Ruffians, who were to have
assassinated King WILLIAM, while others at the same time were to have seized
the Person of the QVEEN; to whom perhaps they would have given no better
Quarter.

When this Conspiracy was brought to perfection, and that the Jesuits were
assured of their People, Father la Chaise gave advice to K James, and told him,
That now it was his time to act. I wou^d be willing to believe, that the King
at first had an utter Abhorrency of so black an Enterprise, and that he had as
great an Aversion as could be to engage himself in it; and it is to me the
greatest Astonishment imaginable, that he should be capable of closing with it.
Nevertheless it is too true, that he did consent at last, and that he persuaded
the King of France to consent also, notwithstanding his declared abomination of
Parricides. But, perhaps, they might conceal that Circumstance from him, though
it render^d the Success most probable: for 'twas afterward known, that they
had much ado to overruled him, to grant K. James that new Succor which he
demanded. He told 'em, There was nothing more uncertain then the Success of
their Design, and that he had Employment enough for his Men to guard his own
Dominions. But F. la Chaise and Lausun giving him to understand, that it was
the surest way to stop King WILLIAM, and hinder the Descent, with which he
threatened France, he submitted to their Importunities; and after that, there
was nothing discoursed of in France, but of the great Fleet that was setting
out for K. James. True it is, it was considerable enough to have given King
WILLIAM some trouble, and to have let the Confederates have known that France
was not in so low a condition as many People believed she was.

etc. This Fleet was to have been guarded by twelve great Men of War, commanded
by the Duke d'Estree, who had fitted 'em out at Toulon. In the mean time, to
favor the Descent, and hinder any Succor that could come from Holland, Monsieur
Tourville had Orders to cruise in the Channel with a Fleet of above a hundred
Sail; and all this was ready in less then two months time. So that upon the
29th of April, K. James, who was arrived at la Hogue, began to embark his Men,
after he had carefully visited all the Ships of Burden; and three days after
they were ready to set Sail, only they stayed for d'Estree's Squadron, and a
favorable Wind. But he being surpised by violent Storms, that threw two of
his great Men of War upon the Coasts of Africa, and very much shattered others,
could not possibly observe his time.

Some Weeks before, K. James had publish^d a Manifesto, which he called, A
Declaration of the King of Great Britain, to all his faithful Subjects.. The
substance of which, imported an Exhortation to the English, to join with him
against the Prince of Orange, as he there called him; promising to maintain
their Liberties and Privileges, and the Religion of the Church of England: And
telling 'em withal, that there would never be any Peace in Europe till his
Restoration; for that then he should, by his mediation and good Offices with
the most Christian King, be able to procure it.

He also wrote a Letter to the Officers and Seamen aboard the Fleet, promising
'em the full payment of their Arrears, and to continue 'em in their employment.
Together with another to the English Lords, inviting 'em to Paris, to be
present at the Queen his Wife's Labor: for the removing all the Suspicions,
and destroying all the false reports which his Enemies had raised touching the
Birth of his Son, whom he called, Prince of Wales.

However this Letter wrought upon very few, and in all probability they that
went lost their labor too; for the Queen was brought to Bed so suddenly, that
the Duchess of Orleance, who was ordered by the King to be at her Delivery,
could not come time enough, tho she drove with all speed from St. Clou, so soon
as she had notice of it; which put some jealousies into that Princesse's Head.

Thus all King James's Hopes were blasted in the bud, and at a time when they
promised so fair. For his Fleet was in the best condition in the world: his men
lusty and bonny; he wanted nothing of Necessary Ammunition, even to the Spade
and Mattock. But notwithstanding all this, overwhelmed with despair, he was
forced to stay at la Hog^e, not being able to set sail by reason of contrary
Winds, that continu^d a long time, attended with Storms and Tempests so
furious, as wracked a good part of his Vessels upon the Coasts. Which gave the
Queen of England time so discover the Conspiracy: who immediately with an
extraordinary prudence gave out all necessary Orders for preventing the ill
Consequences of it, as well by imprisoning the chief Conspirators here, as by
disarming all suspected Persons. Moreover she set forth two Proclamations, the
one for calling the Parliament together, the other commanding all Catholics to
depart the Cities of London and Westminster, and not to come within ten M^les
of either. She also sent considerable Forces toward the Coasts where the
Descent was most to be feared, and reinforced the Garrisons in the Islands of
Guernsey and Jersey: So that in a little time the Kingdom was quite out of all
danger.

The Jesuits were astonished when the News arrived in France. They had taken
their measures so exactly, that they thought it impossible they could ever
miscarry; yet saw the terrible disappointment of all their lewd Contrivances,
to the eternal shame and ignominy of the Complotters.

But in regard the ignominy more nearly concerned the two Kings, then the
Society, their vexation was much the greater. They had wearied their men,
expended vast sums, lost several Vessels, and after all, were enforced ^o land
their men again, and to mind their own defense against a powerful Navy which
the English and Dutch had set to Sea. Thereupon the men were disimbark'd, and
King James remained at Cherburg, laden with his own Misfortunes; so far from
being abated, that they were more ponderously augmented by the loss sustained
in the Engagement between Admiral Russell and Tourvile, the success of which
was such as all the world knows. And then it was, that K. James began to be
looked upon there with an evil Eve, every Body beholding him as the Principal
cause of the misfortunes of Christendom, and throwing upon him and his fatal
Star the ill success of the War against the English. More then this, all people
of worth, that had before lamented him in his Misfortune, could no longer
retain the same kind sentiments for him, since he had so wickedly enbarqu'd
himself in such an Infamous Conspiracy. Nevertheless instead of acknowledging
the Foulness of it, he engaged himself soon after in another as bad, if not
worse then the former, with Barbesieux, and Madam de Maintenon, as may be seen
at large in the Trial of Grandvalt, who undertook to assinate King William in
Flanders, and in those Reflections that came out afterward upon that Horrid
Conspiracy.

It Is a sad thing that in France, where there is so good a Government, there
should be such Monsters to be found. They are not so common in our Countries,
and least of all among the Huguenots. Quite the contrary, they are the declared
Enemies of such Assassinations, so far from laying hold upon the base
Assistances of Suborna^ion and Parricide, that they have always rejected 'em
with scorn and horror, when they have been offered.

That which happened upon this occasion at Rotterdam in Holland is very
remarkable. There arrived in that City out of France a certain Benedictin Monk,
with a design, as he said, to turn Protestant. The first man to whom he addressed
himself was M. Jurieux, a Minister well known to all the world, to whom he made
known a desire of embracing his Religion. Jurieux, who presently suspected him
to be some fickle-headed Fellow, that had quitted his Order, only to withdraw
himself from the Austerities to which it obliges him, in hopes to get some
Pension from the States, as it frequently happens, made him answer, That he
could not be too much commended; but that it behooved him to be careful of doing
any thing unadviseably in a Business wherein he could not deceive God, without
miserably deceiving himself. The Monk replied That it was not a thing which he
had but lately considered of; That, God be thanked, he had knowledge and
discretion enough, to distinguish Truth from Falsehood; And that at last, after
he made Religion his Study for many Years, he was convinced, that the Roman
Catholic Religion signified nothing, but the Reformed was the only Prosession
of Faith wherein a man could be saved: And to show that he spoke not without
Book, he presently alleged to him several solid Arguments.

In this Posture things continued for some days, till Monsieur Jurieux,
desirous to sound the bottom of his heart, touched him in the most sensible
part, and asked him what course of Life he intended to live, when he had made a
public Cenfession of his Faith? For in short, said the Minister to him, there
is nothing more commonly done in this Country by People of your Coat, and the
State is so burdened with the vast number of Refugees, that they have much a
do to relieve 'em, so that you must advise with your self how to provide for an
honest Livelihood, either by the labor of your hands, or by some other way.
The Monk replied, That that Consideration never needed to trouble him, for he
came not to be a Burden to the Church; for that he had wherewithal to maintain
himself. Which very much startled Monsieur Jurieux, who could not apprehend how
a Monk that quitted his Convent to change his Religion, could have wherewithal
to subsist, with out begging; and began to suspect him for a Spy. Which the
other perceiving, confessed ingeniously, to undeceive him, That before he fled
the Convent, he had found out a way to rob the Community of a considerable. Sum
of Money, and to bring it along with him. My Father, said he, gave 'em a great
deal of Money when I took the Habit upon me against my Will, and I thought I
might with a safe Conscience make my self Master of what was my own. This free
Confession surpised M. Jurieux much m^re, who after that, had never any good
opinion of him. But he had far worse sentiments of him some few days after,
when the Minister put it a little too close upon him: It behooves me, Sir said
he, to tell you all; nor could I think to whom better to make my addresses then
your self. I have a design to deliver the Church of God from the greatest
Tyrant that ever was upon the Earth. Jurieux, astonished, asked him what
deliverance and what Tyrant he meant? The King of France, replied the Monk,
whom I will kill with my own hands, provided I may have that encouragement in
this Country which I expect. M. Jurieux trembled at the Proposal, and repulsed
him with indignation, asking him where he learnt that the Protestant Religion
ever authorized Assassinates? telling him with all it was the Doctrine of the
Schools from whence he came, but that the Reformed had always abhorred, as
Traitors and Villains, those that taught or practiced it, and so saying thrust
him out a Doors. He was no sooner gone, but in came a friend of M. Jurieux's,
who perceiving him in some disorder asked him the reason of so much unwonted
disturbance in his Countenance: He thereupon told him in short the story, as it
lay. Upon which his friend put him in mind of the error he had committed in not
stopping the Fellow, admonishing him, that it was a matter of great
consequence. So that M. Jurieux, upon second thoughts, acquainted the Sheriffs
with it, who committed the wretch to Prison the same Evening. After that, the
States wrote to the King of France and gave him information of the tragical
design which the infamous Ruffian had projected; assuring him with all, that
tho they were at Wars with his Majesty, yet they were so far from approving any
thing so wicked and Treacherous, that they were ready to inflict the utmost
severity of Justice upon the proposer. To which purpose they thought it their
duty, to detain the Traitor, till they knew his Majesty's farther pleasure.

This was altogether Generous, Great and Noble, and merits Immortality among
men of worth and Virtue: but the Advice was not received as it ought to have
been. So f^r from that, that M. de Montauzier, to whom the Letter was directed,
returned an answer, as harsh and surly, as it ought to have been obliging. For
he sent 'em word, That the King so little minded Parricides, and those that
disclosed 'em, that he knew very well, that if they could have attempted any
thing against his Person, they would have done it long ago; but that, thanks be
to God, he had a good Guard that secured him from that danger.

I am at my wits end, when I consider that such an Answer should come from a
King so Great and Generous, and for whom I have so much love and respect.
Should it have been sent from the King of the Wild Arabs, or the Kan of the
Tartars, I should not have wondr'd; but from a Most Christian King! It vexes me
to the Soul. This is doing Virtue little justice: and ancient Pagan Princes, as
much Heathens as they were, had more of Honor in 'em.

I have stayed somewhat long upon this Point; to show that England and Holland
quite disgrace and shame France, which at all times has produced these
Monsters, and Courtiers that solicit and encourage 'em, as we have lately seen
in the business of Granval.

That which is the greatest wonder as to that Conspiracy, is, that the Jesuits
appear not to have any hand in it. That the Criminal, who charged several
considerable Persons, in his Interrogatories, says not one word against them,
which makes many People believe, that they were no way concerned in it. But I
that know the humor and the morals of those Fathers, know what I have reason
to think. There is a French Proverb that says, a Workman is known by his
Workmanship: and it can never be better applied then to this occasion. That
piece of Villainy came infallibly out of their Shop. And indeed to whom can it
be better attributed then to people who have rendered themselves famous by
several attempts of the same Nature; and have composed whole Books to justify
the Legality of Assassinating Heretic Kings. Add to this, M. de Maintenon is
la Chaises intimate, and she good Woman would hardly have consented to such a
piece of Treachery, without the Fathers privity and advice. Beside the furious
desire that he and his Society have to reinthrone a Prince, who only lost
himself by adhearing so much to their Counse^s. The Jesuit la Chaise, adove
all, is the most capable of such a design, and I shall never forget an
interlocutary discourse between him and the Duke of Coaslin, with which I will
conclude my Book. 'Twas a little after the Duke of Savoy had declared against
the French. The Duke was remonstrating to him, how much the Confederates were
superior in Number, the losses sustained in Ireland, and the little likelihood
of long maintaining the War with such an inequality of Forces. For in short
said he Reverend Father, the King makes his last Efforts at the beginning of
the War, he has laid Tax upon Tax, Impost upon Impost; he has created an
infinite number of Offices never heard of before. The Communities and
Corporations, as well Ecclesiastic as Secular, have contributed several times
beyond their strength: in short, they have pillaged the Altars, and dispoil'd
'em of all their Ornaments. Tell me seriously Father do you believe, that
France is an inexhaustible Mine of Money? No, without doubt, the bottom will
disclose it self sooner then you think for; and then it will come to pass, that
the King being no longer able to pay his men, nor to defray the prodigious
expense he is forced to be at, as well by Sea as by Land, we may expect to see
the Germans come and press the Vintages of our Campaign Grapes, while the
English on the other side invading our Coasts, despoil and ransack all our
lovely Provinces, that for so many years have not known what War means. We are
not come to that yet, replied the Father, interrupting him, and before that
come to pass, there are a great many Engines that will be set at work. I believe
it, replied the Duke, but our mischiefs, it may be, will befall us, before they
have done working; in that case, Father, What secret will you find out, to
expel 'em from our Territories? What secret? answered the Father in a heat, you
are too hasty, hold a little, there is still a remedy for all things, good
Monsieur le Duke; and let one word suffice for all, that if the King of Spain
were dead, 'twould be no difficult thing to divide this formidable Union, which
you stand so much in dread of. I leave it to the judgment of oothers, what he
meant by this: For, for my part, I tremble to unfold my conjecture.
Nevertheless I was willing to repeat his own words, to show that there is
nothing which we ought not to be afraid of from that abominable Society, which
God Almighty seems to tolerate to be the Scourge of his Church.

FINIS.

