THE SPEECH OF Sr Ellis Leighton Knight. AT THE THOLSELL OF DUBLIN, April the 4th
1672.

DVBLIN: Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the KING's most Excellent
Majesty; And are to be Sold by Joseph Wild Bookseller in (...)

My LORD and Gentlemen,
IT is no difficult thing to spin out a long Speech, and entertain an Auditory,
either with Complement or Common place; but it is a hard thing to speak
discreetly in an arduous and perplexed conjuncture of Affairs, it being safer
many times to Act, than to Discourse, and men expose themselves often more by
what they say, than what they do; so that since I knew there was some purpose
in the City, to desire me to supply the place of their Recorder: Among the many
and various considerations that presented themselves, to persuade me to accept
of it, or to decline it, when I had brought my self almost to a resolution of
complying with the Cities inclination, I was driven off again by the thoughts,
That it was fit to say something upon this Occasion, and that I could not
determine what was fit to say. I am sure common civility required my waiting
upon you, and giving you a respectful Answer; and what I think I must pitch
upon at last, is this, That no consideration that terminates in my self, could
prevail upon me to meddle with a thing liable to so many misconstructions with
those that know not the steps of this matter, and will be sure to meet with so
many misrepresentations, from th^se whose interest it is to have your
proceedings cried down, and not considered. But since the City have thought
sit, for motives best known to themselves, to desire it of me, I will hope my
serving of you in it for a time, may conduce to the public tranquillity; and I
will say no more of that matter.

I shall only serve my self of this occasion, to give you some Advice for your
future conduct; it is that must justify the innocence of your intentions, and
crown your actings with applause. if I may make bold with the N^tation of the
word, He that is to you a good Recorder, will be a good Counselor, He that
will but put you in mind of what you have done, will not advise you ill in what
you have to do; your former practice is the best commentary upon your duty; and
a discourse of your duty, is the best Panegyric of your practice. Corporations
are the creatures of the Monarchy, and therefore they have a particular
obligation beyond other subjects at large, to depend upon the Monarchy, and to
uphold it. Your Charter is to the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs and Commons, this is the
creature of the Monarchy: The Table of Aldermen is the creature of the
Corporation, which by an Act of its own, to ease the Commons of the burden and
disturbance of frequent and numerous Assemblies, has made an abstract of the
wisest and wealthiest among them, to assist and advise the Lord Mayor, and at
once to represent and dignifie the Commons. These ought to outvy all the rest
of the Corporation, in that common duty of depending upon the King. They ought
to have no politic Maxims of their own, no headiness, no restiness, but
leaving all affairs of State of the first magnitude, to the piety and prudence
of the Prince; they ought nimbly and readily to obey all the motions of his
Hand, in those various changes he shall have occasion to manage them to.

And has ever City done this more, than this City? They have always been
easy and obsequious to any Governor the Crown has sent them, they have
always adhered to its interest with a perfect obedience, And in the late
unhappy times, when Rebellion overflowed all, like an unresistible inundation,
their coming under that fatal deluge, had the greatest face and appearance of
Obedience in it, of any other part of the King's Dominions, They prudently
complied with the necessity of the Times, by the direction of those His Majesty
had placed at the Helm; and when the happy hour came, that Loyalty began to
peep out again, it must be acknowledged, as it has nobly been, by some of the
prime Actors in that glorious Work, That if the Commons of this City had not
sheltered and assisted them, they might have been crushed and ruined in their
first attempt. This I have heard some of them say, for the glory of the
Commons, and out of great compassion to them, in the beginning of these late
agitations. The character, humor and passion of this City, seems to be
Loyalty, and it cannot be any ways diminished or allayed in the height of its
Tincture, except unfortunately some few of the chief do affect and obtain an
Oligarchy, or overswaying power, and linking themselves to factious and partial
dependencies, should by the communication and defluxion of the same humor upon
the Commons, breed in them an unnatural stiffness, contrary to that gentle and
supple temper they have always hitherto showed toward the least intimation of
the King's pleasure.

It shall always be remembered for the honor of this present Lord Mayor and
the City, how cheerful and how ready an Obedience they gave to the King's late
Proclamation, and the Act of Council (though it has not met with the like
alacrity and respect in all other parts of the Kingdom) And this is most
particularly remarkable, That though the Lord Mayor be noted and famous, as one
that has always been for the King, has fought for Him, and suffered for Him,
and is highly principled for the Government of the Church established by Law,
and that some of the Commons are dissenters from it; yet in all these
agitations, those dissenters have chose rather to stick to the Lord Mayor, than
to those that have more affinity and inclination to their Opinions: and whereas
in many other places, those dissenters are not so well satisfied with the
general indulgence His Majesty has given to tender consciences, In this City,
the rumor of that favor has by those that dissent, been recieved with all
imaginable joy and thankfulness, and an entire resignation to the King's Will
in all civil affairs. So that in a word, This City may be an example to the
greatest Cities of the world, of a most submissive and implicit Loyalty, and
cannot receive a better example from any than from it self.

One thing I would advise, which I have heard professed from some of the most
eminent among you, That how ill soever you may take it to be ensnared by the
cunning, or inslaved to the passion of any among your selves; yet if any body
could find out a shape of Government, or devise any Rules that would make you
more subject to the Will and personal Power of the Prince, you would petition
the King for that Model, and for those Rules. It is a short, but a safe
counsel, Do as you have done, persevere, and you will prevail; prevail, over
all that malice can devise, calumny insinuate, or obloquy can spread.

It remains that I put the Commons in mind to bear all due respect to the Table
of Aldermen, and that no bad Opinion they may have of any they imagine had a
design of bearing too hard upon them, should alienate them from that esteem
compliance, and confidence they ought to have for those, who are therefore set
up above the Commons, that under their conduct and vigilance, the Commons might
have more leisure to follow their Callings, and so enjoy both profit and ease.

I have but one word more to add, that I pretend in any further service I shall
be required to do you, no other advantage, but the honor of serving you; and
that you may have time to cast about and consult for your further convenience,
and I shall think that I have a great Reward (whoever censure me) if you do but
forgive my failings, and accept of my good will.

FINIS.

