A LETTER From the SPEAKER OF The House of COMMONS, To the Gentry, Freeholders
and Inhabitants of the County of YORKSHIRE, IN ANSWER To their Protestation.

ORdered by the COMMONS in Parliament, That this be forthwith Printed and
published: H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com

SEPTEMBER 8. 1642.

London, Printed by L. N. and I. F. for E. Husbands and I. Franck and are to be
sold at their shops in the Middle Temple, and next door to the King's Head in
Fleet Street.

A LETTER From the SPEAKER OF The House of Commons, TO THE Gentry, Freeholders,
and Inhabitants of the County of YORKSHIRE, In Answer to their Protestation.
MY Lords and Gentlemen, I am commanded by the House to let you know, that it
is a very great satisfaction and contentment to this House, to find the
Affections and Resolutions of your County, so worthily and seasonably
expressed, and with so much wisdom and courage, as they have observed in this
your Protestation now presented unto them: Upon which, this House does set a
much higher rate and value in respect of the many subtle practices of the
Malignant party in your County, both to disquiet the peace of the whole
Kingdom, and to oppose the just proceedings of this House, and to beget, if it
had been possible, a contrary opinion of you, from which you have now so fully
vindicated your selves, and the most considerable part of that County.

Nor can we but observe, that at this time, when the Protestant Religion, and
Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and Liberty of the Subjects, are so much
invaded, as appears by that unheard of prevalencie of wicked Council, which
has arrived to that height, as to procure both Houses of Parliament to be
proclaimed Traitors (a thing never before attempted, no not in the worst
times) you do with so much zeal and courage offer your selves to support your
King, your Religion, and Liberty; all which will be preserved by your faithful
adherence to this Parliament.

And besides all these, the House cannot but take notice of your wisdom and
fidelity, in expressing your detestation of those lawless Consultations and
Resolutions, at the last Assizes at York, where Propositions were made for the
raising Forces both of Horse and Foot in that County, the levying of money for
the maintenance of them, together with the taking away the arms of the
peaceable and best affected Subjects; all which was endeavored to be
strengthened by the bold, and Illegal attempts of the Grand Jury, who at that
time did lay aside all presidents of Love and Justice, in such presentiments as
were at that time by them made; which matter this House will in due time take
into serious consideration.

For your Resolution to withstand all these so Illegal proceedings, the House
has commanded me to return you their most hearty thanks, and to let you know,
that this House does esteem your Affections herein, as the most lively
demonstrations of your loyalty to His most Sacred Majesty, and infallible
symptoms of your fidelity to the Parliament, the only means to preserve the
felicity of the English Nation.

Lastly, this House has commanded me to let you know, that they do assent to
your desire of publishing this your Protestation in all Parish churches,
Markets and Fairs within the county, the same being as they conceive, a matter
so much tending to the preservtion of the peace, not only within your County,
but likewise within the several parts of the whole Kingdom. And thus I bid you
heartily farewell, and rest

Your loving Friend, W. L.

FINIS.
Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith Printed
and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


