THE Rector Rectified and Corrected; OR, Infant Baptism Unlawful: BEING A sober
ANSWER to a late Pamphlet, entitled, An argumentative and practical Discourse
of Infant Baptism; Published by Mr. William Burkit, Rector of Mildin in Suffolk.

WHEREIN All his Arguments for Pedo-baptism, are refuted, and the necessity of
Immersion, i.e. Dipping, is evidenced; and the People falsely called
Anabaptists, are cleared from those unjust Reproaches and Calumnies cast upon
them.

TOGETHER With a REPLY to the Athenian Gazette, added to their 5th Volume about
Infant Baptism. With some Remarks upon Mr. John Flavel's last Book, in answer
to Mr. Philip Carry.

By BENJAMIN KEACH.

Bernard, Sermon. 66. in contica. Irrident nos quia Baptizamus Infantes, quod
oramus
Pro mortuis, quod Sanctorum suffragiae postulamus.
London, Printed and sold by John Harris at the Harrow in the Poultry; and at
the Author's House near Horsly-down, Southwark, 1692.

John Tredwell's EPISTLE to Mr. William Burkit.
SIR,
I Am not a little concerned to see how I am necessitated to write this
Epistle, in Vindication of my self from those Aspersions you have cast upon me,
in your late Book, called, An argumentative and practical Discourse of
Infant Baptism; though not so much for my own Reputation, as to clear up to the
World Matter of Fact, and free the Truth of Christ, (I mean his despised
Ordinance) from that Reproach and Contempt you have cast upon it. I know I meet
with no worse usage from you, than my Lord and Master, (and many of his
faithful Servants) did meet withal from others. The truth is, all impartial Men
cannot but wonder when they hear and consider of your undue Behavior toward
me; First, in your strange and unreasonable Proceeding when you came in that
unexpected and unseemly manne^ into our Meeting Place, at Lavingham. I wrote a
friendly Letter to you, being grieved to here how you had cast most odious
Reflections in your Pulpit on the People falsely called Anabaptists. I thought,
according to your Letter, you would have come in a Christian manner to me in
private, and not to have made such an Uproar and Disturbance in our
Meeting Place, (which is entered according to the Law in that Case provided)
and there to read your Notes, and take up an hour or two, and not suffer me to
give you a sober Reply. Sir, what reason have you thus to quarrel with your
Dissenting Brethren, and show such a Spirit of Prejudice against us, who have
done you no wron^* We are for Peace, but (it seems) you are for War. What
^eason had you to write against us at this time, and to write with a Pen dipped
in Gall, as if you envied our present Liberty, and designed to expose us to the
Hate and Contempt of the People, (to say no worse) if you could: what else can
any sober Person make of your Epistle and Book in general? for thus you begin;
Since the late general Liberty, the Anabaptists thinking themselves thereby let
loose upon us, have dispersed themselves into several Counties, endeavoring to
draw away our People from us, by persuading them to renounce their first
Dedication to God in Baptism, and to enter into their Communion after the way
of Dipping, etc.

Sir, Our Design in our Preaching to Gospel, we can appeal to God and all the
World, is to endeavor to draw Men from their Sins and ungodly Lives, and to
believe in Christ to the Salvation of their Souls. They who have attended upon
my Ministry, can witness what the Scope and Design of my Preaching has all
along been. Can any say, that I ever preached up that Ordinance, which is our
present Controversy, till you preached it down, and cast Reproach upon it, and
on us for the Practice thereof? not that I am ashamed to own that blessed
Truth, or did not occasionally mention it; but I had rather see one Sinner
converted, than a hundred Persons baptized who bring not forth Fruits meet for
Repentance.

But you proceed in your Epistle and say. One of their Teaching-Disciples
(meaning my self) having set up in our Neighborhood for making Proselytes, by
Re-baptizing them i^ a nasty Horse-pond, into which the Filth of the adjacent
Stable occasionally flows, and out of which his deluded Converts come forth
with so much Filthiness upon them, that they rather resembled Creatures arising
out of the Bottomless-Pit, then Candidates of holy Baptism: and all this before
a promiscuous Multitude, in the Face of the Sun.

Sir, I wonder how you come to publish such a notorious Untruth to the World:
it seems to me you neither regard your own R^putation, nor keeping of a good
Conscience toward God: you ought to repent of this your great Rashness, in
asserting such abominable Falsehoods. You will find what you have affirme^ is
contradicted by the Testimony of many sober Persons; nor indeed is there any
ground for any body to believe wha^ you say was true, since you say I did it in
the sight of such a promiscuous Multitude. Had it been such a Pond as you say,
do you suppose we would have baptized People in it, in the open sight of such a
mixed Multitude? But, Sir, when did you see any to come out of the
bottomless-Pit, that you know so well how they look?

You say our delud^d Proselytes. Are those deluded, whom God has blessed the
Preaching of the Gospel, to the Conversion of their Souls, and to convince them
of their Duty to obey Christ's holy Ordinance of Baptism, according to the
Apostolical Institution? Sir, remember you and I must come to Judgment: these
are hard Words, which you will be convinced of sooner or later. And are not
those hard Words (as well as notoriously false) you speak, as if our baptizing
of believing Men and Women has a tendency toward the Sin of Adultery and
Murder? the Lord give you Repentance if it be his will. What you speak as to my
Preaching for Bread, I will leave that to my Friend to answer for me.

I have got your whole Book answered: I sent it to one whom I knew could better
do it than my self; not that I saw any thing in it, but that a Man of very mean
Parts might have done it; but for some Reasons, I thought it would be better
for another to answer you at this time, than my self. I hope you will read it,
but I fear, not without Prejudice. As to my mentioning that Text in Isai. 43.2.
When thou passest through the Water, I will be with thee, etc. I only alluded
to it, not thinking it intends Baptism, but that it is to be taken
metaphorically; yet it is true in the case of our Obedience to Christ in Duty,
as well as in case of Affliction. But I will leave you to him that will judge
between us in Righteousness.

I am unwilling to tell the World of those shameful and obs^ene Expressions
uttered by you when you came into our Meeting Place; partly, because of
Modesty, and partly because I would not expose you. I shall forbear, being not
willing to trouble my self with you any more, nor with any who are of your
Spirit; but if you write again, let it be in Love, and not in Wrath; not hard
Words, but hard Arguments; and you will not offend your abused Friend and
Servant, who wishes well to your Soul,

John Tredwel.
Preston-Place, April 30, 1692.
A Certificate under the Hands of several sober and impartial Persons.
WHereas Mr. Burkit of Mildin, in the County of Suffolk, has (in his late
Book, called, An argumentative and practical Discourse of Infant Baptism) very
unjustly reproached the People called Anabaptists, and particularly Mr. John
Tredwell (Preacher of God's Word,) declaring that he the said Tredwell has
lately, at Kittle-Baston, in the said County of Suffolk, baptized several
Persons in a nasty Horse-pond, into which the Filth of the adjacent Stable
occasionally flows, and that the People baptized in the said Pond, came forth
with much Mud and Filthiness upon them, etc. We whose Names are hereunto
subscribed, do solemnly certify and declare to the whole World, that those
Reports and Assertions of the said Mr. Burkit, are utt^rly and notoriously
false: for we taking a strict View of the said Pond and Stable, find the Dung
or Filth of the said Stable, runs the quite contrary way from the Pond into the
Road.

Moreover, we solemnly certify and declare, that the Persons who were baptized
in the said Pond, came forth without the least Speck or Spot of Dirt or Filth
upon their Clothes, the Water being clean. In witness whereof, we have set our
Hands this 3d Day of May, 1692.

John Tyril, sen.Gent. Baptists. William Brown. Not Bapt. Samuel Denny. David
Sare, jun. Thomas Cable. Thomas Game. William Steward. William Boram. Thomas
Well. Thomas Boss. John Noble.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
IT grieves and afflicts my very Soul to see such Strifes, Animosities and
Bitterness of Spirit amongst Christians, because of that Difference there is
amongst us in respect of some Truths of Jesus Christ, in a time when we are all
threatened by the common Enemy. I am afraid it is the Forerunner of a dismal
Hour which is coming upon us: But indeed, of all who have of late come forth
against us, called Anabaptists, none have showed a worser Spirit than this Mr.
Burkit, who writes himself Rector of Mildin in Suffolk: and that which troubles
me the more, is what I have lately heard (by a worthy Gentleman) concerning
him, i. e. That he is looked upon as a sober Person, and one also well affected
to the present Government: would all his Brethren in that respect were
like-minded. But in this Attempt of his, I know not what he aims at. Should we
not all unite together in Love and Affection, and strive to promote Peace and
Concord, and not tear one another in pieces after this manner? I am sure this
cannot tend to the Honor of God which he has done, nor to the Service of the
Church or State: but we have been provoked by him to vindicate our selves, and
therefore none who are unprejudiced can blame us. Should we suffer our selves
to be loaded with Reproach and Infamy, and not endeavor (in a just way) to
clear our selves, and that Truth of Christ we are so well established in, from
the certain Testimony of the sacred Scripture? and must we be exposed (for
making God's Word our only Rule herein) as a corrupt and erroneous sort of
People, because we affirm from thence, Believers only are the true Subjects of
Baptism, and that Baptizing is Dipping, and not Rantising; especially since
('it is well known) in all the Articles of Religion we are acknowledged to be
sound and orthodox, and that by our Advers^ries themselves: only this is the
outcry, you deny Infant Baptism. The reason of which, Reader, thou will see if
thou do but weigh well what is said in the ensuing Treatise.

And now to you my Brethren, who own this despised Truth of Christ, viz. The
Baptism of Believers; let me give you one Caution, i. e. Take heed you are not
ashamed of Christ, or to own his holy Appointment, or his Servants, because
reproached by ill Men, or others through undue Prejudice; left Christ be
ashamed of you, when he comes at the last Day in the Glory of the Father with
all his holy Angels.

Reader, there are two things I would desire thee to note; First, That I have
repeated some of my Answers to Mr. Burkit often; partly because he repeats the
same Arguments, and partly because I would endeavor to make it clearly to
appear, that many, or most of his Arguments he brings to prove Infants ought to
be baptized, do as fully, and as apparently tend to prove Infants ought to
receive the Lord's Supper; therefore I have drawn almost upon every like
Occasion, the same Inferences for that, as he has for the other; which I
entreat you to consider well of.

Secondly; Whereas you will find both Hebrew, Greek, Latin, German, Dutch, (as
well as English) made use of (other more or less,) in the ensuing Answer. I
would not have you think, I understand all those Languages; but I have had the
Assi^tance of a Learned Person, (tho in that case only) who is my Friend and
Acquaintance, that so the Work might the more fully and effectually be done.
I Will say no more, but leave it to the Blessing of God, and thy serious
Examination; and remain yours in the Lord's Service, in the Work of the Gospel,

Benjamin Keach.
From my House near Horsly-down, Southwark, May 12, 1692.

THE Rector Rectified, and Corrected: OR, Infant Baptism Unlawful.
CHAP. I.
Disproving the Arguments for Infant Baptism, taken from Circumcision. With
several Arguments proving the Covenant of Circumcision no Gospel Covenant.
Confuting also the Arguments for Infant Baptism, from the pretended
Jewish-Baptism.

AS to you Six Propositions, I shall begin with the first, and so speak to them
in order.

Proposition I.
Your first is this, viz. That Baptism by Water is a Sacrament of the New
Testament, instituted by Jesus Christ, for the solemn admission of the Party
baptized into the visible Church; and to be a Sign and Seal unto them of the
Covenant of Grace.

Answ. You and I are thus far agreed; save only I deny that Baptism is any
where in God's Word, called a Seal of the Covenant of Grace; for if it was,
then all Persons baptized have all the Blessings of the Covenant of Grace made
sure to them. I know no other Seal of the Covenant of Grace, but the Holy
Spirit; I mean, that seals those Covenant-Blessings and Spiritual Privileges
to our Souls; see Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. Chap. 4.30.

Whereas you say, the Quakers who disown any Baptism in Water, were once our
Proselytes; is not true of the greatest part of them, tho some few of them
might depart from that Faith and Profession we are of: Many others of them (you
cannot be ignorant) come from you, and some from the Presbyterians, etc. Nor
could our Practice of baptizing none but Believers, or such who make a
Profession of Faith, midwive their evil and erroneous Principles into the
World, as must be owned (...) acknowledged by all. There Is more cause to
^ear^tis your practice of ^^^tizing of Infants might lead them to disown
Water Baptism, because they can find no mention of any such Practice in the
Scripture. May not they be mi^^ed to deny any Water Baptism at all, since they
see such a multitude to assert that to be Christ's Ordinance, which the
Scripture is ^holly silent about?

But to proceed; in Page 2. you say, The great Controversy between you and us,
li^ in your second Proposition, which is this, viz.

Prop. 2. That not only those who do actually prosess Faith in Jesus Christ,
but the Infants of such Professors, may, and ought to be baptized.

Answ. Reader, observe, that Mr. Burkitt does grant, that such who do actually
profess Faith, may, nay ought to be baptized. It appears, he ^wns our practice
of baptizing Adult Person, who actually profess-Faith in Jesus Christ. But he
says more, i. e. Not only such Persons may and ought to be baptized, but the
Infants of such who profess Faith also. And to prove this hold Assertion, he
lays down this Hypoth^tical Syllogis^, viz.

If the Infants of the Jews were partakers of Ci^cumcision, Arg. 1.
the Infants of Christians may and ought to partake of Baptism.

But the Jewish Infants were partakers of Circ^mcision, therefore Christian
Infants may and ought to partake of Baptism.

Answ. Sir, must we believe it is so, because you speak and write it? You give
no proof of your (...) Proposition, which is utterly denied.

Might not I state another Argument as good as yours, nay, may be better, yet
both prove nothing? I argue thus;

1. If the Jewish Infants had Right to the Possession of the Land of Canaan,
the Infants of Christi^^s have a Right to the Possession of the Land of Canaan.
But the former is true; Ergo. And if this were so, let us make another holy
War, and take possession of it for our Children.

2. Take a second Argument of the like nature with yours, viz. If all the Sons
of the Priests of God under the Law, had an undeniable Right to the Priesthood,
and many other external Privileges; then the Sons of the Ministers of Christ
have a Right to the Ministry under the Gospel, and many other external
Privileges. But the former is true; Ergo.

Ob. Your Logic will do you no good, if you Argue no better. I must tell you,
that which gave the Male Infants of the Jews a Right to Circumcision, was not
their bare being the Infants of the Jews, not because their Infants we^^ in
that leg^l Covenant with their Parents, but rather the express and positive
Command of God to Abraham; for evident it is, no Godly Mar^^ Children, before
(...) days, had any Right to be Circumcised: And had Abraham or the Jews
Circumcised their (...) Infants without such a Commission or Command from God,
^hey had no doubt been guilty of Will Worship (...) and in like m^nner, If God
(...) required Christians to (...) Infants, (...) be no Precept nor Examp^e
(...) the Holy Bibl^, it must (...) worship in them so to (...). But God (...)
or required Christians to Baptize their Infants, there is no (...) nor Example
for any such Practice (...) all the Holy Bible: Ergo, it is Will^worship in
them so to do.

Arg. 2.
I shall proceed to your second (...), viz. If Baptism suceeds in the room of
C^rcu^cision then as the Jewish Infants were Circumcised, so the Infants of
Christians may and ought to be Baptized. But Baptism succeeds in the room of
Circumcision; therefore (...) their Children were Circumcised (...), so may
(...) be Baptized now.

Answ. 1. I answer, There is no necessity that a Gospel Ordinance must succeed
in the (...) of a Legal or Jewish Ordinance; therefore I deny your M^^^r. What
if (...) that no Ordinance succeeds in the room of Circumcision? Were there not
many other Rites and Ordinances under the Law, or Old Testament, besides
Circumcision? And yet you cannot find, or once imagine, any Gospel-Rite or
Ordinance to come in the room of them respectively, for that then it would
follow, there would be as many Christian Ri^es* Precepts and Ordinances, as
there were Jewish Rites, Precepts and Ordinances, which as o^^ observes, were
more than three hundred.

2. Besides, as Dr., Tailor observes, If Baptism came in the room of
Circumcision, you (...) baptize your Children always on the eighth day: and you
must not baptize your Female Infants at all, because none but Male Infants were
then circumcised.

3. And whereas you say, Baptism signifies the same things that Circumcision
did: it is not true, as will appear to all understanding Men, if they consider
these Particulars following, which are so many Disparities, viz.

(1.) Circumcision was a Shadow of Christ to come: Baptism is a Sign he is
already come, was dead and buried.

(2.) Circumcision was a Sign of the Covenant made with Abraham and his natural
Seed: Baptism is a Sign of the peculiar spiritual Privileges made to Saints,
as such, and no others.

(3.) Circumcision was a Domestic Action, i.e. to be done in the House:
Baptism an Ecclesiastic, belonging to the Gospel Church.

(4.) Circumcision was to be done by the Parents in that respect: Baptism is to
be done only by Gospel Ministers.

(5.) Circumcision was the cutting off the Foreskin of the Flesh, which drew
Blood: Baptism is to be done by dipping the whole Body into the Water without
drawing of any Blood.

(6.) Circumcision belonged to Male Children only: Baptism belongs to Males and
Females also.

(7.) Circumcision was to be done precisely on the eighth day: Baptism is not
limited to any precise day.

(8.) Circumcision made a visible Impression on the Body, which the Party might
perceive when he came to Age of Understanding: Baptism leaves no Impression on
the Body.

(9.) Circumcision belonged to Abraham's House, to his Male Infants only, or
suc^ who were bought with his Money, and not the Male Infants of any other
godly Men in his days, unless they join themselves to his Family. Baptism
belongs to Believers in all Nation^.

(10.) Circumcision bound those who came under that Rite, to keep the whole Law
of Moses: Baptism signifies we are delivered from that Yoke of Bondage.

(11.) If Circumcision signified the same things, and consequently,
particularly the sealing the Covenant of Grace; then those (...) were
circumcised, needed not to be baptized, because sealed before with the same
seal of that which signified the same thing: but Christ and all his Apostles,
and many others who were circumcised, were nevertheless baptized.

(12.) Circumcision signified the taking away the Sins of the Flesh, or the
Circumcision of the Heart: but Baptism signifies the Death, Burial, and
Resurrection of Christ, which Circumcision did not.

(13.) Circumcision was to be a Partition Wall betwixt Jew and Gentile; but
Baptism testifies that Jew and Gentile, Male and Female; Barbarian and
Scythian, Bond and Fr^e, are all one in Christ Jesus. Therefore there are
invers Disparities and different Significations between Circumcision and
Baptism.

^. And what tho we deny not but that Circumcision was then the in^^lating
Ordinance, and Baptism is so now in Gospel Times, i. e. an Ordinance of
Initiation; yet Circumcision initiated none into the Jewish Church, but such
who were by the express and positive Command of God to be circumcised, who were
only Male Infants, (for the Females were initiated without it) even so Baptism,
tho it be an initiating Ordinance, yet none are to be initiated thereby, not
only those who by the express Command of God are required to be baptized; and
they are only such who believe, or make a Profession of their Faith. Sir,
Precepts that are merely positive, greatly differ (you know well enough) from
Precepts that are purely moral in their own nature. Laws that are of mere
positive Right, wholly depend upon the absolute Will and Pleasure of the great
Legislator; and in all Cases and Circumstances we must keep to the express
words of the Institution; we must venture to do no more nor no less, nor do any
thing in any other manner than God has commanded, as appears in Nadab and
Ab^hu, and Vzzah's case; the first for offering of strange Fire, which thing
God commanded them not, (tho God in express words no where forbid them so to
do) were cut off, Levit. 10. 1, 2.

When God commanded Abraham to circumcise on the eighth day, did he not
virtually forbid him to do it on the seventh or ninth day? Therefore this sort
of reasoning of yours is mere sophistical, and you do but darken Counsel with
words without Knowl^dg. You say in Page 4. That God has no where declared that
Infants should be excluded. You mean, he has no where forbid in express words
the baptizing of Infants; no more, say I, has he forbid Honey, Wine, Oil, Salt
and Spittle to be used in Baptism; the former was used by some of the ancient
Fathers, and the latter is still in the Romish Church. Where are we forbid to
baptize Bells, and consecrate Water, as the Papists do to make it holy Water?
Also where are Infants excluded from the Lord's-Table? If therefore any thing
may be done in God's Worship, which you suppose is not forbid, and bears also
some proportion in Signification with Jewish Rites; all Popish Rites and
Ceremonies may be let in at the same Door: for the Pope, Miter, Popish
Vestures, Candle and Candlesticks, etc. they no doubt will tell you are of like
Signification with the High Priest under the Law, with the Priest's Vestures,
and other Ceremonies among the Jews. Whither will this lead you? it is dangerous
to be led by such a Guide.

But to proceed; we will come to that grand Proof of yours for Infant Baptism
in Page 4. which you intimate will put the Matter out of all dispute; namely,
That Baptism does come in the room of Circumcision, which is Col. 2. 11, 12. In
whom also ye are circumcised, with the Circumcision made without Hands, by the
Circumcision of Christ; buried with him in Baptism. You say, The Design of the
Apostle here is to take the Colossians off from the old Sacrament of
Circumcision. He informs them that there was no reason why they should be fond
of it, because they were complete without it, Christ having substituted new
Circumcision in the room of it, namely, Baptism: and accordingly Christians may
now be said, by Baptism, to be spiritually circumcised, as the Jews were said
to be spiritually baptized.

Answ. Your Exposition of this Text, there is no ground to admit of; the
Apostle speaks of the Power or Virtue of Christ's Circumcision. His design is
to show we are complete in Christ without Circumcision, or Jewish Ordinances:
and to show how we are complete in Christ, and have put him on, he mentions
Faith as well as Baptism, or such a Faith that should always attend Baptism;
and therefore Infant Baptism from hence cannot be proved or inferred, nor the
least ground for your bold Conclusion from hence, viz. That Baptism came in the
room of Circumcision.

1. For first, the Apostle it is true excludes Circumcision, but it is upon
another account, viz. by showing Circumcision was a Figure of the Circumcision
of the Heart, as Romans 2. 28, 29. Phil. 3.3. and since they had the thing
signified thereby, the Rite or Sign ceased. And as I have lately replied to
some of your Brethren in answer to this Text, so I must say to you, all that
can well be asserted from this Scripture, where the Apostle brings in Baptism,
is no more than this, viz. That where Baptism is rightly administered upon a
proper Subject, it represents the spiritual and mystical Circumcision of the
Heart, i. e. that the Soul is dead to Sin, or has put off the Body of the Sins
of the Flesh by the Circumcision of Christ; which may refer to the Power of his
Death in the blessed Effects thereof, by the effectual Sin-killing Operations
of the Spirit on the Heart. And as being dead to Sin, we are buried with Christ
in Baptism, both in sign and token of Christ's Burial, i. e. covered all over
in the Water, which is a clear Symbol of his Burial; also in Signification, i.
e. that we being dead and buried with Christ in Baptism, so are to rise with
him, by the Faith of the Operation of God; and both these are held forth in
true Baptism. The Apostle does not mention Baptism to come in the room of
Circumcision, but to show that these believing Colossians had through Christ by
the Spirit obtained the Antitype thereof, or thing figured out in the
Circumcision of the Flesh; which Baptism did clearly represent. But since this
is so strenuously urged by you afresh, tho so often answered, I will be at the
trouble to transcribe once more what Dr. Tailor, late Bishop of Down, has said
to this Argument of yours, and others before you, about Circumcision, viz. That
Baptism is the Antitype of it, or that it came in the room thereof.

The Argument (says he) from Circumcision is invalid upon infinite
Considerations, Figures and Types prove nothing, unless a Command go along with
them, or some Express to signify such to be their purpose. For the Deluge of
Waters and Ark of Noah were Figures of Baptism, says Peter. If therefore the
Circumstances of the one be drawn to the other, we shall make Baptism a Prodigy
rather than a Rite; The Paschal Lamb was a Figure of the Eucharist, which
succeeds the other, as Baptism does Circumcision: But because there was in the
Mandu^ation of the Paschal Lamb ^o Prescription of Sacramental Drink, shall we
conclude from hence, the Eucharist is to be administered in one kind? To which
let me add, Because Children, Servants, and all in the House Exodus 12.3, 4.
They were to take to them a Lamb, according to the number of Souls in the House.
might eat of the Passover, must our Children and all in our Houses eat of the
Eucharist, or Supper of the Lord? But, says the Doctor, and in this very
Instance of this Argument, suppose a Correspondency of the Analogy between
Circumcision and Baptism, yet there is no Correspondency of Identity; for
though it be granted, that both of them did consign the Covenant of Faith, yet
there is nothing in the Circumstances of Children being circumcised, that so
concerns that Mystery, but that it might well be given to Men of Reason,
because Circumcision left a Character in the Flesh, which being imprinted upon
the Infant, did its work to them when they came to Age; and such a Character
was necessary, because there was no word added to the Sign: But Baptism
imprints nothing that remains on the Body; and if it leaves a Character at all,
it is upon the Soul, to which the Word is added, which is as much a part of the
Sacrament as the Sign it self: for both which Reasons it is requisite, that the
Party baptized should be capable of Reason, that they may be capable both of
the Word and of the Sacrament, and the impress upon the Spirit. Since therefore
the Reason of the Parity does wholly fail, there is nothing left to infer a
necessity of complying in the Circumstance of Age, any more than in the other
Annexes of Types. The Infant must also precisely be baptized upon the eighth
day, and Females must not be baptized at all, because not circumcised. But it
were more proper, if we would understand it aright, to prosecute the Analogy
from the Type to the Antitype, by the way of Letter, and Spirit, and
Signification, and as Circumcision figures Baptism, so also the Adjuncts of the
Circumcised shall signify something spiritual in the Adherents of Baptism: and
therefore as Infants were circumcised, so spiritual Infants should be baptized,
which is spiritual Circumcision; for therefore Babes had the Ministry of the
Type, to signify that we must, when we give our Names to Christ, become
Children in Malice, and then the Type is made complete.

Thus, as I have formerly said; the worthy Doctor has given you a full Answer
to all you have said concerning your Arguments for Baptism coming in the room
of, or being a Figure of Circumcision. But to proceed.

5. If Baptism and Circumcision were both in full force together for some time;
then Baptism is not the Type of, nor came in the room of Circumcision.

But Baptism and Circumcision were both in full force together for some time:
Therefore Baptism is no Type of, nor came in the room of Circumcision.

The Minor is undeniable. Was not Baptism in full force from the time that John
received it from Heaven, and administered it on the People? and did not Christ,
by the hands of his Disciples, baptize many Persons? nay, more Disciples than
John? as it is said, Joh. 4.1, 2. And was not Circumcision them in full force
too, and so abode till Christ took it away by nailing it, with all other Jewish
Rites, to his Cross?

And as to the sequel of the Major, that cannot be denied; for if one thing
cannot come in the room and, place of another, till the other is actually and
legally removed and took out of the way, which is plain; then since these two
Rites had a Being together, the Major is undeniable. A Type can abide no longer
than till the Antitype is come; therefore Baptism is not the Antitype of
Circumcision, or came not in the room and place thereof; the Antitype of which,
or that which came in the room of the Circumcision of the Flesh, is the
Circumcision of the Heart, not in the Flesh; but in the Spirit, whose Praise is
not of Men, but of God.

6. And indeed how one thing that was a Figure or Shadow should come in the
room, or be the Antitype of another thing, which is a Figure or Shadow, no wise
Man can see reason to believe. And thus your great Text, Col. 2.11, 12. is
plainly and honestly opened, according to the scope and main drift of the
Spirit of God therein, and your great Pillar for your Scriptureless Practice of
Babes Baptism, razed and utterly overthrown.

Since I wrote this Answer to what you have said touching Circumcision, See Mr.
Tomb's Anti-Pedo-Baptism.
I have met with an Answer given to the like pretended Proof for Pedo-Baptism,
written by a most Learned and Reverend Author: The Argument and Answer I have
been at the pains to transcribe, which tak^ as here follows.

The Argument runs thus, viz.

To them to whom Circumcision did agree, The Pedo-Baptists Argument.
to them Baptism does agree: But Circumcision did agree to Infants, therefore
also Baptism, etc.

The Major he endeavors thus to prove, i. e. If the Baptism of Christ succeeds
into the place and room of Circumcision, then Baptism belongs to them that
Circumcision belonged to: but the Antecedent is true, therefore the
Consequence. The Minor, he says, is proved from Col. 2.12. it is said, the
Colossians were Circumcised, because Baptized.

Answ. This Argument supposes Baptism to succeed in the place of Circumcision;
Mr Tomb's Answer.
which may be understood many ways.

1. So as that the sense be, that those Persons may be Baptized, which
heretofore, by God's Appointment, were to be Circumcised. And in this sense the
Argument must proceed, if it conclude to the purpose: But in this sense it is
false, for Females were not Circumcised, which yet were Baptized, as Act. 8.12,
13, 14. and 16.14, 15. and Believers out of Abraham's House, as Lot,
Melchisedec, Joh, were not to be Circumcised: but believing Gentiles are
universally to be Baptized.

2. It may be so understood as if the Rite of Baptism then began, when the Rite
of Circumcision did or was to end. But this is not to be said; for John Baptist
and Christ's Disciples baptized, John 4.1, 2. before Circumcision of right
ceased.

3. It may be understood, as if Baptism did succeed into the place of
Circumcision, in respect of its signification; which is true in some things,
but not in others. First, both might signify the Sanctification of the Heart;
and this is (...) may be concluded out of that place alleged, Col. 2.11, 12.
To which I think meet to add, that if that Text be looked into, the Apostle
speaks not of any Circumcision, but of Christ, because in him we are complete,
and by whose Circumcision we are said to put off the Body of the Sins of the
Flesh: nor does the Text say we are Circumcised, because we are Baptized; but
that we are complete in Christ, because we are Circumcised in him, and buried
with him in Baptism, (in which) or in whom ye and also risen together, through
the Faith of the Operation of God that raised him from the Dead.

In some things Baptism does not succeed into the place of Circumcision, in
respect of signification.

For, 1. Circumcision did signify Christ to come of Isaac according to the
Flesh, Genesis 17.10, 11. but Baptism does not signify this, but points at his
Incarnation, Death and Resurrection.

2. Circumcision was a Sign, that the Israelites were a People separated from
all Nations, Romans 3.1. but Baptism signifies, that all that believe, whether
Jews or Gentiles, are one in Christ, Gal. 3.28.

3. Circumcision signified, that Moses his Law was to be observed, Gal. 5.3.
but Baptism does signify, that Moses his Law is abolished, and the Doctrine of
Christ established.

4. Circumcision signified the Promise of the Land of Canaan: but Baptism
Eternal Life by Christ.

And indeed, says he, if this Argument be not warily and restrainedly
understood, an Egg is laid, out of which manifest Judaism may be hatched; but
if it be taken restrainedly, (...) no more follows thence, but that Baptism and
Circumcision, in some things, hold forth the same; which is more plainly said
of (...) Ark, 1 Pet. 3.21. and of the Red Sea, and Cloud, 1 Cor. 10.2. And yet
we say not that Baptism succeeded into their place, much less do we infer any
Rite to be instituted in their stead, respecting the same Persons; yea verily,
it is to be seriously thought on,

1. That by such Arguments drawn from Analogies, not conceived by the Holy
Ghost, but drawn out of our Wit, a new kind of instituting Rites (to wit, from
Analogies) is brought in, besides our Lord's Precepts, and the Apostles
Examples.

2. This being once said, by a like parity of Reason and Arguing, it will be
lawful to bring into the Christian Church, under other Names and Forms, the
whole Burden of Jewish Rites; yea, almost out of what you will, to conclude
what you will. For who shall put a Bound to Men's feigning Analogies, when they
go beyond the Lord's Precepts, and the Apostles Examples? It is well known,
that the Divine Appointment of Tithes to be paid, and many other things in the
Writings of Divines, are asserted by this kind of Argument, besides the Rule of
the Lord's Precept, and the Apostles Example.

3. Hereby will the Opinion of the Papists be confirmed; who affirm, from 1
Cor. 10.11. the Sacraments of the Jews, to be Types of the Sacraments of
Christians; which is rejected by Divines that dispute against Bellarmine.

4. This manner of arguing, will countenance the Arguments of the Papists for
an Universal Bishop, because the Jews had such; and justify a Linen Garment at
Mass, because there was such among the Jews; and for Holy Water, Purification
of Women, Easter, Pentecost, and many more such Ceremonies; for which the
Papists do in like manner argue, as appears out of Durandus's Rationals, and
other Interpreters of Rituals among the Papists. Yea, what hinders, but we
may give Children the Lord's Supper, if we argue this way, since Samuel, Jesus
Christ under Age, were partakers of the Passover? And of right, all the Males
were thrice in the Year to appear before the Lord, and therefore it is certain
they did eat the Passover: and it shall be afterward showed, that the place,
1 Cor. 11.28. will not avoid this Inconvenience, if the Text, Mat. 28.19. may
be shifted off, as Pedo-Baptists use to do. Lest any Man take this for a light
Suggestion, I will add, that grave, godly, and learned Men, have often warned,
that we are to take heed, that we do not rashly frame Arguments from Analogy;
among others, in their late Writings in the English Tongue, John Paget, in his
Defense of Church Government, Part 1. Chap. 3. Page 8, and elsewhere. John
Ball, in his Reply to the Answer of the New England Elders unto the Nine
Positions, Posit, 2. p. 14.

Lastly, It is to be considered, again and again, how by these Argumentations,
the Consciences of Men may be freed from the danger of Will Worship, and
polluting so remarkable an Ordinance of Christ as Baptism is; especially this
Care lies on them, who by Prayer, Sermons, Writings, Covenants and Oaths, do
deter Christians from Humane Inventions in God's Worship diligently, and it is
to be hoped sincerely.

Thus far that Reverend Divine, who though I knew not what he had said till
after I had wrote as before in answer to you; yet finding him so fully to
strengthen what I have said, I thought good to add his Excellent Lines.

In the close of your 4 th Page, you recite an Objection brought by us, viz.

That there was an express Command in so many Words for Circumcision, but there
is no such Command for Infant Baptism. Genesis 17.9, requires Infants to be
Circumcised; show us but such a Text in all the New Testament, that says, (...)
Infants be Baptized. Thus you have stated our Objection, to which you give a
threefold Answer.

I acknowledge (say you) that in the New Testament, though it be not wholly
silent, yet it speaks very little touching the Case of Infant Baptism; and that
for two Reasons, 1. Because the Old Testament speaks so much in their Case,
therefore the New Testament speaks so little -- The Old Testament plainly
informs us, that Children in their Infancy were admitted Members of the Visible
Church. Now what need is there that the same thing be repeated over again in
the New Testament? for it is not the Old Testament alone, nor the New Testament
alone, but both together, that contain the Rule of Faith and Practice, etc.

Answ. 1. You speak an Untruth, for the New Testament speaks nothing at all
touching Infant Baptism; if a Man read it over a thousand times, he shall not
find one Word, or the least Hint given of it: therefore the New Testament,
contrary to what you boldly affirm, is wholly silent in the Case of
Infant Baptism and Church Membership. It Is a shame for a Man, who calls himself
a Minister, to speak falsely, but much more to publish Falsehoods to the World.
In this, Mr. Rector, you must be corrected. If you fly to your pretended
Consequences, you shall find, by and by, God assisting, that that Refuge will
fail you in the Case; for Consequences in many Cases, drawn naturally from the
Premises to which they refer, we readily admit of, though not in the Case of
mere positive Precepts.

2. As to your first Reason, why the New Testament speaks no more in the Case
of Infants; which is, as you conceive, because the Old Testament speaks so
much, that the Infant Seed of Believers should be owned as Covenant Servants,
as Deuteronomy. 29.10, 12. and were admitted Members of that Visible Church. I must
tell you, Sir, by way of Answer, this will do you no good, for the Reasons
following.

1. Because Baptism is (as I have told you already) a mere positive Precept;
and the Rite thereof, as well as Circumcision, cannot be known but by the
express Declaration or Manifestation of the Will and Mind (...) God in his
written Word. Abraham knew not that it was his Duty, he ought to Circumcise his
Children, till God gave him his positive and express Command to do it; and then
also it was none but his Male Children; and God gave Directions to him, when
and wherefore he should Circumcise them: And therefore there is the same parity
of Reason, why the Great God should give us under the Gospel the like positive
Law for baptizing our Children under the Gospel; together with the Time when,
and the Reason wherefore, as he did to them in the case of Circumcision, had it
been his Pleasure we should Baptize our Children: but since he has not
required any thing of this Nature of us under the Gospel, his requiring them to
Circumcise their Male Children, will not justify us, nor free us in so doing,
from palpable Will Worship. Were there none among the Gentiles, think you, in
the Old-Testament-time, that were Believers and Godly Persons? And if there
were such, I ask you, whether they were to Circumcise their Children,
notwithstanding they abode without the Gate or Pale of the Jewish Church? Nay,
I affirm, that it was not the Duty of Melchisedec, Lot, nor Job, (because not
Abraham's natural Offspring, nor bought with his Money, had they never so many
Sons) to Circumcise one of them, because they had no Command so to do. Read
Genesis 17.8, 9, 10, 11. and you will find the express Command of God was to him,
and to every Male-Child of his; or that was born in his House, or bought with
Money, ver. 11, 12.

2. Because the Church State of the Jews, or that under the Old Testament,
quite differs from the Gospel Church State; the Jewish-Church-Constitution was
National, the whole Nation of the Jews; and every individual Person that
proceeded from Abraham's Loins, were admitted as Members of that Church under
the Law, or in Times of the Old Testament, and therefore his Infant Seed were
and might be admitted Members thereof. But in the Times of the Gospel, the
Church is not National, but Congregational, Show us what whole Nation or
People, none excepted, were by Christ's Appointmen^ constituted as a
Gospel Church, as the People of Israel or Jewish Nation were, and you will gain
a great Point. Is it not evident, all along in the Acts of the Apostles, which
gives an Account of the Nature and Manner of the Gatherings and Constitutions
of the Gospel-Churches, that they consisted of none but of such who professed
Faith and Regeneration, and so were either gathered out of the Jewish People,
or else out of the Nations of the Gentiles, and consisted of no other but such
who were called, or did profess Faith in Jesus Christ? Which if considered,
utterly overthrows, not only what you speak here, but all you speak afterward
about Children being once in Covenant under the Law.

3. Whereas you say, It is not the Old Testament alone, nor the New Testament,
but both together, that contains the Rule of our Faith and Practice.

I answer, That though in part what you say here is true, yet your Trumpet
gives an uncertain Sound: for in respect of Practice, were there not many Laws
and Precepts given to the People of the Jews, which no ways in the least
concern us, or God's Spiritual Israel under the Gospel? If you explain your
self no better, you may soon subvert the People, and carry them away to Judaism
with a witness: nay, and instead of Baptizing Children upon such a childish and
erroneous Foot of Account, make them think they ought to Circumcise them, as
some of late here in England were deluded to do. Therefore we say as to all
Precepts of the Gospel that are mere positive Laws, the New Testament is our
only Rule without the help of the Old: Christ alone is our Lawgiver, and him,
and not Moses, we are only to hear and hearken unto; though as to matter of
Faith, the Old Testament may be useful (...) us in many respects, and also all
Precepts that are purely Moral in their own Nature. The Old Testament is a Rule
to us as well as the New, which I might show in many respects, not only
touching the Law of the Decalogue, but also of Prayer, singing God's Praises,
Fasting Days, etc. But for you to intimate in the case of Circumcision, that
the Old Testament is a Rule of Practice, or in respect of Jewish
Church Membership, you strangely betray your Ignorance, as will further appear
hereafter. For that Circumcision was a mere Legal or Jewish Rite, I shall
evidently anon fully prove. But so much as to your first Reason, your Second
shall be now examined.

2. So little is said (say you) in the New Testament about Baptizing Infants,
because the custom of Baptizing them was common, and the practice constant in
the Jewish Church, at and before our Savior's Time. Whilst Circumcision was
the Covenanting Sign, Baptism was the Purifying Ceremony among the Jews; for
when any of the Gentiles were admitted into the Jewish Church, both Parents and
Children were first Circumcised, and then Washed, in token of cleansing them
from the filth of their Heathenism: So that Baptism among the Jews constantly
went along with Circumcision till our Savior's Time.

Answ. 1. It Is a sign of a bad Cause, when Men are forced to try their Wits
after such a ridiculous manner, to make out what they have to prove. Pray, was
that Custom among the Jews, of Baptizing Infants, when any of the Gentiles were
admitted into the Jewish Church, commanded of God? Had God given the Jews any
such Law or Precept? or was it not one of their own Traditions, who in their
own Wisdom, without any Warrant from their great Prophet and Lawgiver, devised
that Ceremony, possibly to wash away the Filth of Heathenism, as your
Predecessors in like manner, without any Command or Warrant of Jesus Christ,
devised the Baptizing of Infants, to wash away the Filth of Original Sin? Does
not our blessed Savior say, that they had made void the Commandments of God
through their Traditions? I do affirm, it was never given them as a Law or
Precept by the Great God, nor do you attempt once to prove any such thing; for
there is not the least shadow of any such thing in all the Old Testament;
therefore it was a mere humane Tradition.

2. Can any wise Man, who would do nothing in God's Service without a
sufficient Rule or Warrant from the Word of God, think this a good Argument for
Infant Baptism? I must tell you, (as I have some of your Brethren, called, The
Athenian Society) That a Popish Tradition is every way as good as a Jewish one.
You were better plead thus, The Romish Church, without any Warrant from God's
Word, received Infant Baptism as an unwritten Apostolical Tradition, and in
some Councils early. Milevit. Conc.
Quicunque parvulos recentes ab uteris Matrum Baptizandos esse negat, Anathema
esto. Milev. Can. 2. and Anathematized or cursed all who should deny that
newborn Infants were to be baptized; why do you fly to the fabulous and idle
Traditions of the Jewish Rabbis for your Childish Baptism, since you have the
Testimony of so many Romish Doctors, and General Councils, who positively
affirm you ought to baptize your Children? Sure the Authority of the latter is
as good as the former.

3. But is it so indeed, did our Savior say nothing of Infant Baptism? or, as
you hint, leave so little of it in the New Testament, because it was the
constant Custom among the Jews to baptize the Children of Heathens before they
admitted them into their Church? What Dr. Hammond, Tailor and Lightfoot have
said upon that account, is to their Shame and Reproach, rather than to their
Honor; tho I know it was their last Refuge, when they saw your
Scripture-Proofs would not prove it to be a Truth of Christ. O how are we
beholden to the Jewish Talmud, and Jewish Rabbis for our Infant Baptism! Nay,
which is worst of all, how is Christ beholden to them for that rare Invention,
that had said so much for it, and made it so common a Practice among them, that
it saved him the Pains to give the least Directions about it? But is not this
next to Blasphemy? Can any Man in his right Wits think our Lord Jesus should
confirm a vile Tradition and Innovation of the Jews? or take His great
Ordinance and Sacrament of Baptism from the superstitious, fabulous and
erroneous Custom of their Doctors and Rabbis? Besides, was Baptism to be
preached or practiced by none but the Jewish People? does it not belong to the
Gentiles too? Did not our Savior command his Disciples to go into all Nations,
and make Disciples and baptize them? etc. Was it his Mind that Infants should
be baptized, and yet say nothing of it, because it was a common Custom and
Practice among the Jews? But, Sir, what must the Gentiles do to know this to be
their Duty? (I mean those Gentiles who received the Christian Faith) viz. that
they ought to baptize their Children, who did not know nor ever heard of that
Jewish Custom? Or, dare you say, our New Testament is not authentic, or
sufficient to teach us the whole of Gospel-Duties and Obedience, without the
Jewish Talmud? You should not ('it is plain) only have said the New Testament is
not, without the Old, the Rule of our Practice; but also that the New Testament
and the Old, without the Jewish Talmud, is not sufficient, and then you had
done your business at once. Are you not ashamed thus to go about to blind and
deceive the poor People?

Is not the whole Mind of Jesus Christ, even all his Laws and Precepts, or his
whole Counsel plainly contained in his blessed Word? But would you have People
be wise above what is written, and teach Men to reflect upon the Care and
Faithfulness of the blessed Jesus, in leaving out of the sacred Bible one great
Truth of God, and leave us to find it out by going to search the Jewish
Traditions?

4. If it was a Custom among the Jews, it must be a sacred Custom, I mean a
Custom that God appointed and commanded them to observe, or else a human
Tradition or vain Custom: If it had been a Mosaical Rite given by God himself
to the Jews, Christ besure abolished it, and nailed it to his Cross, with all
its fellows, and it is gone for ever since he has not given it out a new.

Take this Argument.

That Custom among the Jews that God never commanded, nor is any where given by
Moses unto them, who was faithful in all his House, was no Ordinance of God,
but a mere human Tradition. But the Custom among the Jews of baptizing the
Heathen and their Children, who were admitted into their Church, was never
commanded of God, nor any where given unto them by Moses, who was faithful in
all his House. Ergo, That Custom was no Ordinance of God, but a mere human
Tradition.

5. Lastly, take what a worthy and learned Author of your own Communion has
said in Confutation of this foolish and absurd Argument for Pedo-baptism, it is
Sir Norton Knatchbull Knight and Baronet. The thing, says he, is uncertain,
that it cannot be said of the Rabbis, that there were not several among them
who differed very much about this matter; for Rabbi Eliezar expressly
contradicts Rabbi Joshua, who was the first that I know of who asserted this
sort of Baptism among the Jews; for Rabbi Eliezar, who was contemporary with
Rabbi Joshua, if he did not live before him, asserts that a Proselyte
circumcised, and not baptized, was a true Proselyte; for so we read of the
Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, that they were circumcised, but not
baptized. But Rabbi Joshua affirms, that he who was baptized, not he that was
circumcised, was a true Proselyte. To whom shall I give Credit, to Eliezar, who
asserts what the Scripture confirms; or to Joshua, who affirms what is no where
to be found in Scripture? But the Rabbis upheld Joshuah's side, and what
wonder was it? for it made for their business; that is, for the Honor of the
Jewish Religion, that the Christians should borrow their Ceremonies from them.
But when I see Men of great Learning in these times fetching the Foundations of
Truth from the Rabbis, I cannot but hesitate a little: For whence was the
Talmud sent us, they are the words of Buxtorf in his Synagoga Judaica, that we
should give Credit thereto, that from thence we should believe that the Law of
Moses either can or ought to be understood? much less the Gospel, to which they
were professed Enemies. For the Talmud is called a Labyrinth of Errors, and the
Foundation of Jewish Fables; it was brought to Perfection and held for
authentic five hundred Years after Christ: therefore it is unreasonable to
rest upon the Testimony of it. And that which moves me most, Josephus (to omit
all the Fathers that lived before the Talmud was finished) who was a Jew, and
contemporary with Rabbi Eliezar, who also wrote in particular of the Rites,
Customs and Acts of the Jews, is altogether silent in this matter. So that it
is an Argument to me next to a Demonstration, that two such eminent Persons,
both Jews, and living at the same time, the one should positively deny, and the
other makes mention of Baptism among the Jews. Besides, if Baptism in the
modern sense were in use among the Jews in ancient Times, why did the Pharisees
ask John Baptist, Why do thou baptize, if thou art not Christ, nor Elias,
nor that Prophet? Joh. 1.25.
do they not plainly intimate that Baptism was not in use before, and that it
was a received Opinion among them, that there should be no Baptism till either
Christ, or Elias, or that Prophet came? So far the renowned Sir Norton
Knatchbull, in his Notes printed at Oxford, Anno Dom. 1677. with the License of
the Vice Chancellor, a very learned Man, and a Son of the Church of England.
Sir, what think you now of your Jewish Custom, of baptizing the Heathens and
their Children who were admitted to their Church? Do you think there is not
need that Infant Baptism should be mentioned in the holy Scripture, had it been
a Truth? Is this uncertain Story of the Jewish Custom sufficient for you to
build your Faith and Practice upon, when the Truth of the Story, as to matter
of Fact, may justly be doubted? but if it was true, it is but a rotten
Foundation to build one of the great Sacraments of Christ upon, viz. a vile,
profane and human Tradition of the Jewish Rabbis.

I have been the larger on this matter, because the Men you mention, as Dr.
Hammond, Tailor and Lightfoot, some People have in such Veneration, who were
the Persons (you need not doubt) the learned Sir Norton confuted; and also
because your Brethren the Athenian Society The Athenian Society detected in
their 12 Numbers to their fifth Volume.
, notwithstanding I have lately so fully answered all they have urged upon this
account, still insist upon this ridiculous Argument, as appears by their 12
Numbers to their fifth Volume. And what I have now said, may serve for a
further Answer to them as well as to you; but if we hear any more of this, we
shall further expose you and them than yet we have done.

In Page 6. you seem to answer a Question, viz. Why our Savior did not
particularly name Infants when he instituted Baptism in the room of
Circumcision?

Your Answer is, because there was no occasion for it; What need, say you, our
Savior declare that Infants ought to have the Seal of the Covenant applied to
them, when it was never denied them? it had been highly requisite that our
Savior should have particularly named them now: but being all ways included
before, if our Savior had intended their Exclusion now, he would most
certainly have declared it, etc.

Answ. 1. I answer, you say the Seal of the Covenant was never denied Infants,
and therefore what need our Savior particularly name Infants when he
instituted Baptism? Sir, but did not our Savior know there would be just
ground for us to deny Infant Baptism, since he commanded none in the great
Commission to be baptized, but such who were made Disciples by being first
taught? And he being God as well as Man, did know from hence it would be
denied, as it has been by some godly Christians from the first time it was, as
an human Device, introduced into God's Worship (as hereafter we shall prove):
sure this being so, there was all the reason imaginable that he should speak of
their Baptism in his great Commission, had it been his Will they should be
baptized.

2. And why should the baptizing of Believers be so clearly and so often spoken
of in the New Testament, if a being in the Covenant was a sufficient ground to
baptize them, without a positive Precept, or express Command to baptize them?
since they were always from the beginning of the World looked upon and known
beyond doubt to be in Covenant: and so you cannot say of Infants, (tho you say
the Seal was never denied them) for there is no mention of their being in
Covenant, as to have any Sign or Rite assigned them of it till Abraham's days;
and that that Covenant then, viz. of Circumcision, was not a Covenant of Grace,
we shall hereafter, God assisting, clearly prove. Therefore, say you what you
please, there was more need for our Savior to have Infants Baptism, and
Church Membership particularly mentioned, than that of Believers, had it been
the Mind of Christ they ought to be baptized and made Members of the
Gospel Church.

3. Besides, the Dispensation of the Gospel requires it, since it differs in
Nature, Rites and Privileges from that of the Law, or under the Old Testament.
The Church State of the Jews being National, and that of the Gospel
Congregational, had Christ only confirmed old Covenant-Rites and manner of
Privileges, Membership and Initiations, etc. there might be something in what
you say; but evident it is, that the Matter and Form, Rites and Privileges of
the Gospel Church, according to the Constitution, Laws and Ordinances of
Christ, Here the Athenian Society may see their first Query fully answered, of
Infants being once in Covenant, and never cast out, are in still.
quite differ, and are of another sort to those of the Law. Think not to say
within your selves, We have Abraham to our Father, etc. Now the Axe is laid to
the Root of the Trees, Mat. 3.9, 10. [ Now] as if he should say, the case is
altered; your being the fleshly Seed of Abraham would do then, or give you a
right to Circumcision; but this will not do now, this will give you no right to
Gospel-Baptism, the Dispensation is changed; actual Faith, and Fruits meet for
Repentance, are required of all who have a right to Baptism.

4. Moreover, it is evident that Christ in bringing in and establishing of the
second Covenant and Gospel-Church-State, dissolved, and for ever took away the
old Covenant, and Church State of the Jews, with all their Rites, initiating
Ordinances and Privileges whatsoever.

Suppose a Man should make his Will, and bequeath such or such Legacies to such
and such Persons; and yet afterward he abrogates that Will, and makes another,
which is his last Will and Testament, in which he leaves out the Names of those
Persons, and does not bequeath those Legacies to them; Can they recover those
Legacies by virtue of the old abrogated Will? The case is the same here; If
Infants have right to Baptism and visible Church Membership, it must be found
in Christ's Gospel, which is his last Will and Testament, or they have no such
Right you may be sure, nor ought to be baptized; He took away the first, that
he might establish the second, Heb. 10.2.

Your second Answer to this Objection, viz. That Infants are no where commanded
to be baptized, is this, viz. Although they are not, say you, particularly named,
yet are they necessarily included in the Commission, Mat. 28.19, 20. Infants
being a very considerable part of all Nations; surely the universal (all
Nations) does include the Individuals, tho our Savior does not particularly
name them. To clear this, you make use of a Similitude. Suppose, say you, the
King should grant his Royal Charter to make this your Market Town a
Corporation, and all the Inhabitants of it Freemen, would any be so idle as to
suppose that this Royal Grant does not include your Children, because it does
not particularly name them? Is not the Son of a Freeman a Freeman as well as
his Father? Thus in the Sacred Charter and Royal Patent of the Covenant of
Grace, which is sealed by Baptism; all the Privileges and Promises of that
Covenant granted to Believers, concern their Children as well as themselves,
Acts 2.38. The Promise is to you and to your Children; the Promise of the
Covenant belongs to you and to yours. The Infants then of Believers are
included together with themselves, tho not particularly named.

Answ. 1. I reply, that you argue not only sophistically, but also very weakly;
for are not Pagans, Turks and Infidels, with the profane and ungodly Men and
Women, and their Children, All Nations takes in Pagans, etc. and their Children.
a very considerable part of all Nations? nay, the far greatest part of all
Nations; for Christ's Flock comparatively is but a little Flock: And are these
included in the Commission, tho not named? You must say they be, or else
confess there is nothing in what you say in the least upon this account.

2. If that Universal does include every Individual in all Nations, all these
are included as well as Infants of Believers. Sir, you must be corrected here
for your bold and daring Abuse of the Sacred Commission of our Blessed Lord;
for I appeal to your Conscience, or to the Consciences of all impartial Men,
whether, by virtue of the Commission, any one Person ought to be Baptized, but
such who is first Taught? it is not said, Go, Baptize all Nations; mark, but go
ye therefore, teach all Nations, (...); that is, disciple, make Disciples in
all Nations, baptizing them, that is, such who are so taught or made Disciples.
And this is according to Christ's own Practice, Jesus made and baptized more
Disciples than John, etc. John 4.1. first he made them Disciples, and then
Baptized them, and thus runs his Commission. Therefore since none are
expressed, as required in all Nations to be Baptized, but such as are first
taught and discipled; Infants of Believers, as well as Pagans, and Unbelievers
and their Children, are excluded. As when God commanded the Male Children to be
Circumcised, he thereby excluded all Female Children: Or when he commanded
Abraham to Circumcise on the eighth Day, he virtually forbad him to Circumcise
on the seventh or ninth day, as I said before; or as when he commanded the Ark
to be carried on the Priests Shoulders, he forbad them to carry it on a Cart;
and for their presumption so to do, it provoked God, and cost Vzzah his Life:
So and in like manner, all that are not expressed, as injoined or required to
be Baptized by the Authority of the Commission, are excluded.

3. And as to your Simile, there is nothing in it; for you should first prove,
that the Nature of the Sacred Charter of the Church about the Royal Grant of
that Spiritual Corporation, runs Parallel-wise with the King's Charter of
making a Civil Corporation: make that appear, and you do your Business. But,
alas, Sir, you beg, and instead of arguing, take that for granted which is
utterly denied. It Is not the first Birth that brings us into the Covenant of
Grace, but the Second; not Generation, but Regeneration; not being born of
Believers, but by our being born of God: See John 1.12, 13. To as many as
received him, to them gave be Power (Gr. Privilege) to become the Sons of God:
Which were not born of Blood, nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of
Man, but of God. If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham 's Seed, and Heirs
according to the Promise, Gal. 3.29. The Children of the Flesh, these are not
the Children of God, Romans 9.8. Thus the Royal Charter of the Gospel, or
Spiritual Corporation of the Covenant and Gospel-Church-State runs; i. e. You
must be a Believer, you must be born again, be a new Creature, and so must your
Children, before you or they either can be Freemen and Women of this
Corporation, or be Fellow-Citizens with the Saints and Household of God, Ephesians.
2.19. And indeed the Covenant of Grace ran thus, as it was made with Abraham;
though he was in it, yet all his Children were not included, though
Circumcised. Was the Royal Grant made so, that it included Ishmael and Esau?
Were the Promises and Privileges of the Covenant of Grace belonging to them?
does not the Apostle positively deny it, in Romans 9.7? Neither because they are
the Seed of Abraham, are they all Children; but in Isaac shall thy Seed be
called: that is, they which are the Children of the Flesh, these are not the
Children of God; but the Children of the Promise are counted for the Seed, Ver.
9.

4. If all the Privileges and Promises granted to Believers, so concern all
their Children, they must all be saved, for that is the Promise and blessed
Privilege of all Believers; He that hears my Words, and believes on him that
sent me, has everlasting Life, and shall not come into Condemnation, John
5.24. If this were true Doctrine that you teach the deceived and blind World,
the Privileges of Believers Seed were great indeed, and their State happy: but
alas it is no such thing, they are, as born, and as they come into the World
from the Loins of their Parents, in the same woeful condition, and alike
polluted as the Children of Unbelievers; and many of the best of God's People
have now-adays, as well as formerly, wicked Children; and many die in Sin, and
perish eternally, which they could not do, had they the same Promises and
Privileges their believing Parents have; therefore you teach false Doctrine,
and ought to be rectified and sharply corrected.

5. If they have the same Privileges their believing Parents have, and that by
the Royal Grant and Charter of Christ given to his Church, Why do you not, as
the ancient erroneous Fathers did, give them the Eucharist? I affirm, they have
as much right to that Sacrament, (as they have to the Sacrament of Baptism, as
I shall prove in its place) by your Arguing and Argument.

6. And lastly, As to that Text cited by you, to prove what you say in Acts
2.38. For the Promise is to you and to your Children, does not refer to their
Children quatenus as Children, but to such of their Children, or Offspring,
God by his Word and Spirit should call, (as the Sequel of the Verse clearly
shows) for the Promise is to you, and to your Children, and to all that are
afar off, even to so many (mark) as the Lord our God shall call. To you Jews,
and not only to you, but to the Gentiles also, which were said to be afar off,
as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 2.17. And came and preached Peace to you that
were afar off. But then it is with this Restriction or Limitation, even to so
many of you, and your Children, and them afar off, which the Lord our God shall
call: and when Children are, by the Grace of God effectually called, we deny
not but that you may Baptize them.

In page 7. upon the Popular Objection, as you call it, against Infant Baptism,
from the Silence of the Scripture in that Case, you argue thus, viz.

That which by a just and necessary Consequence is deduced from Scripture, is
as much the Mind of Christ, as what is contained in the express words of
Scripture. To confirm this, you bring in the Arians, who rejected Consequential
Proofs, etc. And (say you) if you of the Anabaptist Persuasion do the same,
know, that if you deny evident and necessary Consequences from Scripture, then,
first, you deny your Savior's way of Arguing; and, secondly, you condemn your
own Practice, etc.

Answ. 1. You basely misrepresent those you call Anabaptists; for we do not
deny, nor never did, necessary Consequences deduced from the Scripture, or such
Consequences which naturally and genuinely follow from those Texts they refer
to, or are drawn therefrom.

Though, Sir, I must tell you, Consequences that are genuine, or are naturally
deduced from the Scripture, to prove and demonstrate Matter of Faith, (as in
the case of the Resurrection, or about the Deity of the Son of God, or any
thing of like nature, are one thing) and Consequences brought to prove a
Positive Law or Institutions, are another thing. Pray, did God by Moses give
forth any Law, or positive Rite or Precept so darkly, that it could not be
proved but by Consequences? for that is the case here between you and us. Moses
delivered every Law, Statute and Ordinanance so plainly to the People of
Israel, that he that ran might read it. And shall any Man think that our
blessed Savior, who declared all things plainly from his Father, and was
faithful as a Son over his own House, would leave any positive Law or Precept
of the Gospel so dark, that there is no way to understand it but by
Consequences?

2. But secondly, our main Objection lies against your pretended Consequences;
for we positively deny that any of your Inferences or Consequences which you
bring to prove Infant Baptism, do naturally follow from the Scripture-Texts, to
which you refer, or from whence you draw them: and blame us not, since your own
Brethren (such too as Dr. Hammond, Dr. Tailor Bishop of Down, etc.) do affirm,
that those Scriptures from whence* you draw your Consequences for this
Practice, are not naturally drawn therefrom, but are very uncertain and
doubtful: if you know not this, it will appear you have read but little of them.

3. As touching Prayer, that is a Branch of Natural Religion, or a Moral Duty,
and therefore quite different from this the Controversy is about; yet that it
is positively enjoined and commanded in the Gospel also, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17, 18.
we deny not; Pray always, pray without ceasing, and for every thing give
Thanks. What can be more plain? Besides, we sin not if we pray thrice a day, or
seven times a day; therefore Prayer is unadvisedly and improperly mentioned by
you upon this account.

4. As touching Women's receiving the Lord's Supper, that is proved more than by
Consequences: Let a Man examine himself, i. e. Man or Woman, for so the word
(...) in the Greek, and Adam in the Hebrew signify. There is one Mediator
between God and Man. Is not the Woman comprehended as clearly as the Man? Are
not Male and Female all one in Christ Jesus? Gal. 3.28. And, as we have lately
told your caviling Brethren the Athenian Society, did you never read of the
Figure Sylepsis or Conceptio, that comprehends the less worthy under the more
worthy, indignioris sub digniore? As for Example, Quid tu and soror facitis;
ego and matter miseri perimus; tu and uxor qui adfuistis testes estete; and is
no less true in Divinity: See that full Text, 1 Cor. 6.16. (...), they two
shall be one Flesh. Mary the Mother of Jesus, and the other good Women who were
Christ's Disciples, were of the number of the hundred and twenty Disciples who
brake Bread with the three thousand that were added to them, Acts 2. It Is said
Acts 8.12. They were baptized both Men and Women. Now such a Consequence as
this we deny not, viz. Women were Disciples, Women were baptized, and therefore
broke Bread: for all who were true Disciples of Christ and baptized, had an
undoubted Right to the Lord's Supper. Bring us such Grounds and Consequences
for your Infant Baptism and Church Membership, and we will contend with you no
more. But to satisfy the Reader more fully as to this, I desire him to see Mr.
Danvers Answer to Mr. Blindman.

5. As to the first day of the Week, being the day appointed for Christians to
observe under the Gospel in the Worship and Service of God, we have Proof
enough without Consequences. Sir, we always affirm an Apostolical Practice, or
a Gospel-Precedent, is of like nature and of equal Authority with a Gospel
Precept. Do we not read, Acts 2.1, 2. that when the day of Pentecost was fully
come, the Disciples were all gathered together with one accord in one place;
which was the first Day of the Week? And was not this their assembling on that
day, as the day of the Christian Sabbath, ratified and confirmed from Heaven,
by that wonderful Effusion of the Holy Ghost, or extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit? And is it not said, Acts 20.7. the Church came together on the first
Day of the Week to break Bread? And does not the Apostle exhort the Church at
Corinth, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. upon the first Day of the Week to make Collections, or
to gather and lay in store for the Poor, as he had given Orders to the Churches
of Galatia? this they could not do, if they met not on that Day. And what tho
we cannot prove without Consequences, that he who was the Lord of the Sabbath
did change the Day, etc seeing we have such plain and express Examples or
Precedents for the Observation of the first Day of Week, and none but that in
the times of the Gospel? Therefore now we say,

6. Could you give us but one Example, one Precedent in all the New Testament,
that any one Infant was baptized, we would give up the Cause: but as you can
give us none, so you cannot give us any Consequences, that without the abuse of
the Scripture naturally flow from the Texts to which you refer; therefore all
this stir in mentioning these particular Cases, are remote to your Business,
and prove nothing, they being not like parallel Cases to yours.

But to come to your Argument for Infant Baptism, which you would have to run
parallel with that, for Women's receiving the Lord's Supper: I will repeat them
both, and then reply to the last.

All Christ's Disciples ought to partake of his Supper: Women are Disciples,
therefore to partake of his Supper.

You proceed; All Christ's Disciples ought to be baptized; but some Children
are his Disciples, therefore to be baptized.

1. I deny your Minor; you say some Children are Disciples, the Scripture you
bring to prove it, is Acts 15.1, 8, 10. Answ. That Scripture proves no such
thing: the Yoke that was laid on the Neck of those Disciples were Men, or Adult
Persons, or Gentile Saints; they were such Disciples those false Brethten would
have laid the Yoke of Circumcision upon.

2. A Disciple is one taught or instructed, as the genuine and proper
Signification of that word holds forth; but Infants have no Understanding, (...)
and therefore are not able to be made Disciples by teaching.

Your second Proof, is their Parents Dedication of them to Christ.

I answer; Parents have no Warrant from God's Word to dedicate their Children
to Christ by Baptism, nor does that Dedication infuse any Divine Habits into
them, or the least Light, Knowledge, or Understanding; therefore that Dedication
cannot render them to be Disciples.

Your third Proof is Christ's gracious Acceptance of them at their hands.

Answ. I answer, Christ only laid his Hands upon some Children who were brought
to him, and blessed them; but this does not prove they are Disciples, or that
he baptized any Infant. But more of this hereafter. I proceed to your second
grand Argument, Page 8.

CHAP. II.
Wherein the grand Argument for Infant Baptism taken from the Covenant made
with Abraham, is fully confuted. Proving the Covenant of Circumcision was not a
Covenant of Grace, wherein both Mr. Burkit and the Athenian Society are clearly
answered. The Legal Covenant and Fleshly Seed being under the Gospel both cast
out, the Plea for Pedo-baptism from the old Covenant-Right is vanquished.

I Come now to examine your second grand Argument for the Baptism of Infants,
which you in Page 8. laid down thus, viz.

Arg. 2.
If the Infants of believing Christians under the Gospel are in Covenant with
God, as the Jewish Infants under the Law were; then the Seal of the Covenant,
which is Baptism, may and ought to be administered to them.

But the Infants of Believers under the Gospel are in Covenant with God, He
should have mentioned Circumcision in his Propositions.
as well as the Jewish Infants under the Law were.

Therefore Baptism, the Seal of the Covenant, ought to be applied to these, as
Circumcision was to them.

Answ. Tho this Syllogism is not perfect in Form, yet I will pass by that
Oversight of yours, and consider it in each part, and finding it sophistical,
must deny the whole Argument.

1. For first, as to your Major, If the Infants of Christians were in Covenant
with God, as the Jewish Infants were, yet Baptism cannot belong to them, unless
God has commanded them to be baptized, and made it also a Seal of the same
Covenant: for as much as Baptism, (as I have told you before once or twice
already) is a mere positive Law or Institution, it is not Man, but God himself
must make it their Duty to be baptized, and a Seal of the Covenant, if it were
so indeed: but God has neither enjoined them, or made it their Duty to be
baptized, nor appointed it to be a Seal of the Covenant of Grace to them; Ergo.
Also you mistake, in calling Circumcision a Seal of the Covenant made with
Abraham; for it is only called the Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith he
had, (that is Abraham) and which he had, being yet uncircumcised. It Is not
called a Seal of the Covenant, but of Faith, and that too of Abraham's Faith
only, because none before they were circumcised had such a Faith but himself
only. Nor can you prove Christ's true Baptism is a Seal of the Covenant of
Grace under the Gospel, the holy Spirit is the only Seal of the Covenant of
Grace mentioned in the Scripture, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. chap. 4.30.

If therefore I should grant, that the Infants of Believers under the Gospel,
as such, were in Covenant with God, which I must deny, yet it would not follow
in the least that they ought to be baptized, from that ground: for, were not,
think you, all the Children of the Godly before Abraham's time, or before he
received that express Command to circumcise them in your sense, in Covenant
with God? If you do not say this, why do you affirm, that the Children of
Believers were always, or ever in Covenant as well as their Parents? but if it
were so, Do you think it was their Duty to circumcise them? If you should say,
no, because they did not know to circumcise them was the Will of God. But you
might say more, viz. it was not the Will of God they should do it; it is God's
Command only, and not their being in Covenant, made it their Duty to circumcise
their Children: and had God given us such a Command, or any Authority to
baptize our Children, we ought and would baptize them; but must not, dare not,
without such positive Command or Authority.

2. We utterly also deny your Minor, and say that the Infants of Believers (as
such) under the Gospel, are not in Covenant with God.

We will therefore examine your Grounds to prove that which you affirm upon
this account, Page 8, 9. and thus you argue, viz.

They who by Circumcision were once solemnly taken into Covenant with God, and
never since were solemnly cast out, do undoubtedly continue in a
Covenant-State.

But Infants under the Law were solemnly by God's Appointment taken into
Covenant with himself, and were never since by any Command of God cast out;
therefore they do still continue in Covenant.

Answ. 1. I answer first of all, that your Argument is not true in form; Is
Circumcision in your Minor? Sir, if you are a Logician, speak like one; Mr.
Burkit's Syllogism not true in form.
your Minor should run thus, viz. But Infants were once by Circumcision,
solemnly by God's Appointment, taken into Covenant, etc. But I Will pass by that,
and must tell you your Argument in another respect is lame also; You do not
tell us what Covenant it is you here intend; ought you not to have added, They
who were once solemnly taken into the Covenant of Grace by Circumcision, etc.
but Infants were once solemnly taken into the Covenant of Grace by
Circumcision? If you do not affirm that, you say nothing that concerns our
Controversy. If the Covenant of Circumcision was not the Covenant of Grace, you
will and must give up your Cause: and if you say that, you ought to have put it
into your Syllogism. 3. There is yet another fault in your Argument. If you
would include the Controversy, ought you not to have said, All they who? etc.
Can your Conclusion be good, when your Propositions are bad and defective?

But to the business; If you say Infants, as such, were solemnly taken into the
Convenant of Grace by Circumcision; then I deny your Minor: Infants, as such,
were never by Circumcision, nor any other ways under the Law, taken into the
Covenant of Grace. Moreover, I affirm, that tho they were once solemnly taken
into Covenant with God by Circumcision, yet that Covenant, and that Covenant
Seed, viz. the natural Seed of Abraham, are both solemnly cast out; and this I
shall, God assisting, prove, and afterward take off all those pretended
Absurdities you in the 9 th and 10 th Pages of your Book mention, and give a
full Answer to your Reasons and Arguments you bring to prove the Covenant of
Circumcision was a Covenant of Grace.

1. And now to proceed, to raze and quite overthrow this main Foundation and
Pillar of Pedo-baptism; I shall argue as Mr. Tombs has done, whose Arguments
could never be yet answered.

We are first of all to consider, whether the Gospel Covenant, and the Covenant
of Circumcision made with Abraham be the same. Secondly, Inquire what Seed of
Abraham it is, of which it is said, I will be a God to thee, and to thy Seed,
Genesis 17.7. Thirdly, Whether there be the same Reason of Circumcision and of
Baptism in signifying the Gospel Covenant. Fourthly, Whether there is the same
Parity of Reason for the one, as for the other.

First, The Covenant God made with Abraham proved to be a mixed Covenant,
partly Gospel, and partly Legal.
The Covenant made with Abraham we affirm is not a pure Gospel Covenant, but a
mixed Covenant, partly made with his Natural or Fleshly Seed, and partly made
with him and his Spiritual Seed; and therefore we thus argue.

Arg. 1. If the Covenant takes its Denomination from the Promises, and the
Promises are mixed, some Evangelical, belonging to those to whom the Gospel
belongs; some Domestic, or Civil Promises, specially and absolutely
respectin^ the House and Natural Seed of Abraham, and Policy of Israel; then
it is a mixed Covenant.

But the Covenant takes its Denomination from the Promises, and the Promises
are mixed, some Evangelical, belonging to those to whom the Gospel belongs;
some Domestic, or Civil Promises, specially and absolutely respecting the
House and Natural Seed of Abraham, and Policy of Israel. Ergo, It Is a mixed
Covenant.

To make this clear, it is evident that that Promise was Evangelical, belonging
to those the Gospel belongs to, Genesis 17.5. I have made thee a Father of many
Nations: And so is that Genesis 15.5. So shall thy Seed be. In which it is
promised, that there shall be of the Nations many, or a great Number, that
shall be Abraham's Spiritual Children by believing, Romans 4.17, 18. Also it was
Evangelical, which we find in Genesis 12.3. And in thy Seed shall all the Kindreds
of the Earth be blessed. These, it is evident, respect all Gospel-Believers, who
are the Spiritual Seed of Abraham; see Gal. 3.8. And the Scripture foreseeing
that God would justify the Heathen through Faith, preached the Gospel unto
Abraham, saying, In thee shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. And
more directly to Christ, who is the Seed of Abraham, as Gal. 3.16. Now to
Abraham and his Seed were the Promises made. He says not, And to Seeds, as of
many, but as of one, And to thy Seed, which is Christ; that is, to Christ as
the Head and Surety of the Covenant of Grace, and so primarily and directly to
him, and then in him to all who are his; according to that in Gal. 3.29. And if
ye be Christ's, then are you Abraham 's Seed, and Heirs according to the
Promise. See also Acts 3.25.

2. Moreover, that the Domestic and Civil Promises were many, is plain: As,
See Mr. Tombs Exercit. p. 2.
1. Of multiplying the Seed of Abraham. 2. The Birth of Isaac. 3. Of the
continuation of the Covenant with Isaac. 4. Of the coming of Christ out of
Isaac. 5. The Bondage of the Israelites in Egypt, and their deliverance out
from thence, and of their possessing the Land of Canaan; Genesis 15.18. Genesis 17.8.
And I will give unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee, the Land wherein thou
art a Stranger, all the Land of Canaan for an everlasting Possession; and I
will be their God. So Genesis 15.18. In that same day God made a Covenant with
Abram, saying, Unto thy Seed have I given this Land, from the River of Egypt,
unto the great River Euphrates. Can you be so ignorant as to affirm this
Covenant and Contract made with Abraham, was made with the Natural Seed of
believing Gentiles? Nay, or that it was made to Abraham's Spiritual Seed?
Compare these Scriptures with Acts 7.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And thus it appears, the
Covenant made with Abraham, is a mixed Covenant, or a twofold Covenant, one
made with ^^s Natural Seed, the other with his Spiritual Seed: And this is
fully signified by Sarah and Hagar, the Freewoman and the Bondwoman; and
their Sons, Isaac and Ishmael, Gal. 4.22.

Secondly, The Seed of Abraham i^ many ways so called.

1. Christ is called the Seed of Abraham, as I said before, Gal. 3.16. by way
of Eminency, as he is the Head and Surety of the Gospel Covenant.

2. All the Elect, Romans 9.7. all Believers, Romans 4.11, 12, 16, 17, 18. Gal.
3.29. If ye be in Christ, then are ye Abraham 's Seed, and Heirs according to
the Promise.

3. There was a Natural Seed of Abraham, to whom the Inheritance did accrue,
this was Isaac, Genesis 21.22.

4. We read of another Natural Seed of Abraham, to whom the Inheritance, it is
positively said, did not belong, as Ishmael and the Sons of Keturah, Genesis 15.5.

But now can the Infant Seed of Believers, as such, be said to be the Seed of
Abraham in any of these four respects? add, if you can, a fifth.

1. As the Promise refers to Christ, (so they cannot be included) who is
Abraham's Seed in a special manner, to whom God promised he would be a God to,
and impart all Blessings of the Covenant unto, according to that glorious
Compact or Covenant of Redemption made between him and the Father before the
World began, upon the account of his blessed Undertakings, as our Mediator and
Surety, that so he might impart all those purchased Blessings and Privileges
to all who believe in him, or where given to him by the Father.

2. As ^^e Promise refers to the Elect Seed, or such who have the Faith of
Abraham, and walk in his steps, it cannot include the Infant Seed of Believing
Gentiles as such.

3. As the Promise refers to Isaac, who was Abraham's own natural Son according
to the Flesh, as well as according to the Promise, they are not the Seed of
Abraham.

4. As Ishmael and the Sons of Keturah were the Seed of Abraham, so the
Infant Seed of believing Gentiles, are not the Seed of Abraham. If you can add
a fifth sort of Abraham's Seed (I mean, such who are so called) from the
Scripture, pray do when you write again.

And from hence I thus argue;

If the Children of believing Gentiles, as such, Arg. 1.
are not the Natural Seed, nor the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, then they can
have no right to Baptism or Church Membership, by virtue of any
Covenant-Transaction God made with Abraham.

But the Children of believing Gentiles, as such, are not the Natural nor
Spiritual Seed of Abraham: Ergo, they can have no right to Baptism, nor
Church Membership, by virtue of any Covenant-Transaction God made with Abraham.

Your Brethren, called the Athenian Society, in p. 2. of their Athenian
Gazette, affirm, The Children of Believers are the Spiritual Seed of Abraham,
till they by Actual Sin, unrepented of, are otherwise.

1. To which I answer, The Athenian Society confuted.
Then some of the true Spiritual Seed of Abraham may perish eternally, and the
Promise is not sure to all his Spiritual Seed; which is directly contrary to
what St. Paul affirms in Romans 4.16. Therefore it is of Faith, that it might be
by Grace; to the end the Promise might be sure to all the Seed; not to that
only which is of the Law, but to that also which is of the Faith of Abraham,
who is the Father of us all.

From whence I argue:

All they that are in that Gospel Covenant which God made with Abraham, Arg. 2.
or who are his true Spiritual Seed, have the Promise of everlasting Life made
sure to them.

But all the Infant Seed of Believers, as such, have not the Promise of
everlasting Life made sure to them: Ergo, The Infant Seed of Believers, as
such, are not in that Gospel Covenant God made with Abraham, nor his true
Spiritual Seed. Take another;

Arg. 3.
If all the true Spiritual-Seed of Abraham have the Faith of Abraham, and walk
in the Steps of Abraham, even that Faith Abraham had before he was Circumcised;
then the Infant Seed of Believers, as such, are not the Spiritual Seed of
Abraham.

But the true Spiritual Seed of Abraham have the Faith of Abraham, and walk in
the Steps of Abraham, even that Faith Abraham had before he was Circumcised:
Ergo, The Infant Seed of Believers, as such, are not the true Spiritual Seed of
Abraham.

As to the Major, see Romans 4.11, 12.

The Minor cannot be denied; no Man in his right Wits will affirm, the Infants
of Believers, as such, have the Faith Abraham had before he was yet
Circumcised, nor do many of them; nor can they walk in the Steps of Abraham,
having not his Faith.

If any object and say, If Infants of Believers are not included in that
Covenant made with Abraham, How can any of them, who died in Infancy, be saved?

I answer; 1. Cannot God save dying Infants, unless they were included in that
Covenant made with Abraham? How then could the dying Infants of the Godly, who
lived before that Covenant was made with Abraham, be saved?

God has a thousand Ways, through Christ's Undertakings, to save dying Infants,
as Dr. Tailor notes, which we know not of: Secret things belong to God, and
revealed things to us.

2. Were they in any sense included in that Covenant made with Abraham, though
not accounted counted for his Natural or Spiritual Seed, yet it would not
follow from thence that they ought to be Baptized, because the Females, who
were truly Abraham's Natural Seed, and some of them might be his Spiritual Seed
too, yet were not Circumcised, no more than the Male Children of the Godly were
before Abraham's Time. And,

3. Were they in Covenant, as they are the Natural-Seed of Believers? then
Baptism however does not bring them into the Covenant: and if so, their State
is good, whether Baptized or no. And if Baptism brings them into the Covenant
of Grace, then they have not right thereto, because they are in the Covenant:
And if Baptism brings them into the Covenant of Grace, and makes the Covenant
sure to them, then it would follow, that it is in the Power of Men, either to
bring their Children into the Covenant of Grace, or keep them out; and that it
is in effect to say, Parents have Power to save or destroy their Children: and
how absurd that is, I will leave to all impartial Men to judge.

I shall, in the next place, prove, Covenant of Circumcision no Covenant of
Grace.
that the Covenant of Circumcision was not a Covenant of Grace, or Faith, and
therefore does not concern the Infant Seed of believing Gentiles.

1. I argue thus: Arg. 1.
That Covenant that was made to separate the Natural Seed of Abraham from all
other Nations of the World, and made sure unto them the Earthly Promise of the
Possession of the Land of Canaan, could not be a Covenant of Grace, which
concerns the Infant Seed of Believers under the Gospel.

But the Covenant of Circumcision was made to separate the Natural Seed of
Abraham from all other Nations of the World, and made sure unto them the
Earthly Promise of the Possession of the Land of Canaan. Ergo, The Covenant of
Circumcision could not be a Covenant of Grace, which concerns the Infants of
Believers under the Gospel.

The Major cannot be denied, because the Gospel, or second Covenant, is
established upon no such earthly Promises as the Covenant of Circumcision was,
not that we should have an Earthly Kingdom, or possess the Land of Canaan, but
it is established on better Promises than these, as Heb. 8.6.

Also if that Covenant concerned us, or our Children, who are Gentiles, then
the Gentiles had equal Right to that Earthly Inheritance; and then were not the
Natural Seed of Abraham separated from all other People upon the account of
that Earthly Blessing as their Possession only.

As to the Minor, see Genesis 17. I will establish my Covenant between me and
thee, v.7. And I will give unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee, the Land
wherein thou art a Stranger, all the Land of Canaan, for an everlasting
Possession; and I will be their God, v. 8.

This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy Seed after
thee; Every Man-Child among you shall be cirumcised, v. 10.

1. There were some who were circumcised, to whom the Promise of the
Gospel Covenant God made with Abraham did not belong, as Ishmael, Esau, etc.
God expressly said that his Covenant, ( i. e. the Covenant of Grace) was not
established with Ishmael, but with Isaac, and yet the Covenant of Circumcision
belonged to Ishmael as well as to Isaac.

See Genesis 17.20, 21. As for Ishmael, I have heard thee, behold, I have blessed
him, etc. But my Covenant will I establish with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear
unto thee. Compare this with Romans 9.7, 8, 9. Not because they are the Seed of
Abraham, are they all Children; that is, Children of the Covenant of Grace, or
the Children of God; but the Children of the Promise are counted for thy Seed;
see Gal. 4.29, 30. Nay, all that were in Abraham's House, whether born there or
Strangers, or such who were bought with his Money, were circumcised; but will
you say, all these were in that Gospel Covenant God made with him?

Moreover, there were other Persons in Abraham's House, who, no doubt, might
some of them be in the Covenant of Grace, and had the Promises belonging to
them, who were nevertheless not circumcised, namely, the Females; also Male
Infants dying before the eighth day coming from Abraham. Moreover, other godly
Men who were not of Abraham's Family, yet lived in his time, as Melchisedec,
Lot, Job, etc. none of these had right to be circumcised. But if any object and
say, the Females were circumcised in the Males; I answer with Mr. Tombs, it is
without Proof; and by like perhaps greater Reason it may be said, that the
Children of Believers are baptized in the Persons of their Parents, and
therefore are not to be baptized in their own Persons.

Also it is apparent that the Jews comprehended in that Covenant made with
Abraham, Being the Children of Abraham, as such, gave them no right to
Circumcision
and circumcised accordingly, were nevertheless not admitted to Baptism upon
that foot of account; which had the Covenant of Circumcision been a
Gospel Covenant, i. e. of the same nature, I see no reason why John Baptist
should deny their Argument, i. e. We are Abraham's Seed, etc. Hence it plainly
appears, that the right Evangelical Promises were not the adequate Reason of
Circumcision: But as I have before said, the Precept, or express Command of God
to Abraham. And from hence I shall infer this third Argument.

Arg. 3. Covenant of Circumcision made with Abraham, belonged to the ungodly as
well as the godly.
That Covenant that was made with, or did belong unto the fleshly Seed of
Abraham, and ungodly ones as well as the godly, was not a Covenant of Grace, or
Gospel Covenant. But the Covenant of Circumcision was made with, or did belong
to the fleshly Seed of Abraham, as Ishmael, Esau, and all the lineal Seed of
Abraham, who were ungodly, as well as to the godly.

Ergo, The Covenant of Circumcision was not a Covenant of Grace, or
Gospel Covenant.

Arg. 4.
If all who are in the Covenant of Grace, or Gospel Covenant, do know the Lord
from the greatest to the least of them; All in the new Covenant need not be
taught to know the Lord.
then the Covenant of Circumcision could not be the Covenant of Grace, or
Gospel Covenant. But all who are in the Covenant of Grace, or Gospel Covenant,
do know the Lord from the greatest to the least of them.

Ergo, The Covenant of Circumcision was not the Covenant of Grace.

This Argument is fully proved by that in Jer. 31.32, 33, 34. Speaking of the
new Covenant which God would make with the House of Israel, which should not be
according to the old, he goes on and tells us what God would do in that
Covenant-day; that he would put his Law into their inward parts, and write it
in their Hearts. And they shall teach no more every Man his Neighbor, and
every Man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know-me, from
the least* of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord, etc.

And indeed in this very respect the Gospel Covenant is not according to the
old, as the Lord said it should not be, as well as in diverse other cases; for
many of those who were in the old Covenant (to which Circumcision did
appertain) were Infants, tho all of them were not taken in by Circumcision: for
Female Infants were received into that old Covenant without it. Now these
Children who were taken into that Covenant, did not know the Lord. Infants
having no Understanding, know not their right Hand from their left, it is
therefore impossible they should know the Lord; A necessity that Infants be
taught to know the Lord.
and therefore also there was a necessity after they were in that Covenant,
that they should be taught to know the Lord: First, that God is, and what a God
he is, and so to know him, as to fear him and serve him in Sincerity.

But in the Gospel Covenant God promised it should be otherwise; all who were
received into that Covenant, should be Adult Persons, or such who did know the
Lord, which plainly implies no ignorant Infant should be taken into that
Covenant, and be a Member of that Church State; for if so, then it would
follow, such would have the like need to be taught to know the Lord, as they
had in the old Covenant Church State. And remakable it is, that this Text does
clearly intimate, that all who should be taken into the Gospel Covenant, or
Gospel Church, should be discipled or taught, first to know God: for to be
taught or discipled, is all one and the same thing, which agrees with Christ's
great Commission, Matthew. 28.19, 20. where he gave Directions who, or what kind
of Persons they were to be, that he would have his Apostles receive into his
Gospel Church: and that they should be all of them first taught or made
Disciples, and as such be baptized, is clearly declared. Now that this Text in
Jer. 31. refers to the Gospel Covenant, is evident; see Heb. 8.7, 8, 9, 10.

That Covenant that was a part or branch of the old Covenant, or Covenant of
Works, Arg. 5.
was not a Covenant of Grace, or Gospel Covenant.

The Covenant of Circumcision a Covenant of Works.
But the Covenant of Circumcision was a part or branch of the old Covenant, or
Covenant of Works. Ergo, The Covenant of Circumcision was not a Covenant of
Grace, or Gospel Covenant.

The Major cannot be denied.

The Minor is easily proved. That which bound or obliged all those who were
under it, or did it, to keep the whole Law, and was also abrogated* or taken
away by Christ, with all the other Rites and Shadows of the old Covenant, was a
part or branch of the said old Covenant. But Circumcision bound or obliged all
who were circumcised to keep the whole Law, Circumcision obliged Persons to
keep the whole Law.
and also the same Rite of Circumcision was abrogated, with all other Rites and
Shadows of the old Covenant by Christ, Ergo, Circumcision was a part or branch
of the old Covenant. See Gal. 5* (...) testify to every Man that is
circumcised, that he is a Debtor to keep the whole Law.

Arg. 6.
That Covenant which was in its nature and quality as much a Covenant of Works
as the Covenant made with Adam, or the Sinai-Covenant, Covenant of Circumcision
of the same nature with the Sinai-Covenant.
was not a Covenant of Grace, or Gospel Covenant, whereof Christ is the
Mediator. But the Covenant of Circumcision was in its nature and quality as
much a Covenant of Works as that Covenant made with Adam, or the
Sinai-Covenant, Ergo, The Covenant of Circumcision wa^ not a Covenant of Grace,
or Gospel Covenant, Read Reverend Mr. Philip Cary's Desence and Proof of the
substance of this Argument, in his just Reply to Mr. John Flavel, p. 59, 60.

Thus he says (and doubeless speaks the truth) viz. That Adam's Covenant was a
Covenant of Works, cannot rationally be denied; for as much as Life was
implicitly promised unto him upon his Obedience, and Death was explicitly
threatened in case of his Disobedience; upon these terms he was to stand or
fall. And that the Sinai-Covenant was of the same nature, he has in the said
Treatise clearly proved, both of them requiring perfect Obedience, and neither
of them admitting of Faith in a Redeemer; the Sinai-Covenant commanded perfect
Obedience, under the pain of a Curse; Cursed is every one that continues not
in all things that is written in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10.

It accepted (as he shows) of no short Endeavors, nor gave any Strength, and
is called a Ministration of Death and of Condemnation, 2 Cor. 3. And moreover,
it is called in express terms, the old Covenant which God made with the Children
of Israel when he brought them up out of the Land of Egypt, Heb. 8.9. Also the
new Covenant is said to be directly contrary unto it, or not according to it,
but opposed thereto, and that there was no Righteousness by it, nor Life: for,
as the Apostle shows, if there had, Christ is dead in vain; and besides, the
Apostle says it is done away. Now all these things being considered, Mr. Flavel,
it is evident, does but beat the Air, and darken Counsel; and all that he has
said in his last Book in answer to that worthy Gentleman Mr. Carry, deserves no
further Answer.

Now, says he, that the Covenant of Circumcision is of the same stamp, is
evident; for tho God promised to be a God to Abraham and to his Seed, Genesis 17.
7, 8. as he did also in the Sinai-Covenant to the same People in the
Wilderness; yet still it was upon condition of Obedience, with an answerable
threatening in case of Disobedince, ver. 9, 10. Thou shall keep my Covenant
therefore, thou, and thy Seed after thee in their Generations. This is my
Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy Seed after thee; Every
Man-Child shall be circumcised. And, ver. 14. The uncircumcised Male-Child,
whose Flesh of his sore-Skin is not circumcised, that Soul shall be cut off
from his People; he has broken my Covenant. The same terms, says he, with the
former. Besides, it is evident that Circumcision indi^pensibly obliged all that
were under it, to a perfect universal Obedience to the whole revealed Will of
God, as I hinted before, Gal. 5.3.

And as the Terms were the same, so were the Promises; that which was the great
Promise of the Covenant of Circumcision, was the Land of Canaan, and God to be
their God, in fulfilling that earthly Promise to Abraham's Natural Seed, upon
the Condition of the keeping that Covenant on their parts.

That which Mr. Flavel has said in his last Reply, Mr. Flavel answered, in
what he says in his Book, p. 217.
(in his Book called, A succinct and seasonable Discourse) to Mr. Carry, is
mainly to prove that there is but one Covenant of Works, page 217, 218, etc.

To which I answer, by way of Concession, yet must say, that Covenant had
several Ministrations and Additions, as had also the Covenant of Grace; because
the Covenant of Works was made with Adam, by which he stood in the time of his
Innocence, justified and accepted by virtue thereof.

Could not God give forth a second Ministration or Transcript of his Righteous
and Holy Law; though not to Justification, yet to aggravate his Sin, and so to
his just Condemnation* And does not St. Paul assert the same thing, Romans 3.19,
20. compared with Romans 7.13. That Sin by the Commandment (or Law) might become
exceeding sinful? So Gal. 3.19.

Nay, I will affirm always generally, when the Scriptures of the New Testament
speak of the Old Covenant, or first Covenant, The Sinai Covenant, called the
Old or first Covenant in the Scripture.
or Covenant of Works, it passes by in silence the Covenant made with Adam; and
more immediately and directly applies it to the Sinai-Covenant, and to the
Covenant of Cirrumcision, as all careful Readers, who read the Epistles to the
Romans, Galathians, and to the Hebrews, may clearly find. But to proceed,
Though we say there is but one Covenant of Grace, yet it is evident there were
several distinct Ministrations or Additions of it; yet we say, the Promise of
the Gospel, or Gospel Covenant, was the same in all Ages, in respect of things
promised, with the Nature and Quality thereof, which is a free and absolute
Covenant, without Works, or any Conditions or foreseen Acts of Righteousness,
or any thing to be done by the Creature, Romans 4. 5.

The Substance and essential Part of this Covenant, is Christ, Faith, a new
Heart, See Mr. Tombs. The New Covenant had diverse Additions or Transcripts, or
diverse Ministrations.
Regeneration, Remission of Sins, Sanctification, Perseverance, and everlasting
Life. Yet this Evangelical Covenant had diverse Forms or Transcripts of it,
which signified those things, and various Sanctions by which it was given forth
and confirmed. To Adam the Promise was made, under the name of the Seed of the
Woman bruising the Head of the Serpent; to Enoch, Noah, etc. In other Forms to
Abraham, under the name of his Seed, in whom all the Nations of the Earth
should be blessed. To Moses, by the name of a great Prophet of his Brethren
like unto him; and it was also signified to him under dark Shadows and
Sacrifices. Unto David, under the name of a Successor in his Kingdom. In the
New Testament, in plain words, We all with open Face, beholding as in a Glass
the Glory of the Lord, etc. 2 Cor. 3.18.

But now, because there were so many Additions of the Gospel Promise and
New Covenant; are there so many New Covenants? this being so, Mr. Flavel has
done nothing to remove Mr. Cary's Arguments, but they stand as a Rock. Take
another of them.

Arg. 7. Faith not reckoned to Abraham ^^ Circumcision.
That Covenant in which Faith was not reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness,
could not be a Gospel-Cov^^^n^, or a Covenant of Grace. But the Scripture is
express, that Faith was not reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness when he was
Circumcised, but in Uncircumcision, Romans 4* 9, 10. Ergo, The Covenant of
Circumcision was not a Gospel Covenant, or a Covenant of Grace.

Arg. 8.
That Law or Covenant which is contradistinguished, or opposed unto the
Righteousness of Faith, could not be a Covenant of Faith, or a Gospel Covenant.
Covenant of Faith, and that of Circumcision, contradistinguished.
But the Law or Covenant of Circumcision is, by the Apostle plainly opposed to,
or contradistinguished unto the Righteousness of Faith, Romans ^. 1^. Ergo, The
Law, or Covenant of Circu^^ision was not a Gospel Covenant. And from hence, Mr.
Carry argues thus, By the way (says he) let it be observed, in reference to the
two foregoing Arguments, which I have already proved that that Covenant that is
not of Faith, must needs be a Covenant of Works, there b^ing no Medium betwixt
them, and consequently must be the same for substance with that made with Adam,
and that on Mount Sinai with the Children of Israel.

Arg. 9.
That Covenant that is plainly represented* to us in Scripture as a
(...)-Covenant, in and by which there was imposed such a Yoke upon the Necks of
the Jews, Circumcision a Yoke of Bondage.
which neither those in the Apostles ^^me, nor their Fathers were able to bear,
could be no other than a Covenant of Works, and not of Grace.

But the Scriptures do plainly represent, such was the Nature of the Covenant
of Circumcision, Acts 15.10. Gal. 5.1, 2, 3. Ergo, The Covenant of Circumcision
was not a Gospel Covenant, but a Covenant of Works. Thus Mr. Carry argues also.
And thus we have proved from God's Word, and sound Arguments, that the Covenant
of Circumcision was not a Gospel Covenant.

Object. But lest any should think, that we shut out all dying Infants from
having any Benefit by Christ.

I answer; Infants saved by the Covenant of Redemption, or by Christ's
Undertakings.
I doubt not but God might comprehend them in that glorious Covenant or Compact
made between him and our Surety in the Covenant of Redemption; but as I said
before, Secret things belong to God.

But let me here add one word or two further, i. e. Circumcision, you say, was
a Privilege; so we say too; but not such a Privilege as you do imagine.

1. It does profit as a Privilege, because it was given as a Token or Sign to
Abraham's natural Seed, that they should have the Land of Canaan for an
everlasting possession.

2. As a Token or Sign to them of the giving forth of the Law on Mount Sinai.
He dealt his Laws and Statutes to Israel, he did not do so to any other Nation.
This Rite therefore could not be a Gospel-Rite, nor the Covenant it was a sign
of a Gospel Covenant, in which the Gentile Christians are concerned: And thus
the Apostle argues, Romans 3. 1. What Advantage then has the Jew? or what Profit
is there in Circumcision? ver. 2. Much every way; chiefly, because unto them
were committed the Oracles of God. You may soon know the Nature of that
Covenant made with Abraham's natural Seed; and of Circumcision, which was a
Sign of it: The chiefest Privilege which attended it, was the giving to them,
i. e. the People of Israel, the Law of the Ten Commandments.

Circumcision a Privilege, on condition of keeping the Law.
3. Circumcision by the Doctrine of St. Paul, was a Privilege if they kept the
Law (...) for, Circumcision verily profits, if thou keep the Law; but if thou
break the Law, thy Circum^ision is made Uncircumcision, or a Nullity, and
profits thee nothing, that is, if thou keep not the Law perfectly. And thus
speak our late Annotators on the place; If thou [Jew] keep the Law perfectly,
to which Circumcision obliges, Gal. 5.3. If otherwise thou transgressest the
Law, thy Circumcision avails thee nothing, it gives thee no Privilege above the
Uncircumcised. What is now become (this being so) of that mighty Privilege
Abraham's Infant (...) (as such) had by Circumcision, if the chief Profit or
Privilege was, because unto them the Law should be given, which could not give
Life, but was a Covenant of Works? then the chiefest Profit lay not in it, as
it was an Ordinance of Initiation into the Church: Sure, had Paul been of your
Judgment, he would have rather past by that Privilege, when he spoke of
Circumcision, which he calls the chief, and have said, chiefly in that it was a
Seal of Infant Church Membership. But since he speaks the quite contrary, who
shall we believe, you, or the great Apostle of the Gentiles? And evident it is,
he confirms the same Doctrine, Gal. 5.3. For I ^^stify to (...) Man that is
Circumcised, that he is a D^^tor to keep the whole Law. And,

Hence it is said to be a Yoke of Bondage, which neither they nor their Fathers
could bear, Acts 15. because it obliged them to univer^^l Obedience, or to keep
the Law perfectly, and brought them under a Curse if they did not, Gal. 3.10.

These things considered, fully show of what stamp and nature Circumcision was,
together with that Covenant to which it did appertain.

I come now to what you further assert in the 9 th Page of your Book, viz.

That Infants were in Covenant under the Law, and by special appointment of
God, Genesis 17.7. but are not now cast out by Christ under the Gospel. This
differs but little from the old Argument of Mr. Baxter, Sidenham, etc. the
latter speaks thus, Infants of Believers were never cast out of the visible
Church of which they were once.

Answ. 1. Infants being once Members of the Jewish Church, Infants the Members
once of the Jewish-Church, yet not of the Gospel Church.
does not prove they were ever Members of the Gospel Church: the Male Infants
of God's Priests under the old Covenant, when grown up, had other Privileges:
If we must call Circumcision a Privilege, which the Sons of Christ's Ministers
have no right to under the Gospel, and yet no where in express words in the
New Testament excluded from that Privilege.

2. But I have proved the Covenant for Infants, in Covenanting under the Law,
was no Gospel Covenant, and so concerns not our Infants.

3. According to that Maxim, Ownis privatio intimat habitum; you know that
every Dispossession implies a Possession. Infants therefore cannot be cast out
of the Gospel Church, before it can be proved they were ever admitted. If Mr.
Burkitt, or the Athenian Society, or any Men living, can tell us in what
visible Administration Children were admitted visible Church Members before
Abraham's days, which was above 2000 Years; and you say somewhat, you affirm
they were always in Covenant.

Mr. Sidenham makes mention of a twofold being in Covenant; 1. In relation to
Election. 2. To be in Covenant, In faci^ visibilis Ecclesiae.

To this I answer; The Covenant of Circumcision belonged to the Children of the
Flesh, to Ishmael and Esau, as well as Jacob, who were not in the Election of
Grace: therefore those who were Circumcised, were not so in Covenant. Children
of Unbelievers may be in that sense in Covenant, as well as the Children of
Believers; as many of them afterward prove to be, nay, may be more of them
than of the Children of Believers.

2. As touching Infants being in Covenant, In facie visibilis Ecclesiae, in the
face of a visible Church. I answer, Though they were so in the Jewish Church
under the Old Covenant, some with Circumcision were brought in, and some
without it; yet that Covenant, and Covenant-Seed are (as I have and shall yet
prove) cast out, which will be a final Answer.

Thus I argue;

Arg. 10. The Old Covenant, and Old Covenant-Seed both cast out.
If the Covenant for incovenanting of Infants was the Old Covenant signified by
Hagar, and that Covenant-Seed signified by Ishmael, are cast out, then the
natural or fleshly Seed of Believers are cast out, or not to be admitted into
the Gospel Church.

But the Covenant for Incoven^^^ing of Infants, was the Old Covenant signified
by Hagar, and that Covenant-Seed signified by Ishmael, are cast out.

Ergo, The (...) or fleshly Seed of Believers are cast out, or not to be
admitted into the Gospel Church^ see Gal. 4.22, 23, 24, 25, 26. For it is
written, that Abraham had two Sons, the one by a B^nd^ woman, the other by a
(...) woman. Ver. 24. Which things are (...) Alleg^ry; for these are the two
Covenants, the one from the Mount Sinai, which g^ndereth to Bondage, which is
Hagar, etc. Ver. 30. Nevertheless, which says the Scripture? Cast out the
Bondwoman and her Son; for the Son of the Bondwoman shall not be Heir with
the Son of the Freewoman.

By Hagar is meant, all agree, the Old Covenant; and by casting her out, is
held forth the abolishing or taking away of the Old Covenant; He took away the
First, that he might establish the Second. Heb. 10.9.


2. By Ishmael is meant the natural Seed of Abraham; and so the natural Seed of
all Godly Men of his Race that succeeded him, who were Members of that Church;
and as the late Annotators note by this place is signified, The total
Destruction of the Jewish Church, which consisted of Parents and their
Children, or the whole Nation of Israel, this Church and Church-Seed, and
manner of Church Membership, is cast out and gone for ever.

Pray read Mr. Cary's Solemn Call, and what I have formerly said in that Book
entitled, Gold Restn'd; or, Baptism in its Primitive Purity, p. 113.

Mr. Carry and we all say, That Children were once admitted Members of the
Jewish Church: The Old Church State of the Jews is gone.
But evident it is, that God has now quite pulled down and razed that House to
the Foundation thereof, I mean that National Church of the Jews, and broke up
Housekeeping, and turned the Bondwoman and her Son ( i. e. the fleshly Seed,
or natural Offspring of Abraham) out of Doors; the natural Branches are broken
off, and God has now built him a new and more glorious and spiritual House
under the Gospel, into which he admitted none as his Houshold-Servants, to
dwell in this his Spiritual Family, or Gospel Church, but Believers only, or
such as profess themselves so to be: Yea, 1 Pet. 2.5.
(says St. Peter) as lively Stones are built up a spiritual House, etc. And
that the Old House, the Jewish Church State, with all the Appurtenances, Rites
and Privileges of it, are abolished, or pulled down, and a new one built and
set up, into which Infants are not to be admitted; is very evident; Heb. 7.12.
For the Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of
the whole Law; which must needs include Circumcision, with all the
Appurtenances and Privileges belonging to it. Infant Church Membership came in
with the Old Covenant, and is gone with it.
And therefore as Infant Church Membership came in with the Law of
Circumcision, and as a direct Part of the Old Covenant, or Old Law, so likewise
plain it is, that it went out and was disannulled with it.

Take again my former Simily, viz.

What Privileges soever are given to any Person by an Act of Parliament, which
said Law was to continue in Force so long and no longer; then when that time is
expired, and another Parliament makes a new Law, where many things are
contained that were in the first Law: But those diverse Priviledg^^ given to
those Persons in the former Law, are left out in this latter Act; would it not
be a piece of Folly for any of them to plead those Privileges, by virtue of a
Law that is gone, and now not in any force? But to come a little nearer the
case, in a more apt Simile; I had this Simile once before, but because it is so
full I repeat it.
Suppose a Man should have a Legacy bequeathed to him, by the Will and
Testament of his Friend, and yet afterward his Friend sees good to make
another Will, which is his last Will and Testament; and in this last Will and
Testament he leaves him quite out, not mentioning his Name, bequeathing no such
Legacy to him; would it not be folly in him to sue for that Legacy left him in
the first Will and Testament:

Sir, the Case is thus in hand, we read of two Covenants or Testaments, an Old
and a New, a First and a Second: Now in the Old Will, or Old Testament, Infants
were admitted to the Privilege of Church Membership, in that Legal or National
Church of the Jews; And National Church Priviledges are now made null and void
by the Gospel Covenant, which is Christ's last Will and Testament, in which
Infant Church Membership is quite left out, their Names not being mentioned, as
having right to any Gospel-Ordinance, as Baptism, the Lord's Supper, etc. If we
would know the Mind of God herein, we must of necessity have re^ourse to
Christ's last Will and Testament, since the Gospel is so called, and that the
first, or old is taken away, and there is no Man can prove any one old Rite
that did appertain to the natural Offspring of Abraham, or Believers, remains
to them, which is not mentioned in the new or last Will and Testament of Jesus
Christ; it is plain they had (or least wise) some of them other external
Privileges besides that of Circumcision; and yet I see no Man contend for any
one Rite but only this they call the Seal of the Covenant. Why might not
Ministers plead for all their Sons to have right to the Ministry, The Athenian
Society's first Query more fully answered.
since that Privilege was given them in the Old Testament? And for all
Male-Children that open the Womb, to be holy to the Lord? which Blessing
belonged to them under the Law, and also plead for the Tenths and First Fruits?
etc.

I desire you and the Athenian Society carefully to consider this, and weigh
what we have said; we have showed you and them how Infants who were once in
Covenant, that is, in the Jewish or old Covenant, are cast out, or left out;
for indeed they were never admitted into the New-Testament-Church; but since
they are not put in, and the old Covenant and old Church Membership being cast
out and gone, in vain is it for any to plead their Right by an abrogated Law.

Besides, you say Circumcision was the Seal of that Covenant, by virtue of
which Infants had a Right to Church Membership; if so, it is evident that
Covenant is gone, because it is cancelled; for the tearing off; or breaking off
the Seal, we all look upon the cancelling the Covenant: That Circumcision (the
Seal, as you call it) is broken off, I am sure you cannot deny: Sir, what is
then become of your Covenant for incovenanting Children?

Object. But may be you will object, and say, that you do not contend for that
particular Rite or Institution, but of a visible Church Membership of Infants
perpetual in all Ages, and an indefinite Seal.

1. Reply; How does it appear the Infants of the Godly before Abraham's time,
had any right to visible Church Membership? or what Seal had they?

2. Such a Right is a mere Figment, like Idea (...); all Institutions merely
positives, are of such a Rite in particular; and an initial Seal is merely
positive, as Signs that are not natural, but by the Will of the Appointer; and
therefore there is no initial Seal indefinite.

Sir, now you have no way left, but to see, since the old Covenant is
cancelled, whether you can find the Baptism of Infants in the New Testament,
and there taught, laid down and prefixed to it, as Circumcision was to the old?
Do that, and you do all; do not that, and all you do is just nothing.

But you in Page 9. raise up many Absurdities that follow this, that Infants
are cast out, or not taken into the Gospel Church.

Then Infants, say you, are in a worse condition since the coming of Christ
than they were before, and are Losers by him instead of Gainers, although the
number more, and^.

Answ. You should, before you brought this pretended Absurdity upon us, have
showed what Advantage did accrue to Infants by Circumcision, and how that added
to the goodness of their Condition; it put them, it is plain, to a great deal of
Pain; and the Apostle says, it was a Yoke of Bondage, which neither they nor
their Fathers could bear.

Being Members of that Church, did not save them, nor purge away Original Sin,
etc. tho I doubt not it served for the end God appointed it; yet I say, how did
it add to the goodness of Infants Condition?

2. Then, say you, the Privileges of the Gospel are straiter and narrower than
those of the Law.

Answ. If you once imagine, that the outward or external Privileges of the
Gospel are larger, External Privileges under the Law greater than ours under
the Gospel.
or so large as those were under the Law, you are greatly mistaken. The Jews
and Jewish Teachers or Priests had many external Privileges which Christians
and Ministers under the Gospel have not; they had a lovely Country promised to
them, a Land that flowed with Milk and Honey: outward Peace, Riches, and
gathering of Wealth, were Privileges belonging to them; but we under the Gospel
have no such Privileges, but are to expect Persecution, and what not.

Yet our Privileges are better and greater, tho more spiritual, it is a Covenant
established upon better Promises: our Children, when grown up, sit under the
clear and glorious Light of the Gospel which they and theirs then had held
forth but in dark Shadows.

Moreover, Then the Church State was confined to the natural Seed of Abraham,
etc. But now all in all Nations who repent and believe the Gospel, the poor
Gentiles are now become Fellow-Heirs indeed: our spiritual Privileges do
infinitely excel theirs, but not in Externals, now greater Infusions of the
holy Spirit.

O Sir, what Privileges had the Gentiles or their Children then? is not the
case mended with us?

3. You say, If it were the Will of God Infants under the Gospel should be
reckoned as out of his Covenant, who were in Covenant, then it follows, say
you, that our Savior was unfaithful, or forgetful to his Church, in that he
never acquainted her with this Alteration; but not one word by way of
Prohibition do we find in all the New Testament, from whence we may conclude,
that Christ's not repealing the Practice of initiating Infants, nor forbidding
their Admission into the Church by Baptism, etc.

Answ. 1. I answer, had it been the Will of God, that Infants should under the
Gospel be admitted into the Church by Baptism, Christ you might rather say, had
been forgetful or unfaithful in not giving the least intimation of his Mind and
Pleasure therein, who declared all things plainly from the Father, and was
faithful as a Son over his own House.

2. That which is not contained in his last Will and Testament in this and
other matters, is sufficient to declare his Mind and Will in the Negative. And
so you know it is in all last Wills and Testaments among Men, if it be not
expressed in the Affirmative, it needs not be expressed in the Negative; and if
not because it is not forbidden it may be done, so may a hundred things more;
nay, many Jewish Rites and Popish Innovations too, for where are they forbid?
The sum therefore of our Answer to all you say upon this account, is this; The
Privileges which are Rites, Ordinances or Sacraments, are not so many as you
would have, or so many as the Jews of old had, nor are they to be administered
according as you fancy or approve of, or according to your Reasonings, but
according to God's express Appointment. Rightly does Mr. Ball in his
forementioned Book speak, Posit. 3, 4. p. 38. But in whatsoever Circumcision
and Baptism do agree or differ, Mr. Ball's Posit. 3, 4* p. 38.
we must look to the Institution, and neither stretch it wider, nor draw it
narrower than the Lord had made it; for he is the Instituter of the Sacraments
according to his good Pleasure; and it is our part to learn of him, both to
whom, how, and to what end the Sacraments are to be administered, how they
agree, and wherein they differ: in all which we must affirm nothing, but what
God has taught us, and as he has taught us.

Were it not thus, how could we deny or oppose the Papists seven Sacraments? or
condemn Salt, Oil Spittle to be used in Baptism, which they use in it, seeing
these are not forbid? But well says Tertullian, Is it lawful, because it is
not forbidden? it is therefore not lawful, because it is not commanded.

You say, Page 10. before you end this Argument, Let me suggest one thing more
to your Considerations, namely, What a mighty Stumbling Block this Doctrine of
the Anabaptists lays in the way of the Jews Conversion to Christianity? Will
this, say you, encourage a Jew's Conversion to embrace the Religion of Jesus,
to tell him of the high and glorious Privileges that he shall be interested in
himself upon his believing on him, but for his Children they are cast out?

Answ. Did this stumble them in the Apostolical Days, who were told, that
Circumcision availed nothing, nor Uncircumcision? the truth is, if Circumcision
availed nothing, but was a Yoke of Bondage, then why should that stumble them?
It might be a greater Stumbling Block in their way, to tell them their
Church State, and all their Privileges are now gone, and now they must not look
upon themselves better than the Gentiles; no more Scepter in Judah, no Land of
Canaan, no Temple, no High Priest, the Levites Sons, as such, now no more
Ministers, no Succession of Priesthood: What of all this, when they hear of
better Privileges for them? And that their Infants who die, may go to Heaven,
tho not circumcised nor baptized? and if they live to be Men and Women, and do
believe, (or God does please to call them) the Promise of Pardon of Sin, and of
the holy Spirit is to them, and that they shall be saved, Acts 2. 39. Are not
they and all others told, that old things are passed away, and all things are
become new? The old Covenant and Church of the Jews dissolved.
etc. 2 Cor. 5.16. Wherefore henceforth we know no Man after the Flesh: it
seems then that heretofore there had been a knowledge of Persons after the
Flesh; and it is plain there was, that because the Jews were of the natural or
fleshly Seed of Abraham, and were therefore all of them admitted to the
Privilege of external Church Membership, while others were exempted: But we see
the Apostle resolves henceforth to disclaim any such Value, Esteem, Preference
or Knowledge of them, or any others, upon the account of mere fleshly Descent.
And to this very purpose immediately subjoins in the following Verse, Therefore
if any Man be in Christ, See Mr. Cary's Solemn Call.
he is a new Creature; old things now are past away, and all things are become
new: the old Church and old Church Membership, Privileges, Rites and
Ordinances, and a new Church State, new Ordinances, new Rites, a new Seed, and
a new way of Introduction unto the participation of Gospel-Priviledges and
Church Membership; and if this should stumble them, who can help it? We know
they have stumbled upon as bad Rocks as this. Moreover, denying Infants any
right to Gospel Ordinances, cannot fill the Mouths of Jewish Children with
clamorours and passionate Complaints against Christianity, because they could
not see Jewish Children had such benefit by Circumcision as you intimate: no,
no, they must yield to the Sovereign Will of the great Lord, and plead for no
more Privileges, nor any otherwise than he sees good to ordain and appoint.

I am sure, if what you say was true, Pedo-baptists Argument for Believers
Seed, etc. of ill consequence.
it is enough to fill the Mouths of poor Unbelievers Children among us who are
Gentiles, with clamorous Complaints against their Parents, if they did regard
what you say: and doubtless there are more of them, I mean more Children born
of Ungodly Parents, than such born of Godly Parents: And what may they say, and
how may they expostulate their own Condition? Alas! alas! sad is our State, our
Parents were wicked and ungodly People, and we are by that means left of God;
to us belongs no Covenant, no Sacraments, nor hopes of Mercy; God has taken
none but the Children of Godly Persons into Covenant! We were baptized, alas,
but had no right to it; our Condition is as bad as the State of the Children of
Pagans and Turks! Sir, if People did consider well the Purport of your
Doctrine, they must needs have their Hearts rise against you: Nay all or most
Children may be in a doubt, whether their Parents were truly godly, and so in
Covenant or not; for if not, you must fly to some other Argument to prove their
Baptism and Church-Privileges, than that of their Parents being in Covenant.
True, the case under the Law was another thing; for if their Parents were Jews,
or the natural Seed of Abraham, whether godly or not, yet they knew they had
right to those external Privileges. And so much to your Absurdities, and they
are returned on your own Head.

In page 11. you lay down your Arguments to prove the Covenant made with
Abraham was a Covenant of Grace. 1. From the Language and Expression of it. 2.
From the Duration of it. 3. From the Blessings by it.

Mr. Burkits first Argument to prove the Covenant of Circumcision a
Gospel Covenant.
1. Your first Note is this; The Language and Expression of it, Genesis 17. 7. I
will be a God unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee. Now (say you) is not this
a pure Gospel-Phrase, and shows it to be a Covenant with Abraham in Christ? I
pray, how comes the Almighty God (who upon the Breach of the Covenant of Works
made with us in Adam, became our enraged Enemy) to be a God unto fallen Man,
any other ways than by a Mediator? etc.

Answ. 1. I have proved that Covenant made with Abraham, was a mixed Covenant;
and I deny not but the Covenant of Grace made in Christ was promised to
Abraham, which takes in only the true Spiritual Seed, and to all those God is
in a special manner become a God unto.

All God's Covenanting Transactions since the Fall, are by means of the
Mediator.
2. Evident it is, all manner of God's Covenanting Transactions since the Fall,
of what nature soever, have been no other ways, than through the interposition
of a Mediator; as that with Noah about the Flood, etc. Genesis 9.8, 9. in that God
showed himself to be the God of the Old World; and so he is by Creation and
Providence, etc. Yet it does not follow, that Covenant was the Covenant of
Grace, or that God has received them into special favor with himself. So when
God gave out that fiery Law on Mount Sinai, he told them, Exodus 20.2. I am the
Lord your God, etc. This was the very Introduction to that part of the Law
which was written in Stone; which nevertheless the Apostle expressly calls it,
A Ministration of Death and Condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.7, 8. and that it killed,
The Sinai Covenant a Covenant of Works.
and could not give Life. Now must this be a Covenant of Faith or Grace? How is
it then that the Apostle Paul says, The Law is not of Faith; also the Covenant
of Grace gives Life?

But I argue thus, The Law could not give Life; Ergo, The Law was not a
Covenant of Grace.

And so much to your first Note, or Observation.

2. Your second Observation is, Mr. Burkits 2d Arg.
The Duration and Continuance of this Covenant made with Abraham, the Lord
calls it an Everlasting Covenant, etc.

Answ. You might have left out this, only it helps to add to the number; you
have answered this your self, in saying, The Hebrew word for Everlasting,
sometimes signifies no more than a long continuance of Time. Sir, We know it
very well; and those Mosaical Rites that ended in Christ, are said to be for
Everlasting. But when the Lord says, he will be a Person's God, for ever and
ever, or everlastingly, it denotes his being so to all Eternity: But God never
said he would be the God everlastingly, or to all Eternity, to all who were
concerned in the Covenant of Circumcision: Nor was he Ishmael's God so, though
Circumcised; and has he not cast off that whole Nation of the Jews, with whom
he made that Covenant? and is not so their God now, though he is, I confess, to
all Eternity, or everlastingly, the God of all Abraham's Spiritual Seed, viz.
all true Believers in Christ.

3. Your third and last Argument or Note, Mr. Burkits 3d Arg.
to prove the Covenant of Circumcision a Covenant of Grace, is taken from the
Benefits and Blessings conveyed by it; To be a God unto him, and to his Seed,
and that everlastingly, is a most comprehensive Gospel-Blessing; for hereby God
gives a Person an Interest in all that he is, and in all that he has, so far as
can be communicated to a Creature. This Blessing promised to Abraham,
comprehends Christ, Grace, Holiness here, and Glory and Happiness hereafter.
And accordingly we find the Apostle, Heb. 8. uses the same Expression with this
of God's to Abraham; I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People.

Answ. This is idem, and bis idem, culpandum est, the same again which is
already answered. Sir, Is God everlastingly a God to Abraham, and to all his
fleshly Seed; and to Believers, who are the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, and to
all their fleshly Seed; I say, is this so? Does God give himself, all he is,
and all he has, to every Believer, and to all his fleshly Seed? Have all their
Children, or every one of them, Christ, Grace, Holiness here, and Glory and
eternal Happiness hereafter? Or are you not to be justly blamed thus to jumble
things confusedly together? It Is true, The happy State of all in the Covenant
of Grace.
the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, and all his true Spiritual Seed, (who
are the Elect) have Interest in all God is; and has so far as it can be
communicated to Creatures; and we know they have Christ, (as well as are
Christ's, as Paul notes, Gal. 4.) and Grace here, and shall have Glory
hereafter: But a multitude of Abraham's natural Offspring, and the natural
Offspring of Believers, have neither Christ, nor Grace, nor shall be saved,
but perish eternally. Therefore this may serve for an Answer, with what I have
proved before, touching the Nature of that twofold Covenant made with Abraham.

To what you speak in the second place, page 12, 13. as also in your third
Reply, viz. If the Covenant which God made with Abraham, be one and the same
with the Covenant of Grace; then our Infant Seed have right to Baptism.

Answ. You had this before, and I have already answered it, only I shall add a
Passage or two of Martin Luther.

Paul therefore concludes with this Sentence, (says he) They which are of
Faith, Mart. Luther on Gal. 3. p. 115.
are the Children of Abraham: That corporal Birth, or carnal Seed, make not the
Children of Abraham before God: As if he would say, There is none before God
accounted as the Child of this Abraham (who is the Servant of God, whom God
has chosen and made Righteous by Faith) through carnal Generation, but such
Children must be given before God, as he was a Father, but he was a Father of
Faith, was justified, and pleased God; not because he could beget Children
after the Flesh, not because he had Circumcision under the Law, but because he
believed in God, He therefore that will be a Child of the believing Abraham,
must also himself believe, or else he is not a Child of the Elect, the
believing and the justified Abraham; but only the begetting Abraham, which is
nothing else but a Man conceived, born and wrapped in Sin, without the
forgiveness of Sins, without Faith, without the Holy Ghost, as another Man is,
and therefore condemned: Such also are the Children carnally begotten of him,
having nothing in them like unto their Father, but Flesh and Blood, Sin and
Death, therefore these are also damned. This glorious boasting then, we are the
Seed of Abraham, is to no purpose. Thus far, and much more to the same purpose
he excellently dilates upon.

Mr. Perkins on the Galatians, Perkins, Vol. 2. cap. 3 on Galat. p. 242.
concerning the Covenant made with Abraham; The Seed of Abraham (says he) is
the Seed, not of the Flesh, but of the Promise: And this Seed is, first,
Christ, and then all that believe in Christ; for all these are given to Abraham
by Promise and Election of God. Moreover, this Seed is not many, (as Paul
observes) but one. It is objected, That the word Seed is a Name collective,
and signifies the whole Posterity of Abraham Answ. It does sometimes, (says
he) but not always: for Eve says of S^th, God has given me another Seed.
Again, (he says) this one particular Seed of Abraham, is Christ Jesus; here by
the name Christ, first and principally the Mediator; and then, secondly, all
Jews and Gentiles believing, that are fit and grafted into Christ by Faith. St.
Paul says, The Children of the Flesh, these are not the Children of God; but
the Children of the Promise are the Seed of Abraham, Romans 9.8.

Now this Covenant we grant thus made with Abraham, is one and the same with
the Covenant of Grace; but what does this signify to the Infants, or fleshly
Seed of Believers, as such? And thus I shall pass to your next Argument, page
14.

CHAP. III.
Wherein Mr. Burkitt' s other Arguments are answered, viz. (1.) Infants are
capable of the Spiritual Benefits by Baptism. (2.) Also that they have habitual
Faith. (3.) That Christ has Lambs in his Fold, therefore Infants. (4.) Infants
are capable of Christ's Blessing; they were brought to Christ, and received by
him. (5.) Infants are in Covenant with a federal Holiness, therefore may be
baptized.

YOur third Argument, to prove Infants ought to be baptized, is this, Mr.
Burkits third Argument to prove Infant Baptism.
viz.

If Infants are capable of Spiritual Benefit by Baptism, then Baptism may and
ought to be administered to Infants; if they are capable of the inward visible
Grace, sure they may partake of the outward and visible Sign; if the Word of
the Promise does belong to them, surely the Seal of the Promise ought not to be
withheld from them.

But, say you, the former is true, viz. That Infants are capable of Benefits by
Baptism; therefore the latter is true, they ought to be Baptized. There are,
amongst others, two special Blessings, and spiritual Benefits which Infants are
capable of by Baptism, namely, Remission of Sin, and Regeneration.

1. Remission of Sin; this being an Act of gracious Favor in God, discharging
a Person from his obnoxiousness to Wrath upon the score of Guilt contracted, an
Infant is certainly as capable of this Act of Favor, as a grown Person. To
prove this, you bring in a Simile, That an Infant of a Traitor is as capable of
the benefit of the King's gracious Favor, as the Father himself. Suppose the
King should send for a Traitor's Child out of the Cradle, (say you) and before
all his Courtiers declare, That whereas the Blood of that Child was attainted
by its Father's Treason, and therefore, according to Law, its whole Inheritance
became forfeited to the Crown; yet, says the King, I will pardon this Infant
freely, and restore him to all his forfeited Rights; and in token thereof, I
command one of my Ministers to wash the Infant in pure Water, signifying
thereby to all my Subjects, that he is cleansed from his original Attainder and
Corruption of Blood, and that I am perfectly reconciled to him.

I demand, (say you now) whether any one can truly say, that this Action was
insignificant to the Child, because he did not understand it? etc.

Answ. Were not the Male Infants of Believers before Abraham's days, as capable
of the Privileges and Benefits of Circumcision, as Abraham's Male Infants
were? If so, why were not they Circumcised? If you say it was, Because God did
not require them to be Circumcised, they were not commanded to do it: Even so
say I, God has not commanded Believers to baptize their Infants; therefore
whatsoever Benefit or Blessing they are capable of, it signifies nothing in the
Case, unless there was a Command or Law given us to baptize them.

2. Might you not as well argue, that Infants are capable of the Benefits or
Spiritual Blessings signified by the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, therefore
may partake of that also? Are not they capable of Redemption from Sin and
Wrath, by the breaking of Christ's Body, and shedding of his Blood?

3. And are not Infants of Unbelievers, nay, Turks and Pagans, capable of the
Spiritual Benefits signified in Baptism? sure, as considered in themselves,
they are: and why then may they not be baptized also?

4. Sir, It Is not such are capable of receiving a Favor or Privilege from God,
but rather who he has in his Sovereign Wisdom granted that Privilege unto: And
let me tell you, your Simile quite overthrows your own Argument; for if God,
because he is graciously pleased to acquit our Children who die in their
Infancy, from the Original Guilt they brought into the World with them, through
the Atonement made by Jesus Christ, and in token thereof had commanded us to
baptize them, the Case was clear, and our Controversy was at an end: but since
he has not required us to do any such thing, whatever Grace or Favor he is
pleased to afford to any of our Infants, we have no Warrant to baptize them;
his Will and Law, and not our Fancies, being that which gives us Authority to
do all we do in his Name or Worship. If God had commanded us to baptize our
Infants, we would no more say that Action would be insignificant to our
Children, no more than Circumcision was to Children under the Law, whom God
required to be Circumcised.

5. Besides, in the last place, Baptism does not, by God's appointment, belong
to them who are capable of the Benefits or Blessings signified thereby, as
Remission of Sin and Regeneration, etc. but only to such who are capable to
repent and profess Faith in Christ; these we say, and none else, ought to be
baptized, if the Royal Charter, or Grant of the Lord Jesus, be observed in the
case of a regal Right to Baptism, Suppose the King should grant to you, and to
all in your Parish, (who have been Traitors to him) who are skilled or learned
in the Mathematics, and understand the Law, to be Officers in some of his
Courts, and will then also upon submission pardon you and them of all your
horrid Crimes: will you upon this, carry up several ignorant unskilful Persons
who are in your Parish, tho as guilty of Treason as your selves, and offer them
to the King to be Officers and Clerks in his Courts? who indeed, as they are
untaught in that Art, so see not their own Guilt, nor submit themselves to the
Mercy of the King, and say yet they are capable of Pardon, and to receive the
Sallary also. Sir, All that are to be baptized, are, by virtue of the great
Commission of our Savior, to be first taught and made Disciples by teaching;
and take heed you add not to his Word, nor attempt to invert the Order of the
Charter and gracious Grant of the King of Heaven and Earth; nor go about, as
you do, to make void his Commands by your own Traditions.

2. In page 15. you say, Infants are not less capable of Regeneration of their
Nature, than of Remission of Sins, it being certain that no unclean thing can
enter into Heaven, that none can be saved whose Natures are not renewed; either
the sanctifying Grace of God (say you) must be allowed Infants, or Salvation
must be denied them. Regenerating Grace is called by St. John, the Seed of
Grace, 1 John 3.9. No way hinders, but that the Soul of an Infant may be as
capable of this Seed, as of a grown Person: for, say you, I argue, thus, 'If
the Image of God, consisting in Holiness, was received by the Soul in the first
Creation, without the Soul's Contribution to the Production of it, Why may not
the same Image of God be restored to the Soul in the second Creation, without
the Soul's Concurrence and Cooperation to the Restitution of it? for why may
not the Spirit of God produce in an Infant that imperfect ^egeneration whereof
we are now speaking, as well as he did that perfect Holiness in which our first
Parents were originally created?

1. I answer, Were there not a dangerous Sting in the Tail of some of your
impertinent Interrogations, I might pass them all by without any further Answer
than I have before given you. Sir, who questions the Power of God, who is a
free Agent, and may do what he pleases? He may, it is true, regenerate an
Infant, or change the Nature of a Child in its Mother's Womb; and may be does
change, or regenerate the depraved Nature of those Infants who die in their
Infancy: but who knows what Infants they are he thus works upon, and fits for
Heaven? Secret things, I tell you again, belong to him.

2. But should God tell us which Infants Hearts and Natures he has thus
renewed, yet that can be no ground or warrant to us to give them the Sacrament
of Baptism, no more than the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; and you know well
enough the first Fathers of the declining Church brought in Infant Baptism to
wash away that Pollution of their Nature, or free them from the Guilt of
Original Sin; Infants had the Lord's Supper formerly given to them.
and also those Fathers gave the same Infants the Lord's Supper, and had indeed
as good Authority from God's Word to do the one as the other. And assure your
self they shamefully erred in both, because both were done without any Warrant
or Allowance from God.

But, Sir, how inconsistent are you with your self? even just now you tell us
that the Infants of Believers are in Covenant with God, (as well as their
Parents) and are therefore holy, and from that ground ought to be baptized: But
now it seems as if that Argument was gone with you, and notwithstanding that
federal Holiness, they are unclean; and unless they have actually sanctifying
Grace, and their filthy Natures are changed, they cannot be saved: You just
play the part of a Fencer, and resolve to try your Skill with every Weapon, one
while you are a Presbyterian, another time a Church-of- England-Man. But, Sir,
speak, does Baptism change the Nature, or regenerate the Child, or does it not?
the Seed which St. John speaks of, he affirms remains in those Persons in whom
it is wrought, sowed or infused: see 1 John 3.9.

And no doubt, was there indeed such a Divine Habit, Seed or Habit of Grace
remains where infused, and its Effects will appear.
or Seed of Grace infused into Infants in their Baptism, but it would appear in
their Lives when grown up. Such as is the Cause, such is the Effect, or Product
that is produced, i. e. if Regeneration was wrought in all the Infants you
Rantize, Holiness would be the Effect of it, when they come to Age of
Understanding; but all Men see the contrary, i. e. they show their evil and
unclean Natures as soon, nay, before they can speak plain; therefore you preach
false Doctrine, if you affirm that Baptism renovates or changes their Nature.
Nay, and were it so, all that are baptized would be saved; Shall one Soul who
passes through Regeneration miss of Salvation?

Reverend Stephen Charnock, tho a Pedo-baptist, speaks more like a Divine and
Logician than you do. See his Book on Regenerat. sol. p. 75. says he, Many Men
take Baptism for Regeneration; the Ancients usually give it this term; one
calls our Savior's Baptism, his Regeneration As if Christ passed through
Regeneration, or change of Nature.
: this confers not Grace, but ingageth to it: outward Water cannot convey
inward Life: How can Water, an external thing, work upon the Soul in a Physical
manner? Neither can it be proved, that ever the Spirit o^ God is tied by any
Promise, to apply himself to the Soul in a gracious Operation, when Water is
applied to the Body. If it were so that all that were baptized were
regenerated, then all that were baptized should be saved, or else the Doctrine
of Perseverance falls to the ground. And again he says, That some indeed say
that Regeneration is conferred in Baptism upon the Elect, and exerts it self
afterward in Conversion: But how so active a Principle as a spiritual Life,
should lie dead and asleep so long, even many Years, which intervene between
Baptism and Conversion, is not easily conceivable? So far Mr. Charnock.

It Is well you call it an imperfect Regeneration, Abortive, or a Monster no
doubt; for Baptism forms no Child of God: if it did, how come Simon Magus, who
was baptized, to miss of Regeneration? Acts 8.13. And indeed this is an easy
way to Heaven; I mean if there is no need of further Regeneration than that
poor Babes have in Baptism. I know your Church says, that an Infant is made
thereby a Child of God, a Member of Christ, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of
Heaven. Sad Doctrine! Baptism makes no Persons Christians.
God deliver England from such Guides as teach the common People: Nay, all who
will be led or taught by them, that Baptism makes them Christians, and so never
teach them to look after any other Regeneration, tho such whom you baptize, as
you call it, if they live, when they are grown up, prove wicked and ungodly
Persons, or carnal Worldlings. Sir, take heed what you do, lest the Blood of
your deceived and miserable People be required at your hands. Is not this to
heal the hurt of your People slightly, and to cry, Peace, Peace, when there is
no Peace? This is the Sting I saw in the Tail of your Argument.

You ask many Questions, Why may not this be so: and, Why may not that be so?
Who taught you thus to argue, what do you prove? But that which troubles me
most is this, viz. That after you have put forth these unlearned and weak
Questions, you draw Conclusions therefrom, with daring Boldness, after this
manner, viz. What an high Affront then do these Men give to the Omnipotency of
the holy Spirit, who affirm, that it is as vain a thing to hope and pray, that
Almighty God should regenerate an Infant with his holy Spirit, as to expect
that he should illuminate a Stone or a Tree? These words be cites were wrote by
Dr. Tailor.
page 16.

But, say you, if Infants are found capable Subjects of regenerating Grace, and
Remission of Sin, as, I hope, appears, then surely they are capable of Baptism;
for the outward visible Sign ought not to be denied to such as are capable of
the inward spiritual Grace.

Answ. 1. Sir, you are to be rectified, Do we deny the Omnipotency of the holy
Spirit? none of us never doubted of the Power of the Spirit in regenerating an
Infant, if he pleases so to do; but you are to prove God does do it, and that
by Baptism too; for that is the thing you seem to contend for, which we deny: we
say, God can of Stones raise up Children to Abraham, if he pleases.

2. We do affirm, you have as much ground of Faith from any Promise of God, to
pray that God would illuminate a Stone or a Tree, as you have to pray God by
Baptism he would regenerate one Infant. If you pray not in Faith, you sin; and
if you have no Promise of God to ground your Faith upon, when you pray God by
Baptism to regenerate an Infant, then you cannot pray in Faith. Two things you
are to prove;

(1.) That God does require you to baptize Infants.

(2.) Prove that Baptism is appointed of God to regenerate Children, or the
Adult either, if you can.

3. I do say that Baptism does not belong to them who may be said in a remote
sense to be capable of Regeneration; for Unbelievers are capable of
Regeneration (or else sad is their condition) and are they therefore capable of
Baptism? Baptism is not an outward Sign of what a Person is capable of, or may
have hereafter; but of that thing, or inward spiritual Grace the Person
baptized has at present (or gives some evidence of) before, or at the time
when he is baptized; and for this I could cite you diverse of the Ancient
Fathers, and Modern Divines.

You may be as capable to be a Justice of Peace (as far as I know) as you are
to be a Preacher? may you therefore give forth Warrants, and exercise that
Office?

4. And lastly, I must tell you, Infants are not in an ordinary way capable of
the Image of God, tho they may be capable of Grace and Salvation by Christ;
because the Image of God consists in Knowledge, Col. 3.10. And have put on the
new Man, which is renewed in Knowledge, Pool's Annotat.
after the Image of him that created him. Hence our Annotators tell you, that
in Regeneration, or in restoring the lost Image of God, the Understanding must
be enlightened; and are Children capable of an enlightened Understanding, who
have no Understanding at all? or do you pray God would work Miracles? Would it
not be a miraculous thing to see a Babe of two or ten days old, to have such
Knowledge of God and of Jesus Christ?

Obj. But in Page 16. you argue upon us thus, viz. Circumcision was instituted
for the same end that Baptism is; and the Party circumcised, was under the same
natural Incapacity with the Person baptized: And from hence you charge us with
Arrogance, as if we would make our selves wiser than God.

1. I answer; We have proved Circumcision was not instituted for the same end
that Baptism is, but for several other Grounds and Reasons; therefore what you
say is not true. See our Answer.

2. And does it follow, because God commanded Abraham to circumcise his Male
Infants, that you may command Parents to baptize their Infants, both Males and
Females, who are not the Subjects Jesus Christ has commanded in the New
Testament to be baptized? And do not you herein make your selves wiser than
God? O how justly may this Arrogance be retorted back upon your selves!

Your Brethren, Athenian Society say Females were circumcised by some People
formerly.
the Athenian Society, in two or three of their Mercuries, tell us, in some
parts of the World they circumcise their Females; and no doubt of it, they have
as good (or better) Authority so to do, as you have to baptize Children. See
Vol. 7. Numb. 7. Where they say, The Creophagians, Arabians, some of the
Descendants of Ishmael, did judicially circumcise not only Males but Females.
Also the Ethiopians, especially in the Dominions of Prester John, circumcise
Females. And for further Information, they direct to Bartho. de Antiquit.
Puerperi, Bellonius, Caelius Rhodoginus, and several other Histories and
Authors. May be they argue as you do, the Females are capable as the Males, of
the Benefits of Circumcision, and therefore may Circumcise them.

3. Our Argument, I must tell you again, Infants may be capable to be saved,
and yet not capable Subjects of Baptism.
lies not so much in that Infants are incapable of any Spiritual Benefit by
Baptism, (had it pleased Almighty God to have commanded them to be baptized, as
he did the Circumcision of Infants) but in that first we cannot find, directly
nor indirectly, I mean either by Precept, Example, or good Consequences from
all God's Word, it is his Mind or Will they should be admitted to Baptism.

Secondly, Because they have not those previous Qualifications, which according
to the positive and express Law of Christ, is necessary in all that ought to be
baptized; therefore in p. 16, 17. you set up a Man of Straw of your own making,
and then fight with it. Had God required Infants to be baptized, who could
argue against their being capable of it? However since actual Faith, and the
profession of it, is required of all that are to be baptized; we say, Infants
who are incapable to act Faith, are not, cannot be proper or fit Subjects for
that Sacrament.

2. Because none are to be baptized by virtue of Christ's Law and Commission,
Matthew. 28. but such who are made Disciples, by being first taught. Infants who
are not capable so to be made Disciples, ought not to be baptized. And to these
two Arguments, we will now see your Answer, page 18. of your Book, which is as
follows, viz.

That a Profession of Faith is necessarily required before Baptism in all Adult
Persons, that is, Persons grown up to riper Years, who are (say you) the
Persons whom our Savior meant when he said, He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved; as most evidently appears by the words following, He
that believes not, shall be damned, Mark 16.16.

What! must all that die in their Infancy go to Hell for an Impossibility? The
Text only intends such, as by hearing the Gospel preached, are capable of
actual Faith: such as enjoy the Means of Faith, and yet live and die in neglect
of Faith, and contempt of Baptism, shall certainly be damned; 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
says the Apostle, If any Man will not work, neither let him eat; that is, such
as are capable to work, must not eat: But must Children be starved, because
they cannot work? Thus say you here, Children lie under a natural Incapacity of
professing actual Faith; therefore the first Text does not concern them any
more than the latter.

Answ. I. Sir, You have given away your Cause now for ever. If this Text, Mark
16.16. does no more concern Infants than that in 2 Thessalonians 3.10. then be sure, as
they having nothing to do with Faith, so have they nothing to do with Baptism;
for all the Learned generally, as one Man, do and must confess, the Commission
of our Savior is our great Warrant and Rule for Baptizing; Therefore (says
Mr. Baxter) if we find it not here, where have we it? Now this in Mark contains
the Commission of Christ, viz. who they be that he would have to be baptized,
and they are such who believe, ( Matthew says in repeating the words of the
same Commission) such who are discipled, or made Disciples: And you say,
Infants are no more concerned in this Text, than in that, where the Apostle
only intends Men, who will not work, which all know does no ways refer to
Children, so that the Dispute might well here end. By your own concession,
Infants are not concerned in the Commission.

2. You say, the Adult are here intended; we say so too: Whither then will you
go for your Infants Right to Baptism? We can prove, from many Texts, Infants
ought to eat, though they cannot work. But how will you prove Infants ought to
be baptized by any other Scriptures, if not from the Commission, though they do
not believe, or have not actual Faith?

3. May you not as well argue thus, viz. If Children have mortal Bodies, they
must be fed at their Parents Table, and eat Bread, though they cannot work. So
because they have immortal Souls, therefore they must be fed at the Lord's
Table, and eat the Lord's Supper, though they cannot believe nor discern the
Lord's Body by Faith. The Apostle says, Let a Man examine himself, and so let
him eat; but this is only required of Adult Persons, and it is such St. Paul
means: But Infants who are capable to receive spiritual Benefit by Christ's
Death, they must have the Medicine also; may you not argue thus as well? Pray,
Reader, observe what a kind of Doctrine this Man asserts.

I demand, (say you) Whether according to the Mind of God, gathered from the
words of the Commission, the Remedy prescribed should be administered only to
grown Persons, because they only are capable of understanding and believing the
Virtue and Efficacy of it? Sure every rational Man among you would conclude his
Child capable of the Remedy as well as himself, although ignorant of the Virtue
that is in it, and only passive in the Administration of it; and that it would
be Cruelty, yea Murder in the Parent, to deny the Application of it to all his
Children.

Reply; I stand amazed at your Ignorance and Folly. Does it follow, because
Children are capable to receive a Medicine against the Plague or bodily
Distemper, are they therefore capable of Baptism and the Lord's Supper? If
capable of one, say I, of the other also; for as a Man is required to examine
himself, and to discern the Lord's Body in the Lord's Supper, so he is required
to repent and to believe in Christ* that comes to Baptism.

4. I would know how you prove Baptism to be the Medicine appointed to cure the
Soul of the Plague of Sin? Is not this to blind the Eyes of poor People,
Baptism cannot save the Souls of Infants.
and make them think that an external Ordinance saves the Soul? If not thus,
how can it be Cruelty, yea Murder, in Parents, to deny the Application of
Baptism to their Children? The Ancient Fathers, from that in John 6.53. Unless
a Man eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, he has no Life in
him; gave Infants the Lord's Supper, thinking our Savior (like as the Papists
do) meant that Sacrament, when indeed he meant only of (...) by Faith on Christ
crucified. But however, their Argument for giving Infants one Sacrament, was as
good as yours for giving them the other: But when they are as capable to repent
and believe, and are helped so to do as they are, and do eat Bread, let them
have both Baptism and the Lord's Supper; and till then, if God's Word be the
Rule of our Faith and Practice, (and not our own Fancies) they ought to have
neither; yet the Remedy or Medicine, which is Christ's Blood, we deny not, but
dying Infants may be capable of.

5. Sir, You seem to be no true Son of the Church of England, for they it seems
positively affirm, Repentance, whereby a Person forsakes Sin, and Faith,
whereby he steadfastly believes the Promise of God made to him in that
Sacrament, is required of those who are to be baptized; nay and of little Babes
too, therefore the Sureties answer for them, that they do believe and repent,
or forsake the Devil and all his Works, etc. the Child answers by Proxy. Your
Church baptizes no Child but as a Believer, and a true penitent Person. What is
this your Argument good for? even nothing. How now, are you wiser than the
Church? no doubt she believes as we do. All that are proper Subjects of
Baptism, are comprehended in the Commission, and must be as such, whether Adult
or Infants, who profess Faith and Repentance: But you it may be foresaw the
Snake in the Grass, viz. that Godfathers and Godmothers is a Tradition, and
none of God's Appointment; nor are they able to perform those things for the
Child, which they promise for him, and in his Name. And therefore make use of
another Argument, and would have them baptized without Faith, or upon their
Parents Faith, of which your Church speaks nothing.

As to your Comparison, it is not worth mentioning: Baptism (as I have told you)
does not cure the Soul of Sin, but it is the Blood of Christ applied by Faith:
And now do we say, no Child can have the Benefit of that Sovereign Remedy,
because not capable to believe, by reason Men and Women must receive it by
Faith, or perish. God (as Dr. Tailor observes) may have many ways to magnify
his Grace, through Jesus Christ, to them, which we know not of, who die in
their Infancy, yet have we no Authority to baptize them, any more than to give
them the Lord's Supper.

6. Sir, You talk at a strange rate, as if you regarded not what you say or
affirm, while you bring Similitudes to teach People to believe Baptism is the
Balm to cure the Contagion of Sin; and as if the application of it saved a
little Babe from Hell, and they guilty of murdering the Souls of their
Children, who deny to baptize them. I had thought you would not have lain
greater stress upon Childrens Baptism, than on Childrens Circumcision, since
you would fain have them run parallel-wise.

Pray, what became of the Jews Female Infants, were they damned? And what
became of their Male Infants, who died before eight days old? for they broke
God's Law, if they Circumcumcised them, (though sick and like to die) if they
were not full eight days old. Blush for the sake of your precious Soul, and
take more care for time to come, to what you Preach and Write.

But to proceed: In page 19. you say, Tho Children have not actual Faith, yet
they have habitual Faith, Faith in Semine, and so are potentially Believers. As
for Instance, Infants have not Reason; yet because they have a Principle, we
call them reasonable Creatures. Thus Infants, whilst such, have not the Use and
Exercise of Faith, but have it in the Root, and so may be called Believers
initially.

Ans. 1. Dr. Tailor clearly confutes this Conceit of yours; Some there be
(says he) who argue stiffly for Infants having habitual Faith; but (says he)
is there any Precedent, Concomitant, or Consequent to this pretended Habit?
This strange Invention is absolutely without Art, without Scripture, Reason or
Authority.

Answ. 2. Why may not the Infants of Unbelievers have the same habitual Faith,
as well as the Infants of Believers? Also may not Pagans, especially those who
may come where the Gospel is preached, be potentially Believers, and be
baptized, before they believe upon the same Argument?

3. If they had the Habit of true Faith, that Habit would appear afterward,
and they would need no other Sacred Habits to be infused into them; but we see
in Infants baptized (as you call it) when grown up, the Evil Habits of Sin, but
no Sacred Habits of Grace, or Divine Faith, or Seed of Regeneration sown into
them at all. What is in the Root, will show it self in the Branches and Fruit;
but we having fully answered this weak Assertion already, shall say no more to
it now.

You add, That Infants born within the Bosom of the Church, of believing
Parents, tho Faith of the Parents is to them at present, instead of an outward
Profession in their own Persons; for (say you) though no Child is saveable by
its Parents Faith, yet the Child is baptizable by virtue of its Parents Faith,
because the Parent receives the Promise of God, both for himself and his Seed,
Acts 2.39.

1. I answer; Let all Men judge of that Confusion which attends your Arguing and
Arguments for Infant Baptism: One while the absolute Ground and Plea you bring
to prove it, is the Covenant made with Abraham. Sir, If that will do, and be
sufficient, stand by it: but alas you dare not trust the whole Structure on
that crazy Foundation; therefore now you go to the immediate Faith of the
Parents, and thus without any Ground or Authority from God's Word, you build
your childish Practice upon your own Dream: Why not, as your Church teaches,
upon the Faith and Profession of the Sureties? why the Faith of the immediate
Parents? Those Texts you mention, Acts 2.39. 1 Cor. 7.14. as we shall hereafter
show, prove not what you here affirm, nor any thing like it.

2. If the Parents Faith will serve for the Child, The Parents Baptism may
serve for the Child, as well as the Parents Faith.
why not the Parents Baptism serve for the Child as well?

Take again what the Bishop of Down has wrote on this Argument of yours; Some
say (says he) Infants have an Imputative Faith; but then so let the Sacraments
be too; that is, if they have the Parents Faith, or the Churches, then so let
Baptism be imputed also by derivation from them; and as in their Mother's
Breast, they live upon their Mother's Nourishment, so they may upon the Baptism
of their Parents, or their Mother the Church: for since Faith is necessary to
the susception of Baptism, (and they themselves confess it, by striving to find
out new kinds of Faith to daub the Matter) such as is the Faith, such must be
the Sacrament; for there is no proportion between an actual Sacrament, and an
imputative Faith, this being immediate and necessary in order to that. 'Thus
far Dr. Tailor.

3. I wonder (as I have formerly said) what Faith it is you suppose to be in
Infants: When will your Trumpet give a certain Sound? Is it the Faith of the
Church, as Thomas Aquinas asserts, which is intailed upon all who are within
the Pale thereof, or in her Bosom, to use your words? Or is it an imputative
Faith from the Parents, as Musculus, you, and others maintain? Or is it the
Faith of the Gossips or Sureties, as your Church says, Various thoughts among
Pedo-Baptists, what Faith Infants have.
i. e. others believe for them? [Wonder, O Heavens, and be astonished, O Earth!
are these thy Teachers, O England?]; Have they a justifying Faith, as Mr.
Baxter intimates? Or a dogmatical Faith only, as in Mr. Blake's sense? Some say
it is a Physical Faith, some a Metaphysical, and some a Hyperphysical Faith.
Some say they are born Believers, See Mr. Danvers.
others say they are made Believers by Baptism.

See what Confusion you Pedo-Baptists are in. An actual Faith you dare not say
they have, because they have no Act of Understanding: Besides, how can any Man
know they have Faith, since he never saw any sign of it? neither was he told
it, by any that could tell.

Object. But then, Page 19. you bring in our Objection: Infants are not capable
of Ministerial Teaching, therefore not of Baptismal Washing; because Teaching
must go before Baptizing, according to the order of the words in our Savior's
Commission, Mat. 28.19. Go, teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc.

Your Answer is, That it is a mighty Weakness to infer from the order of the
words, the necessary order of things. St. Matthew sets Teaching before
Baptizing; but St. Mark sets Baptizing before Teaching, Mark 1.4. so that no
conclusive Argument can be drawn from hence either way.

Answ. I answer, you discover a great Abuse of the sacred Scripture. Sir, does
St. Mark, Chap. 1.4. set Baptizing before Teaching? Pray, good Reader, observe
the Text, John did baptize in the Wilderness, and teach the Baptism of
Repentance for the Remission of Sins.

1. Does this Text, in the order of words, say, John taught Persons to be
baptized, and then to repent? if what you say were true, so the order of words
must have been; and then he had indeed taught contrary to our Savior's
Doctrine in the Commission in order of words, as recorded by St. Mat. 28.19.
It Is called, says our Annotators, the Baptism of Repentance, because
Repentance was the great thing he taught: nay, and taught Repentance absolutely
necessary in all who came to be baptized by him. The order of words are very
conclusive here, and must not be inverted without palpable danger of God's
Displeasure. John called upon all who came to his Baptism to bring forth Fruits
meet for Repentance, and the order of words here do not contradict this; for
because Repentance was pre-requisite to Baptism, it is called the Baptism of
Repentance; and so the order of the words, if understood, shows, (...) that
Repentance went before baptizing, which directly agrees with St. Mat. 28.19.
Go, teach all Nations, baptizing them; that is, such who have been taught or
discipled; and this was according to Christ's own Practice, Joh. 4.1, 2. Jesus
made and baptized more Disciples than John, (mark Reader!) they were all
Disciples which John and our Savior baptized; Jesus made them first Disciples,
and so did John, and then baptized them.

Had John Baptist, our Savior, or his Apostles baptized one Infant, or one
Adult Person, who made no Profession of Faith, the order of words were not so
conclusive and demonstrative, but that they never did (as we read of.)

Where therefore the order of Words, and order of Practice go together, and
exactly agree, they ought not to be inverted; and he that does it, is greatly
culpable before God, as I might show in the Administration of the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper; the order of words are, Christ first took the Bread, and
brake it, and then the Cup: Would any dare to invert this order of words, and
first take the Cup, etc. they may as well attempt so to do, as to put Baptizing
before Teaching.

Perkins 2 vol. cap. 3. on Gal. p. 257.
Take what Mr. Perkins has said concerning the order of words in the
Commission: says he, I explain the former thus.

First, teach them; that is, make them my Disciples by teaching them to believe
and repent. Here we are to consider the order which God observes in making with
Men a Covenant in Baptism. First of all, he calls them by his Word and Spirit
to believe and repent: then, in the second place, he makes a Promise of Mercy
and Forgiveness; and then, thirdly, he seals his Promise by Baptism. They
(says he) that know not, nor consider this Order which God used in covenanting
with them in Baptism, deal preposterously, over-slipping the Commandment of
repenting and believing, and is the cause of so much Profaneness in the World.
This Divine Order Christ signifies, when he says, make them Disciples, and
was always observed of God.

Mr. Perkins as he was a very learned Man, so you know he was a Member of the
Church of England, and how fully does he confirm what we say, and teach, and
how does he confute your Notion and Practice? Moreover, Mr. Richard Baxter,
speaking of the Order of the Commission Christ gave to his Disciples, says,
Baxter's Right of Baptism, p. 149, 150.
viz. Their first Task is to make Disciples, which are by St. Mark called
Believers. The second work is to baptize them, whereunto is annexed the Promise
of Salvation. The third work is to teach them all other things which are after
to be learned in the School of Christ. To contemn this Order, is to contemn the
Rules of all Order; for where can we find it, if not here? I profess my
Conscience is fully satisfied from this Text, that there is one sort of Faith
-- that must go before Baptism, the Profession whereof the Minister must expect.

2. You say, Mr. Burkit's sense of the order of the Commission, Mat. 28.19.
The true reason why Christ bid his Disciples first teach and then baptize,
was, because he was sending his Apostles forth among the Heathen to convert
them to Christianity, in which work we all know, that preaching of the Word
must go before the Administration of the Sacraments, Page 20. Should, say you,
the King of England send his Ministers into Foreign Plantations to convert the
Indians to Christianity, they ought not to be baptized before they are taught,
and instructed; but when the Parents are proselyted, and make a visible
Profession of their Faith, their Children may be baptized, and afterward
instructed; as the Children of the Jewish Proselytes were first circumcised,
and then taught: for tho Abraham was first taught and then circumcised, yet
Isaac was first circumcised and then taught: so that the sense of our Savior
is this, teach such as are capable of teaching, and baptize such as are capable
of Baptism.

Answ. I answer, first, how inconsistent is this with what just before you
asserted? Do you not plead for Faith in some sense to be in all such, who by
virtue of the Commission ought to be baptized, and therefore pretend that
Infants have Habitual Faith, Faith in semine, etc. but now plead they may be
capable of Baptism without Faith; you also contradict what you before said
about the order of words. Do you not positively now confess by the order of the
words in the Commission, Teaching ought to go before Baptizing? Sir, it is a
sign of a very bad Cause that puts you thus to try your Wit, and after all
confound your self.

2. I ask you how Abraham (who God commanded to be Circumcised, as a Seal of
the Righteousness of that Faith HE had before circumcised) could know he ought
to circumcise his Son Isaac, etc. who had no such Faith, had not God given him
an express Command to do it? Had it not been in the words of his Commission,
durst he, think you, have done it? Be sure if he had, he had sinned in doing
that which God commanded him not: So, and in like manner, since our Lord Jesus
expressly in his Commission, commanded none to be baptized but such who are
first taught, unless he had added, as in Abraham's Case, viz. when an Heathen
is converted to the Faith, and baptized, you may baptize his Infants also; how
dare you add such Additions to Christ's Commission without his Authority, and
so make the World believe, if you could, our blessed Savior gave forth an
imperfect Commission to his Disciples, which all Men must confess is the only
Warrant and Rule of all Ministers to act by in the case of baptizing to the end
of the World? And does he not say, Add thou not to his Word, lest he reprove
thee, and thou art found to be a Liar; by fathering that on Christ which he
never said nor intended?

Suppose the King should send you with a Commission into a remote Plantation,
and command you to act and do exactly according to the express words of the
Commission, not to add to it, nor diminish from it, upon pain of being cast out
of his Favor, and incur his Wrath and Curse; durst you to do otherwise in any
thing, under pretense it was his meaning, whereas he plainly and fully in his
Commission expressed in the Affirmative, how and what you should do in all
Matters and things, and forbad you to add thereto? Read Rev. 22.18. For I
testify unto every Man that hears the words of the Prophecy of this Book, If
any Man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him all the Plagues
that are written in this Book, etc. Who told you what you say is the sense of
our Savior? Can any Man once think, since the Commission of Christ is a pure
Gospel-Commission, and contains mere positive Laws and Rules, no ways referring
to, nor depending on the Law or Command God gave to Abraham, that what you say
can be true, and the Conclusions safe, certain, and warrantable? May not
another say, with as good Authority, that our Savior commands his Disciples to
baptize all Nations, both Parents and Children too, whether they will or not,
whether they believe or not, whether Jews or Gentiles, Turks or Pagans? I
wonder you are not afraid, who take liberty after this sort to sport (as it
were) and play with, invert, alter and add unto the sacred Commission of the
jealous God, and great King of Heaven and Earth.

3. We will examine your Similitude, of which you seem very full,

Suppose, say you, a Person, Owner of a great Flock of Sheep, should command
his Shepherd to shear all his Sheep, and give them an Earmark to know them, and
he leaves out all the Lambs (which perhaps made up half the Fold) unmarked; Can
the Shepherd be supposed to have done his Duty? Suppose he says the Lambs were
very young, and incapable of shearing: True, says the Owner, but were they not
capable of marking.

Infants, say you, are not capable of teaching, but are they not capable of
Christ's Earmark [Baptism] by which Christ's Sheep are distinguished from the
Devils Goats? But according to your Principles, Christ's Fold has no Lambs in
it, but all Sheep, such a Fold as the World never yet heard of. See Isa. 40.11.

Answ. 1. I answer; this is as weak an Allusion or Similitude as ever was
brought to illustrate a matter:

For, first, it supposes that Christ gave a very obscure, dark and doubtful
Commission; for if all were to be sheared that the Shepherd was to mark, the
Shepherd could not err in refusing to mark the Lambs, because not capable of
shearing; for so it is here, all are by Christ's Commission to be first taught
who are to be baptized.

2. You suppose in Christ's Fold there are no Lambs, if no Infants are admitted
to be of his Church or Flock; which is absurd: Were they Infants that Christ
commanded St. Peter to feed, when he bad him feed his Lambs? Joh. 21.15. Or,
were they Infants that Christ is said to carry in his Bosom? Isa. 40.11. The
Scripture you cite, He shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd; he shall gather
his Lambs with his Arms, and carry them in his Bosom. Do not all Expositors
tell you, by Lambs in these places are meant young Converts, who are by St.
Peter called newborn Babes? 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. and who denies but many such are in
Christ's Fold; and these Lambs we say may and ought to be baptized.

3. Who told you Baptism is Christ's Ear-mark, by which Christ's Sheep are
distinguished from the Devils Goats? I affirm this is no certain and
distinguishing Mark to know the Sheep and Lambs of Christ from the Devil's
Goats. Was not Simon Magus baptized? was that a Mark to know he was a Sheep of
Christ? Thousands may be baptized, have that Ear-mark, and yet be in the Gall
of Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity, and be the Goats of the Devil.
Christ himself in John 10. lays down diverse distinguishing Marks of his Sheep,
but makes not the least mention of this. True, when a Believer is baptized, and
does all other things Christ had commanded, that is no doubt one mark that he
is one of Christ's Sheep, but the distinguishing Mark is Regeneration, and that
of having his Spirit in our Hearts, and leading a godly Life. Now if any Man
have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his. Nom. 8.9.

As to Infants who die in their Infancy, who doubts but they may be happy,
since Christ says, of such are the Kingdom of Heaven, i. e. Kingdom of Glory?
but this is no more ground for you to baptize them, than (as I have often said)
to give them the Lord's Supper. Does it follow because some Infants may belong
to the Kingdom of Glory, they are Members therefore of the visible Church, and
so Lambs of Christ's Fold on Earth?

And this brings me to your next, which is your fourth Argument, viz. If
Infants be capable of Christ's Blessing on Earth, and of his Presence in
Heaven; if they be Subjects of his Kingdom of Grace, and Heirs of his Kingdom
of Glory; then they have an undoubted right to the Privilege of Subjects,
amongst which the Seal of the Covenant is not the least.

Answ. 1. We answer, and argue thus to the first part of your Proposition, viz.
If many of the Jews, and others who were ungodly Persons, were capable of
Christ's Blessing, i. e. of being healed of their bodily Diseases, they were
Subjects of Baptism: Is this sound arguing? What further Blessing Christ did
vouchsafe to Infants when he laid his Hands upon them, we know not, for that
was the way Christ took oft-times in the healing the Sick; and so he blessed
many Persons that never were baptized as we read of.

2. We (as I just now told you) do deny Infants are Subjects of the visible
Church; therefore if by the Kingdom of Grace you intend not that, you beat the
Air; you beg, and prove not; besides it does not follow. I say again, tho
Infants may be Heirs of the Kingdom of Glory, therefore they have an undoubted
right to the Privileges of the Subjects of God's Church; for then it would
follow they have right to one Privilege as well as another, and are to have
Fellowship with the Saints and Household of God, as well as Baptism.

But, say you, or take the Argument thus, viz. Those whom Christ invites to
him, and are received by him, his Ministers may not refuse, nor put from them.
But Infants are by Christ invited to him, and were received by him; therefore
the Ministers of Christ may not, ought not, durst not refuse them into
Communion with them, p. 21.

Answ. Christ invited Multitudes to come unto him, and he received them so far
as to feed them with Barley-Loaves and Fishes, and to the Blessing of healing
them of their bodily Distempers: May his Ministers therefore receive all such
into their Communion?

2. In the days of Christ when he was on Earth, there were many who are said to
come unto him, whom he might receive into his Presence and Company, yet his
Ministers might not baptize them, nor receive them into their spiritual
Communion: Other kinds of coming unto Christ in the days of his Flesh, than
what may be said now, Matthew. 22.23, 35.
nor indeed so you dare not receive Infants, I mean into your Communion of the
Eucharist, etc. We read of some Pharisees and Lawyers that came to Christ, and
he received them into his Company, who, it appears, came to tempt him. Also the
Sadduces are said to come unto him, who said there was no Resurrection; may
Christ's Ministers baptize such and receive them into their Communion?

Therefore in opposition to what you say in Page 21. of your Book, I affirm
there was then other ordinary ways of coming to Christ than by Admission into
his Church; Christ invited the worst of Sinners to him, who nevertheless did
not receive him, therefore there are some who must be excluded whom Jesus
Christ graciously invited.

Your Appeal for Proof of this Argument to St. Mark 10.13. Suffer little
Children to come unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, does not your
business; they do not belong to the Kingdom of Grace, i. e. the Church; for if
they did belong to, or were of the visible Church, as such; then you need not
by Baptism make them belong unto it: If Christ owns them Subjects or Members of
his Visible Church, you by Baptism have no need, I say, to add them to it; for
if as they are the Seed of Believers, they are already ( fidem soederis) not
only in Covenant with God, but also belong to his Kingdom or Church upon Earth;
All the World may see you go about but to give them that very Right or
Privilege which they had before, and without Baptism.

Does Christ (say you) take Children into his Arms, and shall his Church cast
them out of her Embraces?

Answ. May I not argue thus, i. e. Does Christ receive all sorts of Persons
into his Arms of Mercy, to heal their bodily Distempers, of which some were
wicked and ungodly? and shall the Church refuse to receive all such into her
Embraces? Besides, all those pretended Consequences make no more for Infants to
be baptized, than for their receiving the Lord's Supper, and all other
Privileges that belong, as well as Baptism, to Adult Persons who believe or are
Disciples.

Does Christ (say you) own them for Subjects of his Kingdom, and shall we allow
them no better standing than in the Devil's Kingdom.

Answ. Does Christ own Infants to be Subjects of his Kingdom, and yet did not
baptize them? (for that he did not) and shall we attempt to Baptize them, An
Argument against Infant Baptism, from that Text, Little Children were brought
to Christ.
as if we were wiser than he? I must again turn the E^g of the Sword against
you; If little Children were brought to Christ, and he did not Baptize them,
then we must not. But little Children were brought to Christ, and he did not
Baptize them, therefore we must not: Here is both Truth and Reason in this
Argument, as Dr. Tailor confesses, but none of both in yours. You your self
confess Christ did not Baptize those Infants that came to him, and whom he took
in his Arms, and blessed; because with his own Hands he baptized none at all,
Joh. 4.1, 2.

Therefore since Christ, who was God, foresaw what Contention would arise about
the Baptizing of Infants, had it been his Will they should be Baptized, would
he not at this time put the Matter out of doubt, have Baptized them, or have
given Command to his Disciples so to have done?

If therefore Infants be in so good a Condition as you say, i. e. Subjects of
Christ's Kingdom of Grace, let us let them alone, for we cannot, by baptizing
them, put them in a better state than they are, without any Warrant from
Christ; and by baptizing them not, we cannot put them into any worser state or
standing than they are in without it.

Well, you are angry with us, because we know not but that the Children of
Turks and Infidels may be in a good condition, as well as Children of
Believers, though we deny not, but that the Children of Believers have greater
Advantages than the Children of Infidels; namely, by the Prayers, good
Education, and the good Examples of their Parents, etc.

In page 22. you say, Can any wise or good Man believe, that our Savior would
speak such favorable Words of Infants, and his outward Gesture manifest so
much good will toward them, only with an intent to ensnare and deceive us?
doubtless it was to encourage his Ministers to perform all charitable Offices
toward them.

Answ. 1. You mistake, our Savior speaks very little concerning Infants, and
that which is said of them was accidentally spoken, being occasioned by those
who brought little Children to him, which the Disciples forbad; and from hence
he spoke what he did. Moreover, the Cause why our Savior spoke those words,
might be more for the sake of Parents, that they might not be afraid touching
the Condition of their dying Babes, than to show any Ordinance belonged to
them: for had it been so, doubtless the Disciples would not have forbad those
People to bring little Children to Christ. It Is therefore an Argument against
Infant Baptism, and not for it, because the Disciples were appointed by their
Master to be the Administrators of that Ordinance, on such to whom it did of
right belong; and had Infants been the Subjects, would they have forbid People
to bring Infants to him?

2. You therefore may rather conclude, had they been the Subjects of Baptism,
Christ, by not hinting any such thing in the least on this Occasion, might
rather have left us in a Snare, in speaking nothing of it, neither here, nor at
any other time.

3. Therefore Christ speaking so favorably of Infants, and yet baptized them
not, may teach us to judge favorably of them, and do any charitable Office
toward them, but not to presume to give them holy Baptism without Christ's
Warrant, no more than any other Gospel-Ordinance. It Is no matter what Calvin
spoke, it is no Sin to keep such out of Christ's Fold, which he has given no
Authority to take in: nor have any People a more charitable Opinion of the
state of dying Infants, than those you call Anabaptists.

4. Those who are capable of some kind of Blessings of Christ, we have showed,
are notwithstanding not capable of Baptism.

We read not, the Disciples baptized these little Children, nor none else.

Object. To this you answer; Perhaps they were Baptized before: But (say you)
it does not follow that the Apostles did not baptize these Children, because no
mention of it: the Scripture no where tells us, that the Apostles themselves
were baptized; shall we conclude therefore that they were never baptized?

Answ. It Is no matter whether we read, or read not, that the Apostles were
baptized, since we find it was his Precept and Practice to baptize Disciples,
or such who did believe in him. We read of multitudes of Disciples that were
baptized, and we know the way of Christ was one and the same; that which was
the Duty of one Disciple, as a Disciple, was the Duty of every Disciple. We
read but of two or three Churches who broke Bread, and celebrated the Lord's
Supper; could you show us but a Precept for Infant Baptism, or but one Example
or Precedent where one Infant was baptized, we would not doubt but those little
Children might be also; but this you cannot do.

And whereas in page 23. you say, That there is not the same Reason why Infants
should be admitted to eat the Lord's Supper, as there is for them to be
admitted to Baptism.

Answ. We deny it utterly. What though the one be a Sacrament of Initiation,
and the other of Confirmation? Yet pray observe, Like Reason for Infants
receiving the Lord's Supper, as to be baptized.
that Repentance and Faith is required of them that are to be baptized, even
actual Faith and Repentance, as well as actual Grace and Examination, etc. to
discern the Lord's Body in those who are to receive the Lord's Supper. If all
that were to be Circumcised, had been required to repent and believe, as in the
Case of admission to Baptism, you had said something; but the contrary appears,
Male Infants, as such, had a Right to that, but have no Right to this. And thus
I pass to your fifth Argument.

If the Infants of Christian Parents are s^dorally Holy, then (you say) they
are Subjects qualified for Baptism: but the Scripture pronounces such Children
federally Holy; therefore they are qualified for Baptism, and may be admitted.
You cite Romans 11.16. If the Root be Holy, the Branches are also Holy: where, by
the Root (you say) we are to understand Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and by the
Branches, their Posterity, the People of the Jews. Now forasmuch (say you) as
the Jews, the natural Branches, are for Unbelief broken off, and the believing
Gentiles are grafted in their stead, and succeed in their Privileges, in the
sense that they were Holy, not with an internal and inherent Holiness, passing
by natural Generation from Parent to Child, but with an external relative
Covenant-Holiness, grounded on the Promise made to the Faithful and their Seed.

Answ. 1. I deny your Major, and say, If Children of Believers were federally
Holy under the Gospel, yet they are not qualified for Baptism, because it is not
what you imagine gives them right thereto, External federal Holiness, gives no
right to the Sacraments.
or qualifies them for it; but what Christ has ordained and appointed, as the
alone proper and meet qualification, which is not that external relative
Covenant-Holiness you talk of, which the New Testament speaks nothing of, as I
shall show by and by, but actual Faith, Regeneration, or Inherent-Holiness,
which is the thing signified by Baptism; therefore a thousand such Arguments
will do you no good, since Baptism is of mere positive Right. It Is Christ's own
Law must decide the Controversy, viz What Qualifications are required of such
who by his Authority and Law ought to be baptized: prove if you can such an
external Federal-Holiness, qualifies any Persons for Gospel-Baptism; for if
such federal or external Holiness, qualifies Persons for Baptism; then the
Jews, before cast off, might have been admitted to Baptism, since they had then
such a kind of federal Holiness; which kind of Holiness you cannot prove
Believers Children are said to have under the Gospel; but if it qualified them
not for Baptism, it cannot qualify our Children for Baptism. And that is did
not qualify them, is evident, see Mat. 3.9. where some of the Branches of this
Root came to* John Baptist to be baptized; and he refused to admit them with
these words, i. e. Think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our
Father; for I say, God is able of these Stones to raise up Children to Abraham.
Ver. 10. And now also is the Ax laid to the Root of the Trees. From whence it
plainly appears, that that external relative Covenant-Holiness, which qualified
under the Old Testament, Persons for Circumcision, and Jewish
Church Membership, will not qualify Old nor Young under the New Testament for
Baptism, and Gospel Church Membership.

2. I also deny your Minor, and say, the Scripture of the New Testament does
not pronounce the Children of believing Parents federally Holy: The Text Romans
11.16. speaks not one word of Infants, nor one word of such a kind of federal
Holiness. Mr. Tho. Goodwin, This Passage of Mr. Goodwin I have out of Mr. Tombs
his Book, called, Two Treatises, p. 67.
who was a very Learned Man, urging that Text 1 Cor. 7.14. tho a Pedo Baptist
says, in the New Testament there is no other Holiness spoken of, but Personal
or Real by Regeneration; about which he challenged all the World to show to the
contrary.

And, Sir, with your Favor, if you cannot from any place of the New Testament
prove there is any such Holiness spoken of, you are to be blamed for bringing
in a private and an unwarrantable Interpretation of that Holy Text. I find
there are various Interpretations of what is meant by the Root in that place.
(1.) Some understand it of the Covenant. (2.) Some of Christ. (3.) Some of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. (4.) Some of Abraham only.


What if I agree with the last, and say, Abraham is the Root? but what Root?
Why the Root of all his true spiritual Seed: And if so, the Holiness of the
Branches was real, in word, and spiritual; for such Holiness as is in the Root,
is in the Branches. And indeed, for want of Faith, or of that real and
spiritual Holiness in many of his natural Branches, (for he was a twofold
Root, or Father, as I before have proved) they were rejected, or broken off for
their Unbelief; and the Gentiles by Faith were grafted in, they having obtained
the Fatness of the Root, or the Faith and Righteousness of their Father
Abraham, who was the Root or Father of all that believe. The Truth is, as Mr.
Tombs observes, the Holiness here meant, is first in respect of God's Election,
Holiness, personal and inherent in God's Intention, Ephesians. 1.4. Secondly, It is
also Holiness derivative, not from any Ancestors, but Abraham; not as a natural
Father, but as a spiritual Father, or Father of the Faithful; and so derived
from the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham.

And thus it appears you have darkened this illustrious Scripture, thinking to
prove a Holiness that the New Testament knows nothing of; applying the Holiness
and Insection to outward Dispensations only in the visible Church, which is
meant of saving Grace^, into the invisible, and make every believing Parent a
like Root to his Posterity with Abraham to his Seed, which we deny.

But let the Jews Covenant and standing before they were broken off be what it
would, I am sure no Gentile is grafted into Christ, but by actual Faith; nor
can any be grafted into the Gospel Church, without the profession of such
Faith, therefore you do but beat the Air.

The Jews, it is true, were broken off by their Unbelief, and were also no more
a Church; nor is there any such kind of Church constituted under the Gospel as
theirs was, viz. a National Church; for they amongst the Jews, who were the
true Spiritual Seed of Abraham, receiving Christ by Faith, were planted into
the Gospel Church, and between them and Gentile Believers: Now there is no
difference, Jew and Gentile stand in the Church now by Faith, not by external
Covenant, Privilege-Right, or Holiness. Thou stand by Faith, O Believer;
mark, not by Birth-Privilege, Mr. Cary's Solemn Call.
but by Faith. Thy standing is by Faith, (says one) yet not thy Seed by thy
Faith, but thou thy self by thine, and they by their own: Faith is that by
which (thou standing, and not thy Seed) have right to stand in the Church, and
not they: but if thy Seed have Faith, and thou have none, then they have right
in the Church, and thou shall be excluded. And though under the Law we deny
not, but that the natural Seed or Progeny or Abraham, were all Holy, with an
external Ceremonial or Typical Holiness; and consequently they were then
admitted to an external Participation of Church-Privileges: Yet now it is
otherwise, Old things are past away; now we know no Man after the Flesh, 2 Cor.
5.16. That Church State is dissolved, and manner of admission into it, by
external Birth-Privilege, etc. so that this Text does not help you. I shall
further open this place of Scripture.

1. It Is evident the Apostle is in the 9th and 10th Chapters to the Romans,
Part of Chap. 11. of the Romans opened.
a treating of the Election of Grace, and of that Covenant of Grace and
Election God made with Abraham: these were his People which he had not cast
away, chap. 10.1. and of this sort God had 7000 in Elias's Days, This Scripture
is to be understood by the main Scope and Drift of the Holy Spirit therein.
ver. 4. Even so says he at this present time also there is a Remnant
according to the Election of Grace, ver. 5. Hence he says, What then Israel
has not obtained, etc. -- But the Election has, etc. ver. 7. He further shows
that abundance of the natural Seed of Abraham were broken off. How were they
broken off? Why, by their Unbelief, they not receiving Christ, but rejecting
the Gospel and New-Church-State, were broken off: but that the Gentiles might
not boast over them, the Apostle shows there is ground left to believe all
those that belong to the Election of Grace, shall in God's due time be brought
in, and so partake of the Blessings of the Gospel Covenant, or Covenant of
Grace made with Abraham. And to prove this, Meaning all the elect Seed, or
those Abraham was the spiritual Father of, were holy.
in ver. 16. he lays down an Argument, For if the first Fruit be Holy, the Lump
is also Holy; and if the Root be Holy, so are the Branches, ver. 16. By the
Root I understand is meant Abraham, Root and Father, signifying here the same
thing, Abraham being the Root or Father, as God represents him, of all the
Elect, or of such who believe, or the Root of all his true spiritual Seed.

2. By the first Fruits may be meant, Isaac, Jacob, and the holy and elect
Patriarchs, for they were given as the first Fruits to Abraham, of that
Covenant and free Promise of God; and these were holy, with a true spiritual
and internal New-Covenant-Holiness.

3. By the Lump he may mean the whole Body of the Elect, or the spiritual Seed
of Abraham, from the time the first Fruits were given him, until the
Gospel-Days, or whole Body of the true Israel of God, who were holy, as the
Root and first Fruits were holy.

4. By the Branches may be meant the true elect Seed that were living then in
that present time, as ver. 5. and these were holy too, The Holiness of the Root
and Branches both one, viz. true spiritual Holiness.
even as all the rest, both as the Root, First Fruits, and whole Lump or Body,
were holy; that is, all the true spiritual Seed of Abraham were like himself,
viz. holy in a spiritual Sense. And now observe, he speaks of some Branches
that were broken off; these seemed to be Branches, or the Children of Abraham;
and so they were according to the Flesh, but were like those Branches, in
Christ who bear no Fruit, and therefore taken away, John 15.2, 3, 4. He alludes
to the natural Seed of Abraham, to whom he stood not as a spiritual Father or
Root, but as a natural and legal Father, as they were a National Church, and
sprung from him, and these Branches were all broken off, viz. for rejecting
Christ; (1.) Not broken off from the Election of Grace, for to that they did
not belong, (2.) Nor were they broken off of the Gospel Church, for they were
never grafted into that. But, (3.) broken off from being any more a Church or
People in Covenant with God, the whole old State and Constitution being gone,
and they not closing in with Christ in the Gospel Dispensation, Grace, and
Church State, are said to be broken off as a lost People; because not replanted
or implanted into Christ, and the true Gospel Covenant; the old being gone,
quite removed and taken away, they have now no Root to stand upon, having lost
their legal Privileges, as Abraham was their Father upon that foot of Account;
and they not appearing to be the true Branches or Seed of Abraham, as he was
the Father of all the elect Seed, or of all that believe in Jesus Christ, they
must of necessity from hence be broken off from being the People of God, or
belonging to any Head or Root in a Covenant Relation to God at all, the
Dispensation being changed; 2 Cor. 5.17.
old things being gone, and all things being now become new. But this new
State, Blessings, Rites, Church, and Church Priviledges they rejected; and thus
were some of the natural Branches broken off, and the Gentiles, who were wild
by Nature, that is, never were in any visible Covenant-State with God, nor in
any Sense related to Abraham as a Root, were grafted into the true Olive Jesus
Christ, and into the true Gospel Church, and so Partakers of the Sap and
Fatness of the Root, and of the Olive, that is, of the spiritual Blessings and
Privileges of Abraham, and of the Covenant of Grace made with him, and of the
sweet Blessings and Privileges of the Gospel Church, and this they receive and
partake of, as being first grafted by saving Faith in Christ, and so united to
his mystical Body. But since there are a great Number of the old natural
Branches that are beloved for their Father's sake, that is, for the sake of
Abraham, as the Root and Father of all the Elect Seed; they shall in due time
be grafted in again, and so become a People visibly owned of God, and in
Covenant with him, as all the true Seed now are, and formerly were. And if this
be considered, what does this Text do to prove the natural Seed of Believers
are in the Gospel Covenant; for if the natural Seed of Abraham can lay no
claim, nor have any Right to Gospel-Priviledges, but are gone or broken off,
what ground is there for us to think that our natural Offspring (as such)
should be taken in? The Apostle speaks not of such Branches, or of being Holy
with an external federal Holiness, but of such a Holiness as was in the Root,
viz. Abraham, who believed in God; and thus all his true spiritual Seed (who
are actually Branches and in Covenant, being grafted into Christ by Faith) are
holy: and also all the elect Seed of Abraham, not yet called, are decretively
holy, or in God's Sight so, who calls things that are not, as if they were,
they are all holy, The Jews not called according to the Decree of God and his
purpose, who are in the Election of Grace, are holy.
and beloved for their Father Abraham 's sake, with whom the Covenant of Grace
was made for himself and all his true spiritual Seed; and it is from this
Argument the Apostle argues for the calling of the Jews, and the grafting of
them in again, who belong to the Election of Grace.

They therefore who would make every believing Parent to be the Root to his
natural Offspring, as Abraham was to his true spiritual Seed or Offspring; or a
common Head or Root of their natural Offspring, as he was to his, know not what
they say or affirm; But one common Root or Father of Believers.
for then there would be so many common Roots and Fathers, like as Abraham was
called a Root and Father; and then also there would be a Knowledge still of Men
after the Flesh, which the Apostle Paul disclaims, 2 Cor. 5.17. Moreover, the
Jews who were broken off, are still the natural Seed of Abraham; and if
therefore this Holiness was an external relative federal Holiness, they are
still in that Sense holy as far forth as any Children of a believing Gentile
can be said to be; but this it is evident is not that Holiness of which the
Apostle speaks, nor is there any such Holiness under the Gospel Dispensation
spoken of.

We shall come now to consider your other Proof for federal Holiness, which is
1 Cor. 7.14. The unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the believing Husband, etc.
else were your Children unclean, but now are they holy.

Which Words (say you) are St. Paul's Answer to the Corinthians Scruple:
Whether such as had Heathen and Infidel Wives, ought to put them away with
their Children, as in the Days of Ezra? The Apostle resolves them, that they
ought not; for, says he, The unbelieving Wife is sanctified to the believing
Husband: how sanctified? not in her Nature, but in her Use, say you; so as that
they might lawfully cohabit and converse together. And for your Children they
are holy, not with an inherent internal personal Holiness; for the holiest
Man-child is born in Sin, and by Nature a Child of Wrath; but with an external
relative federal Holiness; they are not common and unclean, like the Children
of Infidels, but fit to be Partakers of the Privileges of the Church, which
the Children of Infidels are not.

1. I answer, you cannot be ignorant but* that you know well enough this Text
has been fully opened by diverse Learned Men, as well Pedo-Baptists as
Anti-Pedobaptists, who prove the Holiness here spoken of, is no such external
relative federal Holiness you dream of. In the first Place you speak right, it
was about that very matter that the Corinthians wrote to St. Paul, viz. whether
the believing Husband might live or cohabit with the unbelieving Wife, etc. So
that the Scope and Coherence of the Text opens the matter, The Holiness of the
Unbeliever and Child, all one and the same.
and shows what Holiness it is the Apostle intends, viz. only a matrimonial
Holiness; for should he make their Marriage void, their Children would be
unclean or illegitimate, i. e. Bastards: for though it is true the Case was not
as you say concerning Men and Whores, but about Husbands and Wives; yet you
honestly say, It was about the Lawfulness of their Marriage, as in Ezra's time,
when some were commanded to put their Wives away, because the Marriage was
unlawful: such, say we, as is the Sanctification or Holiness of the unbelieving
Wife or Husband, is the Sanctification or Holiness of the Child; and that you
grant to be a matrimonial Sanctification; so as they might lawfully cohabit
together as Man and Wife. And indeed if the Children had from hence an external
relative federal ^^liness, it would follow also that the unbelieving Husband
and Wife had such an external relative federal Holiness likewise, and that
would open the same Door to baptize the unbelieving Husband or Wife: for may
not another Person argue thus, The unbelieving Husband is holy, or sanctified
by the believing Wife, and therefore by virtue of her Faith may and ought to be
baptized? you read [to] the believing Husband, and indeed I find the Greek word
elsewhere so renders it (...).

Let us consider how the Apostle speaks, viz. with respect to a thing present,
or past, therefore he uses the Preterperfect Tense, (...), has been
sanctified: yea, See Mr. Tombs.
in probability he speaks of a Sanctification even when both were Unbelievers
or Infidels; for he says, (...) twice in the Preterperfect Tense, and he
mentions the Unbeliever distinctly; but the Believer without the Expression of
his Faith, under the Title of Husband or Wife, and says, your Children in
Discrimination, without Difference, as well those they had before, one was a
Believer, as since; and if so, then the Children born to them, whilst both were
Unbelievers, were as holy as such born after one became a Believer; and what
Holiness was in the Children then think you? even no other than that which is
in all Children born in lawful Wedlock, whether their Parents are Believers or
Unbelievers.

And this sense is the more confirmed in that (...) Sanctification is the same
with Chastity, 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. so that the sense is, the unbelieving Husband is
sanctified to his Wife, that is, lawfully or chastely used as a Husband, without
Fornication in respect of his own Wife, whether Believer or Unbeliever, and
therefore not to be refused. And this sense only serves for the Apostle's
purpose. The words are a reason why they might lawfully live together; the
reason must be taken from that which was not contingent, but certain. Therefore
let them live together; for though one be an Unbeliever the other a Believer,
yet Marriage continues still, they are Husband and Wife, and sanctified to each
others use in respect of their chaste Ejoyment of each other, and it is no Sin
in them so to company together notwithstanding the Unbelief of one Party; for
Marriage is honorable among all, even Unbelievers, and the Bed undefiled, Heb.
13.4. and Holiness and Honor are terms (as one observes) of like sense in this
matter, 1 Thessalonians. 4.7.

Now this being granted, which inddeed must of necessity, then the Uncleanness
must be understood of Bastardy, and the Holiness of Legitimation, as Mat. 2.15.
for no other Holiness necessarily follows to their Children in that their
Parents Marriage is lawful: See the Apostle's Conclusion, Else were your
Children unclean: you leave out [ Else] for you mention Children as another
Doubt which was in the Corinthians about them, which cannot be gathered from
the Text nor Scope of it, but [ Else] were your Children unclean, is brought in
as an Argument to prove that which he says last; as the Particle (...) shows;
for the terms (...) else were, are argumentative as much as quoniam tum,
because then used. So 1 Cor. 15.14, 29. Romans 11.16. to prove that which went
before.

That here the Argument is ab absurdo, from an Absurdity which would follow if
the thing to be proved were not granted, and the Speech must needs be
Elliptick, and somewhat is to be repeated to make the Speech full, as when its
said, Romans 11.6. (...); and to make the sense you must add, (...), because of
work; and so here (...); for if the unbelieving Husband has not been
sanctified to the Wife, your Children, etc. so that this Argument of the
Apostle is entire, viz. If the unbelieving Husband were not sanctified by the
Wife, then were your Children unclean; but they are not unclean, but holy;
Ergo, the unbelieving Husband is sanctified to the Wife. Now the Major of the
Syllogism is a Contradiction, the Sequel of it were not true if this
Proposition were not true: All the Children of those Parents, whereof the one
is not sanctified to the other, are unclean. Now if the Sanctification be here
meant of Matrimonial Sanctification, as I have proved it must; and the
Uncleanness be meant of federal Uncleanness, so as to exclude them out of the
Covenant, whether of saving Grace, or Church Priviledges, the Proposition were
most false, since the Children of Parents, whereof one was not matrimonially
sanctified to the other, but came together unchastly, as Pharez and Zarah of
Judah and Tamar, Jepthah of Gillead, and many others, were within the Covenant
of saving Grace and Church Priviledges: therefore to make the Proposition true,
(without which the Apostle speaks that which is most false) it must be
understood of Uncleanness by Bastardy; for it is true of no other Uncleanness,
that all Children of those Parents, whereof the one is not sanctified to the
other, are unclean, but now are they holy: the Particle (...), but now, is not
an Adverb of time here, as Beza rightly speaks, but (...), else were. So (...),
but [now] is a Particle of reasoning used in the assumption of Arguments, which
shows it is the assumption of the Apostle's Argument, and therefore it must be
understood of Holiness opposite to the Uncleanness mentioned; but that being no
other than Bastardy, the Holiness can be meant of no other than Legitimation.
Nor is this any more an unlikely sense, since Barstards were reckoned among
unclean Persons, Deuteronomy. 23.2. and the Apostle's Expression is allusive to the
Jewish speaking and Estimation, and why it should be thought strange that Holy
should signify Legitimation, I know not, when as Mal. 2.51. (...) a Seed of
God, is rendered by some Pedo-baptists a holy Seed, we read it a godly Seed,
which were such Children (you cannot deny) born in lawful Marriage. And that we
are not alone touching this sense of the Words and Matter, pray take the
Testimony of diverse Learned Men, who yet held Infant Baptism, but found this
Text remote to the business of proving it.

Jerome, as I find him quoted by a Learned Man, Diverse Fathers and learned Men
assert, the Holiness of the Child is meant of a Matrimonial Holiness, the Child
is legitimate.
says, Because of God's Appointment Marriage is holy.

See Chameri,. 50. Sic Ambrosium, Thomam Anselmum exposuisse, and tunc Suarez
appellat literalem sensum. That Ambrose, Thomas, Anselm so expounded it, and
this Suarez calls the literal sense.

Melancthon in his Commentary upon this place, says thus, Therefore Paul
answers, that the Marriages are not to be pulled asunder for their unlike
Opinions of God, if the impious Person do not cast away the other. And for
Comfort he adds, as a reason, the unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the
believing Wife. Meat is sanctified: for that which is holy in use that is
granted to Believers of God, things prohibited under the Law, as Swines Flesh,
and a Woman in her Pollution were called unclean. The Connection of the Argument
is this, If the use of Marriage should not please God, your Children would be
Bastards, and so unclean: but your Children are not Bastards; therefore the use
of Marriage pleases God: and how Bastards were unclean in a peculiar matter,
the Law shows, Deuteronomy. Thus far Melancthon. Camerarius gives the same sense, as
Chamier observes.

Musculus in his Comment on the place, confesses, that he had formerly abused
this place against the Anabaptists.

Camera on the place says [For the unbelieving Husband has been sanctified]
an unusual change of the Tense; that is, sanctified in the lawful use of
Marriage: for without this, says he, it would be that their Children should be
unclean, that is, infamous, and not legitimate; who so are holy, (that is,
during the Marriage) are without all blot of Ignominy.

Erasmus upon the place says thus, Infants born of such Parents, as one being
a Christian, the other not, are legitimately holy; for the Conversion of either
Husband or Wife, does not dissolve the Marriage which was made when both were
in Unbelief.

Nay, I find a very learned Divine to affirm the Ancients expounded this place
no otherwise. None, says he, that ever I met with, expound it of federal
Holiness, till the Controversy of the Anabaptists in Germany arose.

And, Sir, since you are so ingenuous, as to confess in Page 25. that the
unbelieving Husband is sanctified in respect of Conjugal Relation to the Wife
in a way of Marriage, in which, so far you agree with these learned Men; and
this being so, how come you to assert it is federal Holiness, that is said to be
in the Children?

What we say, it appears, is not a racking of the Scripture to maintain a
private Opinion, therefore what you speak is not true; and tho the word [holy]
refers here to what we affirm with others, yet the Apostle speaks truly. Tho
it is granted the Children of Heathens born in lawful Wedlock, are no more
Bastards than the Children of Christians: for if the Marriage were made void it
would render their Children to be unclean, or base born. And what tho the Greek
word does signify in so many places you mention, spiritual Sanctification and
Separation to God? show us where it signifies external relative federal
Holiness in the New Testament. Yet, Mr. Tombs
as one observes, the word is not bound up to that sense, as you seem to
intimate; for (...) is used for Castimoniam servo, as Stephanus in his
Thesaurus observes out of Demosthenes; (...), where a Priest of Bacchus speaks
thus, (...); I am holy and pure from the Comp^^^ of Man: and the words (...),
chaste, to be chaste, to make chaste, Chastity, coming from the same Root with
(...) holy; whether (...), to reverence, or (...) to admire, as Grammarians
conceive, are used for Holiness very frequently, both in Scripture and in all
sorts of Greek Writers: So that what you say as to the Signification of the
word (...), holy, that it cannot be taken for [legitimate] is fully cleared,
and we justified from your unjust Accusation, viz. that we wrested the word to
favor our private Opinion: neither are we out in our Logic, as you infer; but
now the Inference may be, that you are weak in your Greek. And to conclude; But
if it does signify holy, as you say, why might not the Children of such as the
Apostle speaks of, be said to be holy, as well as the Infidel of unbelieving
Wife is said to be sanctified? what is the difference between Holy and
sanctified?

CHAP. IV.
Wherein the Argument for Infant Baptism, taken from the constant and universal
Practice of the Church in all Ages, which is Mr. Burkit 's last Argument, is
fully answered, and Antiquity proved on our side.

YOur sixth and last Argument for Infant Baptism, is this, viz.

That which has been the constant and immemorial Practice of the Church of God
in all Ages of the World, is unquestionably an Ordinance of God, and agreeable
to his Will. But Infants Initiation, or the Admission of Infants into the
Jewish Church by Circumcision, and into the Christian Church by Baptism, has
been the immemorial Practice of the Universal Church from the Days of Abraham
to this day. Therefore it is undeniably an Ordinance of God, and agreeable to
his Will.

Answ. 1. Though this Syllogism is not good, You forgot all Ages of the World
in your Minor; may be you thought of the Ages before Abraham's time.
I mean true in Form, yet I shall pass that by, and give you a full Answer. But
why do you confound things together, I mean, Initiation and Baptism? as if no
Children were initiated into the Jewish Church without Circumcision; for it is
not so, the Females were initiated without Circumcision, or Baptism, or any
other external Rite so far as we read of.

But as to Infants being admitted Members of the Jewish Church we deny nor, and
all your Arguments from thence I have already answered; your Business is to
prove they were admitted into the Gospel Church, and that by Baptism. The
Church of Christ under the Gospel, is more Spiritual than that under the Law, I
tell you again, it is not National, not Members by Generation, but by
Regeneration; not those born of the Flesh, but those born of the Spirit.

And pray read what Reverend Dr. Owen has said in his Catechism about
Government, p. 106. Our Lord Jesus Christ (says he) has laid down as an
Everlasting Rule, Dr. Owen, A Passage worth noting.
That unless a Man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John
3.3. requiring Regeneration as an indispensable Condition in a Member of his
Church, a Subject of his Kingdom; for his Temple is now built of living Stones,
1 Pet. 2.5. Men spiritual, and savingly quickened from their Death in Sin, and
by the Holy Ghost, (whereof they are Partakers) made a meet Habitation for God,
Ephesians. 2.21, 22. 1 Cor. 3.16, 2 Cor. 6.16. which vital Supplies from Christ its
Head, increases in Faith and Holiness, edifying it self in Love.

Dr. Tailor Libert. Proph. p. 242.
And (says Dr. Tailor) they that baptize Children, make Baptism to be wholly
an outward Duty, a Work of the Law, a carnal Ordinance; it makes us adhere to
the Letter, without regard of the Spirit, to be satisfied with Shadows, to
return to Bondage, to relinquish the Mysteriousness, the Substance and
Spirituality of the Gospel; which Argument is of so much the more
consideration, because under the Spiritual Covenant or Gospel of Grace, if the
Mystery goes not before the Symbol, (which it does, when the Symbols are
signations of Grace, as the Sacraments are) yet it always accompanies it, but
never follows in order of Time. And this is clear in the perpetual Analogy of
Holy Scripture. -- The Lord open your Eyes, Sir, I am persuaded you speak as
you believe.

But to proceed;

You come, in page 26. to the Gospel Church. (1.) From the Command of Christ.
(2.) From the Practice of the Apostles. (3.) From the constant usage of the
Primitive Church after the Apostles.

1. That Infants were to be admitted into the Christian Church, you say,
appears from our Savior's express Command in the words of the Commission, Mat.
28.19. Go, disciple all Nations, baptizing them; that is, go and proselyte all
the Gentile Nations, without distinction of Country, Sex, or Age whatsoever,
make the Gospel Church as large as you can.

Answ. 1. Who is so blind as he who is not willing to see? It is evident to all
Men who understand what they read, that none are to be baptized by the virtue
and plain meaning of our Savior's Commission, but such only who are first made
Disciples, (as I have proved) or as St. Mark renders it, such who believed. And
that it is so, I have already proved;

(1.) From the Practice of Christ, John 4.1. he first made Disciples, and then
baptized them.

(2.) From the Practice of the Apostles, who always required Faith and
Repentance of such, they by virtue of their Commission, did baptize, as Acts
2.37. and 8.27. and 10.47.

(3.) From the Nature of the Ordinance it self, it being a sign of that inward
Grace the Person baptized ought to have.

(4.) From the Nature of the Gospel Church, it being only built up of living
Stones, and to be no larger than Christ appointed it.

But (say you, page 27.) doubtless had our Savior here intended the exclusion
of Infants out of the Visible Church, he would have acquainted her with this
Alteration, Christ being faithful to him that appointed him, as was Moses in
all his House, Heb. 3.2.

Answ. I must retort it back upon you with much better Reason: Doubtless, say
I, had our Savior intended the admission of Infants, he would at this time
have acquainted his Disciples, (and so us) that it was his Will they should be
received, since, as you well say, he was so faithful, and the rather, because
he commanded his Disciples to receive into his Church such who were taught or
made Disciples. When he commanded Abraham to circumcise his Male-Infants,
Abraham knew well enough he was not to circumcise his Females, though he
received no Negative Law in the case. What is not commanded, I say again, is
forbid, especially in all Instituted Worship, or else whither shall we run?

Thus your first Proof is gone, having nothing in it..

2. Baptizing Infants appears in the Christian Church (you say) from the
Practice of the Apostles, who baptized whole Families, i. e. Lydia and her
Household, Acts 16.15. the Jailer and all his, etc.

Answ. 1. If there were no Families or Households but in which there are some
Infants, you might have some pretense for what you infer from hence; but how
palpable is it that there are every where many whole Families in which there is
no Infant or Child in Nonage; There are many whole Households in which there
are no Infants.
and this being so, what certain Conclusion or Consequence can be drawn from
hence?

2. Besides, you know by a certain Figure called a Synecdoche, a part is put
for the whole, as Isa. 7.2, 5, 8, 9. the Tribe of Ephraim is put for all
Israel: It Is said, All Jerusalem and Judea went out to be baptized by John in
Jordan. In 1 Samuel 1.21, 22. the Text says expressly, The Man Elkanah, and all
his House, went up to offer unto the Lord; yet in the next Verse it is as
expressly said, That Hannah and her Child Samuel went not up; and yet it is said,
all his House went up.

3. As touching the Jaylor's House, it is positively said, Paul preached to him,
and to all that were in his House, (do you think he preached to his Infants, if
he had any)? And to put the Matter out of doubt, it is said, He rejoiced,
believing in God with all his House; as well as it is said, He was baptized, and
all his.

4. And as touching Lydia, we still say it is uncertain whether she was a Maid,
Widow, or Wife; but if she was married, and had Children, it is very unlikely
(if Babes) that they were at that time with her, because she was far from her
proper Dwelling, nay many Miles from it, for she was of the City Thyatira,
Lydia was far from her own dwelling when she was baptized.
verse. 14. but when Paul preached to her, she was at Philippi, where she was
merchandising, being a seller of Purple; Can we suppose she carried her little
Babes so far to Market? Besides, those of her House were called Brethren, who
were baptized with her, therefore sure Children cannot be here meant, verse. 40.
Will you, Sir, build your practice of baptizing of little Babes from such
uncertain Conclusions, when it is uncertain whether she had Children or no? or
if she had, whether they were with her at that time or not? Our denying of it,
is as good as your affirming it; yet it is plain she had Servants, or some who
are called her Household, therefore that is impertinent you mention in p. 28.

And thus it appears to all impartial Persons, that there is nothing in your
second Proof touching the Practice of the Gospel Church; here is no mention made
of one Infant baptized, nor the least Color of Reason to conclude there were
in those Families.

A Negative is not to be proved, it is unreasonable to desire it.
But you in the next place put us upon searching the Scripture to prove a
Negative, i. e. that there were none baptized in Infancy; you might as well bid
us search and see if we can find there were not one Infant who broke Bread, or
were not ordained an Elder or Pastor of a Church. How can we prove they did not
make use of Honey or Oil in Baptism, which some of the Ancient Fathers used, as
Mr. Perkins notes; or Salt and Spittle, which Practice is still (as I said
before) in the Romish Church? Where is the extreme Unction forbid, Popish Rites
not in the Negative forbid.
or Auricular Confession, or to use Beads in Prayer, and a hundred more such
Romish Popperies? may these things be therefore done? Because we read not they
are forbid, I thought adding to God's Word was forbidden, Rev. 22. But we will
repeat your Words to see the Strength of your Argument. Search the Scripture,
and produce me, say you, one Instance if you can, from the time St. John the
Baptist, to the Death of St. John the Evangelist, which was more than
threescore Years, during which time many thousands of Infants were grown up to
Maturity, and make it appear they were not baptized in their Infancy, or that
their Baptism was deferred till riper Years; or that there is any Divine
Command for the delaying the Baptism of Children of Christian Parents until
they are grown up, and I will frankly yield the Cause. Bravely spoken!

Answ. I must retort this Argument back again upon you also, and show it is a
great Argument against Infant Baptism, and not for it. For, say I, let it be
considered that since there was such a long Space of time as 60 Years, and much
longer, between John Baptist and the Death of John the beloved Disciple, or
John the Evangelist, Multitude of Infants born to baptized Believers in the
Gospel-Days, yet we read of none of them on their Parents Faith were baptized.
during which time many thousands of Infants were born of baptized Believers,
both Jews and Gentiles. Now Reader, pray observe Mr. Burkit says in the
Gospel-Day, and when our Savior sent his Disciples first to preach, they were
to teach or make Disciples of those they baptized; but upon the Parents
believing and being baptized, he says, their Children were admitted to Baptism
also. Now say I, since many Parents thus taught and baptized, had Multitudes of
Infants born to them; How comes it about that we read not of one of their
Infants were baptized? no not from the time of John Baptist, to the Death of
John the Evangelist? Can any Man think had any Infants been baptized, that God
would not have left some account of it, to put the matter out of doubt,
especially since it was never taught doctrinally, or commanded? certainly, it
could not stand consistent with the Care, Wisdom and Faithfulness of Jesus
Christ, to have hid and concealed such a Practice, had there been one Infant by
his Authority or Allowance baptized. But since the Scripture is silent in it,
we may assure our selves it is not the Will of God Infants should be baptized.
Also if those who were to be baptized, were first to be taught, were first to
repent and believe; then it follows clearly that Baptism must be deferred till
Children were of ripe Years, and able so to do.

We come to what you say in page 28. where you tell us of a cloud of Witnesses
for Infant Baptism in the Churches after the Apostles time.

Answ. And so you may if you pass the first 2 or 3 hundred Years after Christ;
and many Errors besides which crept amain into the Churches. But pray remember,
Sir, now you are without Book, you are forced to quit the Holy*Bible, that
sacred History, and great Charter of the Church: and therefore all your Proof
out of humane History, which may be true, or may not be true, signifies just
nothing. But you had best take heed lest we carry the Cause against you here
too, i. e. for the first Centuries; we will examine your Authors and humane
Testimonies.

The first is Vossius, a later Writer, I know not but you may have Ireneus and
St. Cyprian, out of him: I do confess Ireneus lived not above 200 Years after
Christ, or in the second Century. Thus you and others cite him, viz. Omnes
venit Christus per semetipsum salvare, omnes qui per eum renascuntur ad Deum
Infantes and parvulos juniores and seniores. In English thus, Jesus Christ came
to save all by himself, all who by him are born again unto God, Infants and
little ones, Young and Old.

Mr. Burkit's Proof of Infant Baptism from Ireneus, is by uncertain Consequence.
Answ. Reader, pray observe here is not a word of one Infant baptized, but Mr.
Burkit infers it from his Words; so that we have nothing but Consequence yet,
neither from God's Word, nor the Words of Man. Christ no doubt came to save
some of all sorts of Men; and who doubts but he came to save Infants and little
ones, young and old? But why must those Words, who are born again, be applied
to Infant Baptism.

The Scope of Ireneus in that Chapter is to refute the Grosticks, who said that
Christ did not exceed one and thirty Years of Age; against whom Ireneus
alleged that Christ lived in every Age, of Infancy, Youth, Old and Age; that
by his Age and Example, he might sanctify every Age. So that here Ireneus
speaks not of being born again by Baptism: for he says, Omnes inquam qui per
eum renascuntur in Deum; i. e. I say all which are born again by him to God, i.
e. by Christ; not as if he had baptized Infants, but because he, ( i. e.
Christ) was an Infant, that by the Example or Virtue of his Age, he might
sanctify Infants, as the whole Discourse in Latin plainly shows, viz. Magister
ergo existens, Magistri quoque habebat aetatem, non reprobans nec supergrediens
hominem, neque solvens suam legem in se humani generis, sed omnem aetatem
sanctificans per illam, etc.

2. As to Cyprian, he lived, as I find it in History, about 248, or 300 Years
after Christ: and should I tell the Reader what Corruptions and Errors were let
in about that time, he would not wonder to hear Infants were allowed Baptism:
yet we have Cyprian against Cyprian. It is true, as far as I can gather, in his
time Infant Baptism was first introduced, without any Ground or Warrant from
Christ, and it was as strongly opposed, which appears by the Debates and Doubts
about it.

3. The third humane Authority you bring is that cursed Decree of the Milevetan
Council, Some say this Council ordained it first.
that all who denied Infant Baptism, should be Anathema, accursed. If you come
but a little lower, you have Proof enough in the Popish Councils, Decrees and
Canons. But it is to be observed, that those Fathers pleaded for Infant Baptism,
as that which took away Original Sin, and gave Children the Eucharist too; in
the first Sacrament abusing that Text, John 3.5. and in the other, that in John
6.53. These are all your humane Proofs from the Churches after the Primitive
Apostolical Days, which you bring; and I doubt not but to give you better and
more Authentic Authority from some of the ancient Fathers against
Infant Baptism, than you have brought for it, and some of them nearer the
Apostles Days too. The first is Justin Martyr, though I have him not, 150 Years
after Christ
yet take his Words as they are cited by Mr. Richard Baxter's Saints Rest, Cap.
8. Sect. 5. I will declare unto you how we offer up our selves to God, after
that we are renewed through Christ; those amongst us that are instructed in the
Faith, The Fathers that writ against Infant Baptism.
and believe that which we teach them is true, being willing to live according
to the same, we do admonish to fast and pray for Forgiveness of Sins, and we
also pray with them: And when they are brought by us into the Water, and there,
as we were new born, are they also by new Birth renewed; and then in calling
upon God the Father, the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit, they are
washed in Water, etc.

This Food we call the Eucharist, to which no Man is admitted but only he that
believes the Truth of the Doctrine, being washed in the Laver of Regeneration
for Remission of Sins, and so lives as Christ has taught; and this (says Mr.
Baxter) is, you see, no new way. It Is said Justin Martyr was converted about 30
Years after the Apostle John: and by the Order then used in the Church, it
appears there was no Infant Baptism thought of.

Walaf. Strabo. Eccl. Hist. c. 16. Vicecom. l. 1. c. 30.
Walafrid Strabo, as I find him cited by a great Historian, says, That there
was no Children, but aged understanding Persons, baptized in this Age; that is
to say, in the 2 d Century. Walafrid Strabo, Eccl. Hist. c. 26. Vicecom. l. 1.
c. 30.

Tertullian in his Book of Baptism, speaking of that Text, No Infant Baptism in
the second Century. Tertul. in his Book of Baptism, cap. 18. Tertul. lived 200
Years after Christ.
Suffer little Children to come unto me, says, Indeed the Lord said, do not
hinder them to come unto me: Let them come therefore while they grow to Years,
and while come let them be taught, let them become Christians when they are
able to know Christ; why does innocent Age hasten to the Remission of Sins? Men
will deal more warily in worldly Affairs: So that they who are not trusted with
an earthly Inheritance, are trusted with an heavenly one: Let them ask for
Salvation, that thou may appear to have given it to him.

Dr. Tailor says thus, Dr. Tailor, Lib. Proph. p. 237.
The Truth of the Business is, as there was no Command of Scripture to oblige
Children to the Susception of it; so the necessity of Pedo-Baptism was not
determined in the Church, till the Canon that was made in the Milevetan
Council, a Provincial in Africa, never till then. I grant, says he, it was
practiced in Africa before that time, and they or some of them thought well of
it: And tho that is no Argument for us to think so; yet none of them ever
pretend it to be necessary, nor to have been a Precept of the Gospel. St.
Austin was the first that ever preached it to be necessary, and it was in his
Heat and Anger against Pelagius. Thus Dr. Tailor.

Ignatius in his Discourse about Baptism, asserts, Ignatius.
That it ought to be accompanied with Faith, Love and Patience, after
preaching. H. Montanus, p. 45. and Jacob Dubois, p. 16, to 22. and Dutch
Martyrology, where Ignatius's Letters are mentioned to Polycarp Tralensis, to
them of Philadelphia.

Dr. Tailor says, Dr. Taylor's Disswasive against Popery, p. 118.
in his Disswasive against Popery, page 118. printed 1667. one of his last
Pieces, thus, viz. That there is a Tradition to baptize Infants, relies but
upon two Witnesses, Origin and Austin; and the latter having it from the
former, it lies upon a single Testimony, which, says he, is a pitiful Argument
to prove a Tradition Apostolical: He is the first that spoke of it, but
Tertullian that was before him, seems to speak against it, which he would not
have done, if it had been an Apostolical Tradition; and that it was not so, is
but too certain, if there be any Truth in the Words of Ludovicus Vives, who
says, Ludovicus Vives.
That anciently none were baptized but Persons of riper Age.

And as touching Origen's Works, and many more of the Ancient Fathers, there is
great cause to doubt about them, because, as Mr. Perkins notes, Perkins's
Prepar. of the Probl. p. 491.
no Greek Copies thereof are extant; and many other Books said to be written by
such and such Fathers, are spurious, and never wrote by them. See Perkins.

Great Basil in his Book of Bapt. cap. 12.
Great Basil in his Book of the Holy Spirit, Chap. 12. says, Faith and Baptism
are the two Means of Salvation inseparably cleaving together; for Faith is
perfected by Baptism, but Baptism is founded by Faith; and by the same Names
both things are fulfilled: for as we believe in the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, so also we are Baptized in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit; and indeed there goes before, a Confession leading us unto Salvation;
but Baptism follows, sealing our Confession and Covenant.

The same Churches Teacher, (says the Learned Dr. Du-Veil) in his third Book
against Eunomius, speaks thus, viz. Baptism is the Seal of Faith, Faith is
the Confession of the Godhead; it is necessary we should first believe, and
then be sealed in Baptism. Du-Veil on Act. cap. 8. p. 278.

Zonaras.
Zonaras says, The Babe will then need Baptism, when it can choose it.

Greg. Nazianzen.
Gregory Nazianzen, in his 4 th Oration, says Dr. Du Veil, Of those who die
without Baptism, gives us an Instance in those to whom Baptism was not admitted
by reason of Infancy. And the same Nazianzen, though he was a Bishop's Son,
being a long time bred up under his Father's Care, was not (says the said
Doctor) baptized till he came to Man's Age. In like manner (says he) Basil the
Great, that was born of devout Parents, and instructed from his Childhood, was
not baptized until a Man, p. 280. Also says John of Antioch, called afterward
Chrysostom, was born of Christian Parents, as the truer Opinion is, tutored by
the famous Bishop Meletius, was not yet baptized till he was one and twenty
Years of Age.

Hierom, also Ambrose and Austin, who were born of Christian Parents, and
consecrated to Christian Discipline, even from their Childhood, were not
baptized before thirty Years of Age, as Dr. Tailor Bishop of Down asserts, in
his 12 th Section of the Life of Christ.

Now, Sir, here are Examples enough that do prove, in the Primitive Times,
Children of Baptized Believers were not baptized, but had their Baptism delayed
till they themselves believed, and gave an account of their Faith. Had it been
the constant Custom of the Godly to baptize Infants, would not these, think
you, have been in their Infancy baptized?

Grotius (as I find him quoted by Dr. Duveil') says, Grotius's Notes on the
Gospel Dr. Du-Veil on Act. cap. 8. p. 282.
The Primitive Churches did not Baptize Infants. See Grotius his Notes on the
Gospel.

Nay (says the same great and Learned Writer) it does most plainly appear, by
the right of baptizing used in the Romish Church, for Baptism is to be asked
before the Person to be baptized do enter into the Church; which the Surety
does in the Infant's Name; a clear distinct Confession of Faith is required,
which the same Surety rehearses in the Infant's Name, i. e. A renouncing of
the World, its Pomps, the Flesh and the Devil. We may by this perceive from
whence the Original of our old Church-Catechism came. But this is a clear
Argument, says the Doctor, to prove of old the Persons who were to be
baptized, asked themselves Baptism in their own Names, of their own choice, and
profess their own Faith.

In the Neocesarean Council it was framed thus; Anno 311. Canon 6.
As to those who are big with Child, they ought to be baptized when they will;
for in this Sacrament there is nothing common to her that brings forth, and
that which shall be brought forth from her Womb, because in that Confession,
the Liberty of every one's Choice is declared.

Whence we may infer, 1. That in that Age there seemed to be that aversness
from baptizing Children, that they were not willing to admit Women great with
Child to Baptism, lest it should be thought that the Child was baptized with
them.

2. That in those Times, in the Confession of Faith, in the Death, Burial, and
Resurrection of Christ, which was done in a public and solemn manner in their
Baptism, a liberty of Choice and Consent was required as preparatory to it: for
the incapacity of the Infant in the Womb, to declare this Choice and Consent,
is the reason why they conclude that the Infant was not baptized with the
Mother.

3. That it was then judged necessary to have the Consent and Choice of those
who were to be baptized.

Dr. Du-Veil citing the same Synod on this Passage, Dr. Du-Veil, on Acts cap.
8. p. 279.
( viz. That concerning the Baptism of a Woman with Child, that her Baptism
concerns not her Child, for every one is to give a demonstration of his own
Faith and Confession) says, -- However the Interpreters draw it to another
purpose, it does appear, that the Question was made of a Woman big with Child,
because it did seem that the Child was baptized together with the Mother; which
notwithstanding ought not be used, nor to be baptized, except of its own proper
Election and Profession.

Dr. Barlow late Bishop of Lincoln, in his Letter to Mr. T. says, I believe
and know that there is neither Precept nor Example in the Scripture for
Pedo-baptism, nor any just Evidence for it for above 200 Years after Christ.
Tertullian condemns it as an unwarrantable Custom; and Nazianzen a good while
after dislikes it: Sure I am (says he) that in the Primitive Times they were
Catechumeni, then Illuminati or Baptizati, and that not only Pagans, and
Children of Pagans converted, but Children of Christian Parents. The truth is,
I do believe Pedo-Baptism, how or by whom I know not, came into the World in
the second Century; and in the Third and Fourth began to be practiced, though
not generally, and defended as lawful from the Text, John 3.5. Grossly
misunderstanding upon the like mistake, John 6.53. they did, for many
Centuries, both in the Greek and Latin Church, communicate Infants, and give
them the Lord's Supper; and I confess they might do both, as well as either,
etc. Thus Bishop Barlow.

Curcaeleus says, Curcaeleus Institut. l. 16. c. 1.
Poedobaptismus duobus primis a Christo nato saeculis suit in cognitus, etc.
Pedo-baptism was unknown in the two first Ages after Christ, but in the Third
and Fourth it was approved of by a few, in the Fifth and following Ages it
began to be generally received. And therefore (as afterward he says) this
Rite is indeed observed by us as an ancient Custom, but not as an Apostolical
Tradition.

The same Learned Author, De peccato Originis, Numb. 50. says, Morem Infantes
baptizandi non coepisse ante tertium a Christo nato saeculum, etc. That the
custom of baptizing Infants did not begin till the third Age after Christ, but
in the two former no footsteps of it appear. And afterward says, Sine ipsius
[Christi] mandato introducta est; It was introduced without the Command of
Christ. Athanasius in Sermon. 3. contra Arianus.


Athanasius in Sermon 3. contra Arianos, says, Our Savior did not slightly
command to baptize, but first of all said, Teach, and then Baptize, that true
Faith might come by Teaching, and Baptism be perfected by Faith.

Haimo, Doctrina Baptismus praecedere decet.
Haimo in Postilla upon the Text, Go teach all Nations, Fol. 278. In this place
(says he) is set down a Rule rightly how to baptize; that is, that Teaching
should go before Baptism; for he says, Teach all Nations; and then he says,
and baptize them; for he that is to be baptized, must be before instructed,
that he first learn to believe that which in Baptism he shall receive: for as
Faith without Works is dead, so Works when they are not of Faith, are nothing
worth.

Apostoli jubentur prius docere, baptizare. Super 19 cap. Act.
^^dem in Annotationibus in Mar. The Apostles were commanded, first to teach,
and then to baptize: The Jews were brought by Ceremonies to the Knowledge of the
Truth, but Christians must learn to know them first.

Beda; All those that came to the Apostles to be baptized, were instructed and
taught, concerning the Sacrament of Baptism, then they received the holy
Administration thereof.

Inde cretis de consecrat. distinct. 4. cap. Antebap.
Rabanus. The Catechism, which is the Doctrine of Faith, must go before
Baptism, to the intent that he that is to be baptized, ( i. e. Catech^^^nus)
may first learn the Mysteries of Faith.

Arnobius. Thou art not first (says he) baptized, Arnob. on Psalm. 146.
and then beginnest to effect and embrace the Faith; but when thou art to be
baptized, thou signifiest unto the Priest what thy Desire is, and make thy
Confession with thy Mouth.

Jerome. 400.
Jerome upon Matthew. says, The Lord commanded his Apostles, that they should
first instruct and teach all Nations, and afterward should baptize those that
were instructed into the Mysteries of the Faith; for it cannot be, (says he)
that the Body should receive the Sacrament of Baptism, till the Soul have
received the true Faith.

Sir, What think you now of the Testimony of the Ancient Fathers, and of the
Practice of the Churches after the Apostles days? Sure the Reader must needs
conclude we have it here too, and you must yield whether you will or no, and
give up the Controversy.

But to proceed;

Your first Demonstration to prove Infant Baptism in the days after the
Apostles (in page 30, 31.) is this, Mr. Burkit's first Demonstration to prove
Infant Baptism in the days after the Apostles.
viz. Because that Children had Hands laid upon them in their Minority.

Answ. This signifies nothing, for as the Fathers changed the Ordinance of
Baptism from believing Men and Women to ignorant Babes, so they changed
Imposition of Hands (which I own to be a Principle of Christ's Doctrine, Heb.
6.12.) to such young People who in their Minority had learned the Articles of
the Christian Faith: But clear it is, in the Primitive Apostolical Times, none
but baptized Believers were admitted to that Ordinance of Laying on of Hands,
as Acts 8.14. and 19.6. witnesses.

You do well to acknowledge, in the same 29 th Page, That anciently there were
such called Catechumeni, Persons taught or instructed, and afterward baptized.

You say indeed that there were two sorts, the last you bring for your purpose;
but I know not where you have your Testimony, and therefore shall pass it by.

So much to your first Demonstration from the (...) Fathers.

Your Second to prove Infant Baptism is this, Mr. Burkit's 2d Demonstration to
prove Infant Baptism.
viz. Because (say you) Infants in the Primitive Times were admitted to the
Lord's Supper, therefore you conclude they were admitted to Baptism.

Answ. And they had, say I, as much ground, as Dr. Tailor says, for the one as
for the other; and there is the same Parity of Reason to conclude, as they
erred in the one, so they did in the other.

Why do you not from hence give Infants the Lord's Supper? the reason you give
I have before proved insignificant.

Mr. Burkit's third Demonstration to prove Infant Baptism.
As to your third Demonstration, it is not denied her that Infant Baptism was
received in the Church in the third and fourth Century; with many other
Fopperies, but that does you no Kindness; the Church was adulterated from the
true Apostolical Faith and Practice in many respects in those and after Times
downward.

Mr. Burkit's fourth Demonstration to prove Infant Baptism.
Your fourth Demonstration is this, viz. Page 33. If it was a gross Error in the
Primitive Fathers to admit Infants to Baptism, then they in suffering such an
Error to pass uncensured and uncondemned, were guilty of the greatest Impiety,
etc.

Answ. What then? I ask you, whether you do not believe for several Centuries
those Fathers who admitted Infants to the Lord's Supper without censuring or
condemning it, were not guilty also of as great Impurity? Besides, did not the
same Fathers hold other Errors? see Mr. Perkin's Demonst. of the Problem, page
488. these are his words, viz. And whereas some Fathers, viz. Ireneus, Justin,
Clement, Tertullian, held that the Law of Nature had Power to save the Gentiles
without Christ. And again he says, The Fathers have Errors, yea, and that
sometimes gross ones. Does not History tell us the Fathers used other Rites
also, and that in Baptism? See Perkins, p. 549. The Fathers, says he, used
some other Rites and Ceremonies which are now omitted, as kissing of the Child
which was baptized, in Cyprian, l. 3. ep. 8. use of Milk and Honey, use of Milk
and Wine. Hierom. in Isa. cap. 55. It was an use for the Baptizer to blow in
the Face of the baptized, and the Party baptized used to exufflate the Devil,
whom he renounced. What Credit is to be given to such Fathers? They gave the
Eucharist to Children likewise.

You say the Church of England is for Infant Baptism, Article 27. also the
French, Dutch, Bohemian, Helvetian Churches: What of all this? why did you not
put in the Church of Rome with them? it is clear the Church of the Hebrews, The
Gospel-Churches did not own Infant Baptism.
a Church at Rome in the Apostles days, the Church of the Corinthians,
Galatians, Philippians, Ephesians, Colossians, Sardis, Smyrna, Pergamus,
Philadelphia and Laodicea, owned it not. We must go to the Fountain, and not to
the muddy Stream, to drink pure Water. From the beginning it was not so.

But, say you, Mr. Burkit's Argument for Pedo-baptism, from its long
continuance in the World, answered.
if now the Anabaptists can believe that Almighty God has suffered all his
Churches Ancient and Modern, and that in all parts of the World to fall into
one and the same destroying Practice. They have a Power which I shall never
envy, namely, of believing what they please, page 34.

Answ. 1. You take that for granted which you prove not, viz. That all these
Churches who hold Infant Baptism are true Churches of Christ. Sir, I must tell
you, we have not such a Power of Faith as to believe that.

2. Does not the Apostle declare, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
that a general Apostasy from the true Apostolical Faith and Doctrine would
after his days ensue? And has not the Church of Rome, that Mother of Harlots,
made all the Earth drunk with her Cup for near 1200 Years, or more, and
corrupted all those Churches, more or less, with her poisonous Errors and false
Doctrines, Rites and Ceremonies; and yet Almighty God has suffered her for so
long a time? and many other Errors among Protestants.

M. Tomb' s Anti-pedo-baptism, p. 757, 758.
3. See Mr. Tombs his Answer to this. For if the whole Church might err (says
he) in one Age, it may also in all Ages, collectively considered, the Promises
being no more to the Church in all Ages, collectively considered, than in each
Age distributively considered, nor any means given to them after the Apostles,
collectively considered, to keep them from Error, than to each distributively:
yea the Churches nearer the Apostles had more means to keep them from Error
than other Ages, yet they erred in Doctrine and Discipline, as many Writers
show. As for the Promise, Mat. 16.18. it is not true of the whole Church
visible, the Gates of Hell have and do prevail against her so; but of the
invisible; and yet the Promise is not to the invisible, that they shall not
err, but they shall not err finally to Damnation, which if they did, then the
Gates of Hell should indeed prevail against them.

4. Your Church, and all those other Churches mentioned by you, No Church
infallible.
have other Errors besides this, and yet God suffers you and them to continue
at present in those Errors, for Reasons best known to himself; nor do we say we
are without any Errors, or any Church on Earth, we pretend to no Infallibility:
But in the Point of Baptism we are right by your own Concession, I mean, as to
the baptizing of Believers.

Infant Baptism, tho a great Error, yet not a damning Error*
5. And lastly, We do not say this Error of yours about Infant Baptism, is a
Soul-damning Error, God forbid; tho it does tend to destroy too far the nature
of the holy Sacrament of Baptism, and so also a right Gospel Church according
to the Apostolical Constitution, making your Church National, when the
Gospel-Churches planted by Christ and his Apostles were Congregational.

So much in Answer to all your Arguments for the lawfulness of Infants Baptism.

CHAP. VI.
Showing Infant Baptism is of no use at all, in opposition to what Mr. Burkit
affirms, but contrariwise sinful, i. e. it being an Error, has also many evil
and bad Consequences attending it. With some Reflections on Infants Baptismal
Covenant, as asserted by Mr. Dan. Williams, as well as this Author Mr. Burkit.

YOU say, the Anabaptists assert Infant Baptism is unlawful, because it is
unuseful, Children understanding no more than Brute Beasts what is done to
them; therefore you may as warrantably baptize a Beast as a Child, Page 34. And
then say, page 35. That Infant Baptism is greatly advantageous as an Act of
Initiation into the visible Church.

Answ. 1. You have no Warrant to baptize a Child; but who of the Anabaptists
ever said such words as you here mention? dare you accuse your Neighbors
falsely? it is a bad and unseemly Comparison. But it is no marvel we meet with it
from such as you who are prejudiced against us: some of your Brethren formerly
charged us with baptizing naked. God will judge between us and you in his due
time.

Answ. 2. You should have proved it an Institution, or an Appointment of
Christ; but that you have not yet done, nor never will. True, were
Infant Baptism ordained by Christ to be an initiating Rite into the
Gospel Church, doubtless it had been useful.

3. But what good does your baptizing them do them? what Privilege of the
Church do you allow them? I know not one; if indeed it did adopt the Child to
be a Son or Daughter of God, you say something; or if God had appointed it to
be a Sign or Token of it; but this he has not done, and it is not in your Power
to do it.

1. But you say they have hereby Interest in all the Prayers put up in and by
the Church.

Answ. If you so pray for them, viz. as Members of the visible Church, what
ground have you to believe God will hear you, since he never made them Members
thereof? Besides, the Church prays for all her Members, and for the Children of
them who are Members, that they in due time may become Members, and have equal
Right in all the Blessings of God's Church, if it be his Will to bring them in.
But what ground have you to deny any who are true Members of the Church, the
Eucharist, or Lord's Supper, or any other Privilege whatsoerver?

2. You say, by virtue of this Admission they have an Interest in that special
Providential Care which Christ exercises over his Church.

Answ. No doubt but Christ exercises his Care over poor Infants, but not the
more, assure your self, for your baptizing them without his Authority.

3. You say, hereby the Church stands nearer to them than to the rest of
Mankind, etc. mentioning that Text in Isa. 54.13. Thy Children shall be all
taught of God, etc.

Answ. You cannot bring Infants to stand nearer to God, nor his People by any
Act done by you, without a Rule left by Christ. Besides, that Text in Isa.
54.13. does not refer to Infants, not to our Children as such, but to those
godly Christians who being born in Sion, are indeed truly her Children.

4. 'You say it is an Act of Dedication, etc.

Answ. Who commanded you this way to dedicate your Children to the Lord? Will
you teach him Wisdom? or, are you wiser than he? does he require you so to do?

5. You say, it is greatly advantageous to them, as it is an Act of
Restipulation; that is, say you, a Child at Baptism enters into Covenant with
God.

Answ. Poor Babes! it is without their Knowledge or Consent, or God's
Appointment, which is worst of all, or being able to perform it then, nor many
of them ever after, God never giving them his Grace so to do.

But woe to them, if they do not perform this Covenant, if you and Mr. Daniel
Williams say true; Mr. Dan. Williams in his Book called, The Vanity of Youth,
p. 131.
he says in his Catechism as follows, That those Children who perform not
their Baptismal Covenant do, 1. Reject Christ. 2. They renounce the Blessings
of Gospel. 3. That it is Rebellion against their Maker. 4. That it is Ingratitude
and Perjury to their Redeemer. 5. Gross Injustice to their Parents. 6. That
it is self-killing Cruelty to their own Souls. 7. He says, it is a damning Sin,
nay, it is the damning Sin, and Heart of all Sin.


Is this indeed the Love you Pedo-baptists have to your poor Infants? What,
bring them into such a Covenant, without their Knowledge or Consent, or God's
Appointment, and then threaten them, if they break it, with Hell and Damnation,
and what not!

Do you know they are all Elect Persons, and so such that God will in time
call, give Grace to, and so change their evil and depraved Natures? If not, do
you not heap up a Multitude of Evils upon them, and hereby make their Condition
worse, or aggravate their Sin and Misery for ever?

I know not whether you be of this Pedo-Baptist's Mind, or not; but I think
this Doctrine does not fit a Christian Catechism: if God had required Infants
to enter into such a Covenant, some reason he might have thus to speak: Mr.
Williams worthy of blame as well as Mr. Burkit.
But since he nor you either can prove it, this to me seems a daring boldness
in a Minister of the Gospel to assert, (who I hope is a good Man). God I grant
expects, that all true Believers should perform their Baptismal Covenant, but
then know they are required of God actually to enter into it; they freely of
their own choice enter into it, they are such God has given habitual Grace to
perform it. And he has promised them also a further supply of Grace to enable
them so to do; but nothing of this you can prove, in Infants covenanting in
their Baptism, (but more of this by and by); nor will their Sureties help the
matter, for if they cannot perform those things they promise for themselves,
how should they be able to do it for others? besides it is an humane Invention,
and not appointed of God, as Mr. Perkins himself confesses.

But truly Mr. Williams's Doctrine afflicts my Mind: Strange! is this Sin the
damning Sin? I thought the damning Sin (by way of eminency) had been the Sin of
Unbelief: Suppose your own Child should not believe he is bound by virtue of
that baptismal Covenant you brought him into, but when grown up, disowns that
(you call) Baptism, etc. not believing it is a Truth of Christ, must he be
damned?

But to proceed;

You having showed the Advantages of Infant Baptism, without giving one
Scripture-Text to prove what you say is true; you, in page 38. come to show,
that Baptism is more useful and beneficial to a Child in Infancy, than to omit
it till riper Age; Because no Infant-membership is capable of Hypocrisy, which
Persons grown up are.

Answ. 1. Then give them the Lord's Supper also, for doubtless if they receive
it, they will not eat and drink their own Damnation, as may be some, that have
it given to them, do. I tremble at what you dare to say and write, in which you
seem to arraign the Wisdom of the ever-blessed Jesus; Has he appointed
Believers, or Adult Persons, who are gracious, to be baptized, and none else?
and do you say, the Ordinance better suits with ignorant Babes? Should you
dictate to your earthly Prince, would he allow it? much less to contradict and
correct him, as if your Wisdom was more than his.

2. You say, It Is more advantageous to Infants, than those of riper Years; as
it is a pre-engagement upon them to resist Temptations.

Answ. You may after this rate bring them under an hundred Engagements and
Covenants, nay, may be more plausible ones too, may you not? When they know
what they do, make them take a solemn Oath, or enter into Bonds, upon pain of
severe Punishment, that they shall not yield to Temptations, and pretend it is
God's Law they should do so; and if you can deceive their Judgments, they will
dread as much (nay, may be more) the breaking those Oaths and Covenants, than
this you bring them into, without any Authority from Jesus Christ.

3. You say, Baptism in Infancy is more advantageous than at riper Years, as it
is an early Remedy against the Malady of Original Sin.

Answ. Speak; Does Baptism take away Original Sin, or free them of that Malady,
or not? You know, some of the Ancient Fathers were carried away with such a
Dream; how comes it to pass then, that that Contagion appears so soon, and to
be as strong in your Children as in ours, who never were baptized at all? But
does not St. Peter tell you, (1. Pet. 3.20.) Baptism washes not away the Filth
of the Flesh? Or is not Original Pollution a Filth of the Flesh? what Stuff is
this you would force upon us, and the World! We affirm Infants are no more
capable of this Ordinance than any other. Why do you say of no Rite but this?
We challenge all the World, by God's Word, to prove they are capable of
Baptism, any more than of the Lord's Supper.

4. You say, Baptism administered to Infants, has this Advantage, That it puts
the Christian upon more bitter mourning for actual Sin, from the consideration
of that shameful Perjury and wilful Apostasy that is found in such Persons Sin.

Answ. 1. I find you are one of Mr. Williams his Brethren, i.e. you are of his
Belief it seems: but tremble at the thoughts of the Consequences of your
Doctrine. The Danger of Infants Baptismal-Covenant laid open.
Have not your Children, when grown up, enough Sins to mourn for and bewail
before Almighty God, but you must bring them into a Covenant which you knew
they would break when they come to riper Age? and such is the pravity of human
Nature, there is no avoiding of it without a supernatural Work of Grace; their
Burden is heavy enough, you need not add to it.

2. Is it not sad, that you should give cause to your Children to think they
are guilty of Perjury? when in truth they never were, nor of Apostasy from God
upon that account: our first Apostasy was bad enough, you need not go about to
make them guilty of another. Alas, their pretended Baptism never brought them
one step nearer to God, than those Children are who never were baptized in
their Infancy at all: where then is the Apostasy you speak of?

3. You hereby bring them under a necessity of committing of the Sin of
Perjury, and of Apostasy, at leastwise in your own conceit, and in theirs too,
if they can believe what you say, and so to cause them to mourn for that, or
those Sins most, which may be (if all things were rightly considered) are no
Sins at all. I do not mean that any of their actual Transgressions may not be
Sin; but that they are not guilty of Perjury and Apostasy by breaking that you
call their Baptismal Covenant: for if God brought them not into that Covenant,
nor into any Covenant Relation with himself thereby, I cannot see how there
should be such a Sting in the Tail of it, as you affirm and imagine; and
indeed, had they themselves, of their one accord and consent, entered into an
unlawful or an unwarrantable Covenant, which they were no ways able to perform,
it may be doubted whether it would be Perjury in them if they kept it not:
besides, I hope they have not forsworn themselves, how then is it Perjury?

4. Moreover, Parents, observe this well.
I desire all those Parents who baptize their Children; and you also, to
consider, in the fear of God, the natural Tendency and Consequences of your
bringing poor Babes into such a Covenant.

1. That you force them to enter into this Covenant without any Authority or
Command from God: for I challenge you, and all Pedo-Baptists in the World, to
prove God has any-where, directly or indirectly, required any such thing at
your Hands.

Pedo-Baptists say, Infants in their Baptismal-Covenant, promise Regeneration,
Faith, etc.
2. Consider that it is not only a Reformation of Life, or a bare refraining from
the gross Acts of Sin, that you assert is comprehended in this Baptismal
Covenant you cause Infants to enter into, but it is Regeneration it self, i. e.
a change of Heart, and savingly to believe in Christ; this you oblige your poor
Babes to perform. Now what Arminianism is here fomented, if once you say or
think they are capable to perform this Obligation? but if they do not do it,
woe be to them?

Moreover, what guilt do you bring the poor Sureties under, unless they stand
obliged no longer then the Child abides in Infancy; and if so, what need of
their Obligation at all, if you intend no more?

3. Consider, you brought them into this Covenant without their Knowledge or
Consent, they never subscribed to it, nor knew any thing of it, nor were they
capable so to do.

4. Consider, whatever you think, that such is the pravity of their Natures, by
means of our first Apostasy from God, or Original Sin, that they do and must of
necessity break it, as I said before, unless God should by supernatural Grace
change their Hearts and Natures, and remove the vicious Habits thereof, which
you had not the least ground to believe he would do, or leastwise to all or the
greatest part of them, God having made no such promise; and by woeful experience
we daily see many or most of those Children, are never converted, but from the
Womb go astray, and are guilty of almost of all manner of abominable Sins, and
so live and die.

As to the Adult.

1. Consider, as I said before;

(1.) That all Believers God himself does require or command in his Word to
enter into this Baptismal Covenant.

(2.) And they, before they enter into it, have a Principle of Divine Life
infused into their Souls, or Grace implanted in their Hearts, having passed
under the Work of Regeneration, being dead to Sin, (of which Baptism is a
lively Symbol) or is, as your Church says, an outward Sign of an inward
spiritual Grace. Not as Mr. Baxter observes, a Sign or Symbol of future, but of
present Regeneration; which is confirmed by what St. Paul teaches, Romans 6.2.
How shall we that are dead to Sin, live any longer therein? not, may be dead,
but are dead, and so are buried with Christ in Baptism, verse. 3, 4. If you say,
all Adult Persons baptized are not converted, etc. I answer, They appear so to
be, and as such, voluntarily enter into this Covenant: besides, God does not
require them without Faith to do it. Baptism does not only represent the Death
and Burial of Christ, but also signifies our Death to Sin, or that blessed Work
of Mortification of the Body of Sin and Death; by which means Believers who
enter into this Baptismal Covenant, are put into a gracious and meet capacity
to perform that sacred Obligation; but so are not Infants.

(3.) That every true Believer baptized, considers, ponders upon, and weighs
with all seriousness and deliberation imaginable, the Nature of this Covenant
before he signs it. And,

(4.) That he does it freely, voluntarily, and with his full liking,
approbation and consent: neither of which do, nor can do those poor Infants you
force to enter into this Covenant. These things considered, it appears, as it
is a sinful Act in you to bring them into this Covenant (since it is done
without Command or Authority from God) so it is cruelty also toward your own
Babes, by making them to be come guilty of Perjury, and thereby damning (as Mr.
Williams says) their own Souls.

(5.) Consider, every true Believer that is listed under Christ's Banner, by
entering into this Baptismal Covenant, is by Christ completely armed, i. e. he
has the Christian Armor put upon him, Ephesians. 6. he has the Breastplate of
Righteousness, the Shield of Faith, and for an Helmet, the Hope of Salvation;
and the Word of God, like a Sword in his Hand, to cut down all his Enemies.
Thus by the help of these Sacred Graces of the Spirit, he is enabled to fight
against Sin, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. But alas, you list your poor
Babes into this War, and make them covenant and vow to forsake the Devil and
all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this Wicked World, and all the sinful
Lusts of the Flesh -- but arm them not. Did Baptism confer Grace, and arm their
Souls, it was something; but who dares assert that? or if he does, who will or
can believe him?

(6.) God has also promised to assist, stand by, help and enable all Believers
baptized, with further supplies of Grace; nay, they being actually united to
Christ, have his blessed Influences flowing to them, besides the Promises of
God, the Death, Resurrection, and Intercession of Christ; and the everlasting
Covenant of Grace, which is ordered in all things, and sure, firmly secures all
their Souls: But thus it is not with those poor Babes you bring into this
Covenant; you are like Pharaoh's Taskmasters, command the making of Brick, but
allow them no Straw.

4. Again, consider how hereby great part of the Nations are perjured: I will
appeal to the Consciences of all thinking and understanding People, whether,
according to your Principle and Practice, it is not so; Mourn O England and
lament, sad is thy Case! If these Men speak right or truly, what a Multitude in
thee have been made to enter into this Covenant, who never performed it? O
Perjured Nation! Perjured People! and Perjured Pastors! for so are all thy
debauched, drunken, swearing and unclean Teachers. Are not these perjured also?
Have they kept their Vow and Covenant? Alas, Sir, instead of mourning for this
Sin, we may conclude they never thought of it. But let them break off their
Sins by Righteousness; I mean, repent and leave those gross Acts of Wickedness,
of which many, both Priest and People, are guilty, and get renewing Grace, and
never let them fear this new devised Sin of Perjury. For if God's Word
convinces of all Sins, and does not convince of this sort of Perjury, this is
no Perjury; (I mean the simple breaking of that Covenant, though those Sins by
which they are said to break it, are horrid Treason and Rebellion against the
God of Heaven, and provoke him to Wrath every Day.) But God's Word does
convince of all Sins, and does not convince of this sort of Perjury; therefore
it cannot be Perjury, as is affirmed. It Is not this which is the
Self-killing-Murder, the damning Sin: No, no; but it is their Unbelief and
Contempt of God's Grace, or neglecting the great Salvation offered by Christ in
the Gospel.

5. Baptism administered in Infancy has (you say) this singular Advantage above
that which is administered at viper Age, in that it gives the pious Parent a
good ground of hope that his Children dying in Infancy, are certainly saved, it
makes (say you) that Ordinance a Channel of Grace, etc.

Answ. 1. This is like the rest: But, Sir, by what Authority do you assert all
these things? You know what wonderful Virtue the Papists say is in many of
their Popish Rites, Ceremonies and Relics, i. e. in their crossing themselves,
and in their Holy Water, especially in their Agnus Dei: but how do they prove
it? even as well as you do what you speak here upon this Account. And we have
the same reason to believe them, as to believe you in what you speak without
Proof or Authority from God's Word.

2. Pious Parent! But alas, how few are there of that sort? what hopes has the
impious profane and ungodly Parent of the Salvation of his dying Children? Mr.
Burkit leaves impious Parents without hope of the Salvation of their dying
Infants.
But, Sir, I thought all the pious and believing or godly Parents Children,
were born in Covenant with God; and that the Parents Faith would have secured
them, whether baptized or not. Were not the Jews Female Children saved? they
were not circumcised; and were not their Male Infants saved, who died before
the eighth Day?

3. From what Scripture is it these pious, though ignorant and deceived
Parents, may have hope that their Children that die in their Infancy shall be
saved, and none but theirs, who are baptized or rather rantized?

4. Will you make Baptism their Savior? can Baptism save them? And is it so
indeed? is it then in the Power of Parents to save or damn their Children? And
how came Baptism to have such Power in it? or who made that a Channel of Grace
to dying Infants? Do you not place that Virtue in an external Rite, that only
belongs to the Blood of Christ, and sanctifying Grace of God's Spirit? Perkins
on Gal. cap. 3. p. 256.
Mr. Perkins says, That Baptism indeed saves; but says he, that is not the
Baptism of Water, but the Stipulation of a good Conscience by the Resurrection.
Again he says, The outward Baptism without the inward is no Mark of God's
Child, but the Mark of the Fool that makes a Vow, and afterward breaks it.

5. May not this Doctrine of yours clearly tend to scare and afright poor
Parents with fear that all their Babes that die in their Mother's Wombs, or
before baptized, are damned? And O in what a sad Condition are all the Children
of ungodly and impious Persons, whose little Babes you dare not, cannot
baptize, if you are true to your own Principles? But that Text may give us a
better ground of hope a thousand times concerning the well-being of our dying
Infants, where our Savior says, of such are the Kingdom of Heaven. And that
which you mention, I shall go to him, he shall not return to me; together with
the infinite Mercy of God, through the Virtue of Christ's Blood, who can convey
Help and Healing to dying Infants and Idiots in ways we know not of; nor are we
to trouble our selves about such secret things that are not revealed.

6. You say, The Practice of Infant Baptism appears most beneficial; because it
prevents such shameful and scandalous Neglects of Baptism, to the Blemish of
Christianity.

Answ. Is it then a shameful Scandal to neglect a Tradition of Man? (for so I
have proved Infant Baptism to be) Where is the Shame that ought to be in
Christians, Greater Zeal showed for the Traditions of Men than for Christ's
Institutions. Micah 6.16.
that Christ's Laws and Precepts are neglected, and his precious Ordinance of
Baptism exposed to Contempt and Shame, as it is by you and thousands more,
whilst the Statutes of Omri are zealously kept and observed, as the Prophet of
old complained; I mean, humane Rites and Traditions, or Statutes (like those of
Omri, instituted by him and Jeroboam) which the Wisdom of your Church, and many
corrupt Churches have been zealous for to this Day.

And thus I have ran through and examined your fix Particulars, which you bring
to prove the Usefulness of Infant Baptism above the Baptism of Believers, which
our blessed Savior instituted: And now shall show you further that
Infant Baptism is so far from being more useful than that of the Adult, that it
is a dangerous Error, and therefore of no Use at all, but the contrary, viz. a
very sinful thing.

Infant Baptism no ways useful, but hurtful.
1. Reader, can that be useful, or any ways beneficial, which Christ never
commanded or required to be done in his Name, but is unrighteously fathered
upon him, to the utter making void his own Ordinance of baptizing Believers?

2. Can that have any Usefulness in it, that brings Guilt upon the Parents in
doing it, making them guilty of Will Worship, or of a humane Tradition?

3. Can that be useful that brings poor Babes into such a Covenant, which
Christ never ordained for them to enter into; and to which they never directly
nor indirectly consented nor approved of; and which they are utterly unable to
keep; and which gives them no Strength to perform; nor is there one promise of
God made to assist or help them to do it; and yet for not keeping of it they
are charged with Perjury, with Self-murder, nay, with Hell and Damnation?

4. Can that be of use to Infants, that basely beguiles and deceives them,
causing them when grown up to think they were thereby made Christians, and
become the Children of God, Members of Christ, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of
Heaven, nay, regenerated; and from hence never look after any other Work of
Grace nor Regeneration, but conclude all is well with them?

5. Can that be a useful thing, which the doing of is a palpable Alteration of
the Words of Christ's Commission, and so inverts that holy Order left by him
for baptizing, who requires none to be baptized before they are first taught
and made Disciples?

6. Can that be of any Use to an Infant, which you, nor no Man else can prove
from God's Word to have any Use and Blessing in it to them?

7. Can an humane Rite or Tradition, think you, save poor Children, or a little
Water sprinkled on the Face, wash away Original Sin?

8. Can Water beget Children to Christ, or can that be useful to them, which
they have only the bare Sign of, and not the thing signified, viz. the Sign of
Regeneration, but not Regeneration it self; a Sign of Grace, but not Grace it
self; you give them the Shell, but no Kernel; the Name of Christian, but no
Nature of a Christian; making that you call Christ's Baptism, as Dr. Tailor
says, a Sign without Effect, and like the Figtree in the Gospel, full of
Leaves, but no Fruit?

9. Can that be useful that tends to make the Gospel Church National, (and
confounds the Church and the World together) which ought to be Congregational,
a holy and separate People, like a Garden enclosed?

10. Can Baptism be more useful to Infants than to adult Believers,
notwithstanding the Scripture says, that the Person baptized does not only
believe, but call upon the Name of the Lord, Acts 22.16. can Infants do that?

11. Can Infant Baptism be more useful than that of Believers, and yet Baptism
an Ordinance of the Soul's Marriage with Christ? And is not that, as Mr. Baxter
says, a strange Marriage, where there is nothing signified of Consent? And are
Infants able so to do?

12. Can Infant Baptism be more useful than that of Believers, and yet Baptism
called the Answer of a good Conscience? Can a little Babe answer a good
Conscience by being baptized in Obedience to Christ, and to show forth his
Death and Resurrection?

13. Can Infant Baptism be more useful than that of Believers? Whereas the
first has no Promise of God made unto it, and yet the other has many, as Acts
2.36.37, 38. Mark 16.16.

14. Can that be a useful thing that frustrates the sacred and spiritual Ends
of Baptism? which we have showed are many, but as administered to poor Babes,
it is rendered wholly of none Effect, and an insignificant thing.

Perkins on Gal. p. 265.
Lastly; Mr. Perkins hints that Baptism signifies two things: (1.) Our Union
with Christ: (2.) Our Communion with him. Now how does this appear in Infants
as such, as it does in Believers?

CHAP. VII.
Showing that the Baptists are falsely called Anabaptists, they being as much
against rebaptizing as Mr. Burkit, (or any other Men or People whatsoever)
showing that Infants who have only had a little Water sprinkled or poured on
their Faces, etc. are not baptized, but rantized: Proving Baptism is Immersion,
(and without the Person's Body is dipped or covered all over in the Water, he
is not baptized) from the literal genuine and proper Signification of the Greek
Word Baptizo.

1. IN Page 42, you say, That you will endeavor to satisfy such who were
baptized (as you call it) in their Infancy, that they were rightly baptized.

2. And that such who have been once duly and rightly baptized, ought not to be
rebaptized, or baptized again.

Answ. That which you say in the first Place we do utterly deny, though we
readily grant you what you say against rebaptizing, for we are as much against
it as you can be.

But to prove your first Proposition, you proceed to show the several
Requisites necessary to:denominate a Person rightly baptized.

1. The Person baptizing ought to be a lawful Minister, authorized and
commissioned by Christ, and the Governors of his Church.

2. The Party baptized, you say, must be a Subject qualified for Baptism, etc.

3. That the Element made use of, must be Water.

4. It ought to be done before credible Witnesses.

5. Lastly, Baptism ought to be administered in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Answ. 1. I grant all you say here, though how you can prove there were
Witnesses by when Ananias baptized Saul, or when Philip baptized the Eunuch, I
know not; yet I believe it is necessary there should be in all ordinary Cases
credible Witnesses by.

2. But, Sir, how does this comport with the Rantism of Infants?

For, 1 st. That they are not Subjects fitly qualified for Baptism, I have
fully proved, and have detected your Argument concerning Baptism coming in the
room of, or succeeding Circumcision.

2 dly. I shall now prove your sprinkling or pouring Water on the Subject,
either on the Face, or any part of the Body, is not baptizing but rantizing:
Then answer you Allegations, Objections, base Reflections, and false Calumnies
cast upon Mr. Tredwell, and indeed on the Baptists in general.

And in order to the effectual doing of this, take a Passage or two out of the
ancient Fathers, etc. St. Gregory says, Gregory l. 1. Ep. 7.
That that is not said to be reiterated, which is not certainly demonstrated to
have been rightly and duly done. And in another Place says he, If there be an
Offense taken at the Truth, it is much better that Offense be taken, than that
the Truth should be deserted. The Custom of the Churches ought to submit to the
Words of Christ, Dr. Du-Veil on Acts, p. 86.
not the Words of Christ to be wrested to the Custom of the Church; in regard
the Words of Christ are the Foundation upon which all Customs are to be built.
See the famous Dr. Du-Veil on the Acts.

Tertullian says, Whatsoever savours contrary to Truth is Heresy, Tertull.
though it be an ancient Custom.

These Maxims, says Du-Veil, Dr. Du-Veil on Acts, 2. p. 86.
so agreeable to Reason, whosoever intends to follow, will never question but
that they ought to be baptized, if they have not received that Baptism ordained
by Christ, but only Rantism, that is, Sprinkling, substituted in its room by a
vulgar Use, or rather Abuse.

Mr. Perkins says, Perkins, Vol. 1. p. 74.
if the external Form of Administration be observed, a Person baptized by an
Heretic, must not be baptized again.

Nor is it to be doubted, says that famous Divine, John Forbes, Instruct.
Hist. n. 10. c. 14. n. 13.
but that they are again to be baptized, who before have only received a vain
Washing, and not the true Sacrament of Baptism.

Sir, To baptize a Person, a Believer, again, who was baptized before, we say
is sinful and unlawful. But since yours is no Baptism, but mere Rantism, I need
say no more to this; and that it is so, I shall first prove from the proper
genuine and literal Signification of the Greek word (...), baptiso; that comes
from (...), Scapula and Stephanus.
to dip, signifies mergo, immergo, submergo, obruo, item tingo quod fit
immergendo; that is, to immerge, plunge under, over-whelm, as also to dip,
which is done by plunging. We grant in a less proper or more remote Sense,
because things that are said to be washed, are commonly dipped or plunged all
over in Water, it is put for washing, Luke 11.38. Heb. 9.10. Mark 7.4. You say,
page 52, as for the Derivative word (...), sometimes it signifies to dip or
plunge; sometimes to wash or cleanse, citing ver. 9, 10. Yet we say it no where
signifies to sprinkle. You know the Greeks have another Word to express
Sprinkling, viz. (...), rantizo, as Heb. 9.19. and sprinkled, ((...)) both the
Book and the People; it is (...)* So Heb. 9.13. Sprinkling the Unclean, (...),
etc. 1* Pet. 1.2. And sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus Christ, it is (...). The
like in many other Places: And so that we dare modestly assert that no Greek
Author of any Credit, whether Heathenish or Christian, has ever put Baptizing
for Sprinkling, or used those Words promiscuously: for as in these Scriptures
we have cited Heb. 9.13, 19, 21, etc. it is always translated Sprinkling: So
there is not one Place in Scripture, wherein the word (...), rantizo, is
rendered to baptize; nor is there one Scripture wherein the word (...), baptizo,
is rendered Sprinkling. And whereas you say, the word sometimes signifies
Washing: We say, notwithstanding it does, yet it is such a Washing as is by
Dipping or Plunging, as I said before: Wilson.
Thus Mr. Wilson in his Dictionary renders baptizo, derived from (...), bapto,
ringo, to dip or plunge into the Water: and signifies, says he, primarily such
a kind of washing as is used in Bucks where Linen is plunged or dipped; though
in a remote Sense he hints it signifies other kind of Washing.

You say, Page 49. That we ought to distinguish betwixt that which is of the
Essence of Baptism, and that which only is accidental in Baptism; the Word and
Element say you, are of the Essence of Baptism.

Answ. We say with you, that if Accidents, or mere Accessories be wanting in
Baptism, yet there may be true Baptism notwithstanding; but we assert that
Dipping or Plunging belongs to the Thing, Act, or Essence of Baptism; not an
Accident, but so essential, that it is no true Baptism if the Body is not
dipped, or plunged into the Water: therefore the Word and Element are not so
the Essence of Baptism, unless there be so much Water used as to cover the Body
all over in it; Rantizing is Rantizing, and Baptizing is Baptizing, they are
two different things, and the one will never be the other while the World
stands. And tho you dare affirm, that the Child that is only Rantized, i. e.
Sprinkled, is Baptized, yet you cannot prove it; and although you do assert it,
and attempt to make it out, yet a multitude of learned Writers and Critics in
the Greek Tongue do fully contradict you.

Scapula and Stephens, Scapula. Stephens*
two as great Masters of the Greek Tongue as most we have, do tell you in their
Lexicons, that (...) from (...), signifies mergo, immergo, item tingo quod fit
immergendo, inficere imbuere, viz. to dip, plunge, overwhelm, put under, cover
over, to die in color, which is done by plunging.

Grotius says it signifies to dip over Head and Ears. Grotius.


Pasor, an Immersion, Dipping or Submersion. Pasor.


Vossius says it implies a washing the whole Body. Vossius.


Mincaeus in his Dictionary says, Mincaeus.
that (...), is in the Latin Baptismus, in Dutch Doopsit or Doopen, Baptismus,
or Baptism, to dive or duck in Water, and the same with the Hebrew, (...)
Tabal, which the Septuagint, or seventy Interpreters, render (...) Baptiso, to
dip. Casaubon.
This Casaubon says was the Rite of baptizing, that Persons were plunged into
the Water, which the very word baptizo sufficiently demonstrates; which as it
does not extend so far as to sink down to the bottom to the hurt of the Person,
so it is not to swim upon the Superficies --. Baptism ought to be administered
by plunging the whole Body into the Water.

The late famous and most learned in all the Oriental Tongues, Dr. Du-Veil, in
his literal Explanation of the Acts, Chap. 1.5. says, the word (...) is to
dip, as if it were to dye Color; and any Dyer will tell you, if there is any
small bit of Cloth not dipped, it is not dyed.

Leigh's Critic. Sacra.
Leigh in his Critica Sacra says, the native and proper Signification of the
word is to dip into the Water, or plunge under Water, Mat. 3.6. Acts 8.38. for
which also he quotes Casaubon, Bullinger, Zanchy, Spanhemius: he says withal,
that some would have it signify washing, which sense Erasmus, he says,
opposed, affirming that it was not otherwise so than by Consequence; for the
proper Signification was such a dipping, or plunging as Dyers use for dying of
Clothes.

Salmasius says, That is not Baptism which they give to Children, but Rantism.

Beza.
Beza on Mat. 3.11. says, The word Baptizo signifies to dye by dipping, or
washing.

Seldom says, That the Jews took that Baptism wherein the whole Body was not
baptized; to be void.

Ainsworth speaks to the same purpose.

Rogers.
Mr. Daniel Rogers says, That a Minister is to dip in Water (the Party baptized)
as the meetest Act, the word baptize notes it; For, says he, the Greeks wanted
not words to express any other Act besides Dipping, if the Institution could
bear it: what Resemblance of the Burial and Resurrection of Christ is in
Sprinkling? [mark that!] all Antiquity and Scripture, says he, confirm that it
was Dipping.

If you would, says Dr. Du-Veil, Dr. Du-Veil
attend to the proper Signification of the word, in the Synod of Celichyth,
Wolfred Archbishop of Canterbury.
Anno 816. where Wolfred Archbishop of Canterbury presided. Let, says he, the
Presbyters beware, that when they administer the Sacrament of Baptism, they do
not pour Water upon the Heads of the Infants, but let them be always plunged in
the Font, according to the Example of the Son of God himself, who was plunged
in the Waters of Jordan: thus must the Ceremony be performed according to
order. See Dr. Du-Veil on Acts Chap. 2. p. 76.

The said learned Doctor says in the same place, Dr. Du-Veil.
the constant Practice of the universal Church, till the time of Clem. 5. who
was crowned Pope An. 1305. under whom first of all the second Synod of Ravenna,
approved the Abuse introduced into some Churches about an hundred Years before,
that Baptism without any necessity should be administered by Aspersion. Hence it
came to pass, that contrary to the Analogy, or intended mystical Signification
of this Sacrament, all the West for the most part has in this Age the use of
Rantism, that is, Sprinkling, instead of Baptism, as Zepper speaks, Council.
Florent. Sect. 9. c. 9. lib. of Infant Baptism. f. 693.
to the great Scandal of the Greeks and Russians, who to this day plunge into
the Water those they baptize, and deny [mark] any one to be rightly baptized,
who is not plunged into the Water, according to the Precept of Christ, as we
find in Sylvester Sguropulus.

Dr. Tailor says, The Custom of the Ancient Church was not Sprinkling, but
Immersion, Ductor Dubit, l. 3. c. 4. numb. 9.
in pursuance of the sense of the word Baptizing, in the Commandment and
Example of our blessed Savior.

Salmasius in his Notes of diverse upon Sulpitius Severus St. Martin 's Life, N.
16.
says, That the word Baptizein signifies Immersion, not Sprinkling. Nor did
the Ancients otherwise baptize than by single or treble Immersion in the Greek
Church to this day; (says he) the Person to be baptized is plunged over Head
and Ears. The same thing does Peter Avitabolis testify of the Asian Christians
inhabiting Iburia and Colchi.

St. Ambrose says, Lib. de Initiandis.
Water is that wherein the Body is plunged, to wash all Sin away, there all
Vice is buried.

In a Book inscribed, Reformation of Ecclesiastical Laws, printed at London
1641. it is expressed in these words, viz. While we are plunged in the Water,
the Death and Burial of Christ is recommended to us, that we openly testify
that Sin lies dead and buried in us.

The Roman Order published by the Writers concerning Ecclesiastical Ceremonies,
say the Presbyters, enter into the Fountain within, unto the Water, and the
Males are first baptized, and then the Females.

Luther's Latin. Tom. 1. Fol. 71.
Luther says, The Name of Baptism is a Greek word, it may be turned a Dipping,
when we dip something in Water that it may be wholly covered with Water. And
although (says he) that Custom is now altogether abolished among the most
part, for neither do they dip the whole Children, but only sprinkle them with a
little Water, they ought nevertheless to be dipped, and presently drawn out again.

The Germans Testimony. Dr. Du-Veil.
The Germans also call Baptism T^^ff, from deepness, which they call Tieff in
their Tongue, as if it were mere (says my Author) that those be dipped deeply
who are baptized.

John Bugenhagius Pomeranus (both a Fellow and Successor in the Ministry of
Luther at Wittenburgh, Bugenh. in his Book printed in the German Tongue, 1542.
whom Thuanus and Zanchius witness to have been a very moderate, godly and
learned Man) affirms, That he was desired to be a Witness at Hamburgh, in the
Year 1529. That when he had seen the Minister only sprinkle the Infant wrapped
in Swathling-Cloaths on the top of the Head, he was amazed, because he neither
had heard nor saw any such thing, nor yet read in any History except in case of
Necessity in Bedrid Persons.

Hence in a General Assembly therefore, See Dr. Du-Veil on Acts 8. p. 286, 287.
of all the Ministers that were convened, he did ask of a certain Minister, (
John Frize by Name, who was sometime Minister of Lubec) how the Sacrament of
Baptism was administered at Lubec? who for his Piety and Candor, did answer,
That Infants were baptized naked at Lubec, after the same fashion altogether as
in Germany, but from whence and how that peculiar manner of Baptizing has
crept into Hamburgh he was ignorant. At length they did agree among themselves,
that the Judgment of Luther, and of the Divines of Wittenburgh, should be
demanded about this Point. Which thing being done, Luther wrote back to
Hamburgh, That this Sprinkling was an Abuse, which they ought to remove. Thus
Plunging was restored at Hamburgh, yet is that Climate cooler than ours.
Diatrib. on Titus 3.2.


Mr. Joseph Mede says, That there was no such thing as Sprinkling, or Rantism
[mark] used in Baptism in the Apostles days, nor many Ages after. He had spoke
more proper if he had said, there was no Rantism used in the Apostles days, but
Baptism, (than to say no Rantism used in Baptism) since he well knew they are
two distinct, and different Acts: It cannot be Baptism at all, if it be only
Rantism or Sprinkling, Immersion or Dipping being the very thing, not an
Accident (as I hinted) but an Essential so absolutely necessary; that it cannot
be the Act or Ordinance without it.

If I command my Maid to dip my Handkerchief into the Water, and she only takes
a little Water in her Hand, and sprinkles a few Drops upon it, does she do what
I commanded her? was that the thing, or is it not another Act? Even so it is
here, you do not the thing, you Rantize, and Baptize none, unless you dip them
into the Water.

Pan. Cathol. Tom. 4. l. 5. c. 2.
Chamier also says, The ancient use of Baptism, was to dip the whole Body into
the Element; therefore did John baptize in a River.

Dr. Hammond in his Annotations upon John 13.10. says, That (...) signifies an
Immersion, or washing the whole Body; and which answers to the Hebrew word
(...) used for Dipping in the Old Testament; and therefore tells us, upon Mat.
3.1. that John baptized in a River, viz. in Jordan, Mark 1.5. in a Confluence
of Water, John 3.23. because it is said there was much Water, which the Greeks
called the Lakes where they used to wash: Also, says he, the Ancients called
their Baptisterions, or the Vessels containing their Baptismal-Water,
Columbethras, viz. a Swimming or Diving-place, being very large, with
Partitions for Men and Women.

Pool 's Annotat. on Joh. 3.6.
The Learned Mr. Pool, (or those Learned and Reverend Divines concerned in
perfecting his most excellent Annotations on the Holy Bible,) says, A great
part of those who went out to hear John, were baptized, that is, dipped in
Jordan. On John 3.6. and on Matthew. 28.20. say they. It is true, the first
Baptism of which we read in Holy Writ, was by dipping the Person Baptized.

The Dutch Translation, Dutch Translation on Mat. 3.16.
according to their Language, reads it Dipping.

Mat. 3.16. End Jesus gedoopt zijn de, is terstont opgeklomen vit hit wter.
And when Jesus was dipped, he came out of the Water. And, verse. 6. End wierden
van hemge doopt in de Jordan; And were dipped of him in Jordan. Hence they call
John the Baptist, John the Dipper. In verse. 1. End in die dayen quam Jonnes de
Dooper predikenn in de woeffijue van Judea: In English thus, In those days came
John the Dipper, preaching in the Wilderness of Judea. Had our Translators
translated the Greek word into our English Tongue, as the Dutch have done it
into theirs, it would have been read in our Bible, John the Dipper; and for
Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, etc. it would have been read, Dipping
them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and then
the People would not have been deceived: but they have not translated the Greek
word at all, but left it in its Original Language: What difference is there
between Baptism, and the Greek Baptisma?

Ball in his Catechism, does not only say, Faith was required of such who did
desire Baptism: but also, that the Party baptized, was washed by Dipping, etc.
Your Church also, in the Common Prayer, says, Dipping into the Water, is the
proper, (as I conceive,) signification of the Word. To close with this, I argue
thus, viz.

Since our Savior sent his Disciples (to Teach, and Baptize, or Dip, in the
Name, etc.) into all Nations, viz. into Cold Countries as well as Hot; and
seeing Infants tender Bodies cannot bear Dipping without palpable danger of
their Lives, it follows clearly that they were none of the Subjects Christ
commanded to be dipped, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Spirit.

To conclude with this, take one Argument, viz. If the proper, literal and
genuine signification of the Greek word Baptizo, is Dipping, or to dip; then
Sprinkling is not Baptizing: But the proper, literal, and genuine signification
of the Greek word Baptizo, is Dipping, or to dip: Ergo Sprinkling is not
Baptizing.

CHAP. VIII.
Proving, that to baptize, is to dip, or plunge the Body all over into the
Water, from the Practice of the Primitive Gospel-Days.

I Have showed, that John Baptist baptized in the River Jordan, who was the
first that received Commission to baptize.

And Diodate, on Mat. 3. says, He plunged them in Water.

Piscator also says, The ancient manner of Baptizing, was, that the whole Body
was dipped into the Water. Assemblies Annotat. on Mat. 3.


So says the Assembly in their Annotations.

Nay, say I, it had been a vain and needless thing for them to go to Rivers to
baptize, if it had been only to sprinkle a little Water on the Face, for a
quart of Water might have served to have rantized a great number.

And had Sprinkling or Rantizing been the Ordinance, there is no reason left to
conceive why they should go to Rivers; nor would the Spirit of God have given
that as the Reason why John baptized in Aenon near Salim, Reader, mark this
well.
viz. because there was much Water, John 3.23.

But you strive to contradict the Holy Ghost, by making People believe, there
was not much Water in that place, p. 59.

Because the Original reads not (...), much Water, but (...), many Waters; that
is, (say you) many Streams or Rivolets.

Answ. What difference is there between much Water, and many Waters? If they
were Streams and Rivolets, though not deep, yet if they were but a little while
stopped with a Dam, they would soon rise to be deep enough to swin in, as
Experience shows; but it is enough, there he baptized, says the Holy Spirit,
for there was much Water, or many Waters; there, [for or bebecause] intimating
plainly, that the Ordinance could no^ be administered with a little Water, but
that it required many Waters, or much Water, a great deal more than a Basin
could hold, or you hold in your Hand.

2. But (say you) Sandy's Travels tells us, that they were so shallow, as not
to reach above the ^^kles.

Answ. 1. Must we believe God's Word, or a lying Traveller? the Scripture
says, there was much, or many Waters; and he says, there was but a little.

2. In some shallow Rivolets, we daily see, that in some Places the Water is
deep: and might it not be so in that? and your Traveller might not so curiously
search or examine the Matter.

3. Or might there not be a great Confluence of Water then, (as Dr. Hammond
words it) and yet but little or shallow Water now, or when Sandys was there?
Time alters Rivers as well as other Things. But for your seeking after this
manner to contradict the Sacred Text, to defend your childish Practice of
Rantism, you deserve greatly to be blamed.

Take this Argument;

If the Holy Ghost gives it as the Reason why John baptized in Enon near Salim,
viz. because there was much Water; Then a little Water will not serve to
baptize in.

But the Holy Ghost gives this as the Reason why John baptized in Enon near
Salim, viz. because there was much Water; therefore a little Water will not
serve to baptize in.

2. But to proceed; Mark 1.9. it is said, Jesus was baptized of John in Jordan.
Now says a Learned Man on the Place, Mr. Sam. Fisher.
it had been nonsense for St. Mark to say, that Jesus was baptized in Jordan,
if it had been sprinkled, because the Greek reads it (...), into Jordan. Could
Jesus be said to be sprinkled into the River Jordan? it is proper to say, he was
dipped into Jordan, and that is and was the Act, and nothing else be sure.

3. They went down both into the (...) both Philip and the Eunuch, Acts 8. What
(...) had there been for them so to have done, had Baptism been Sprinkling?
Sure Phil^^ would not have put that Noble Person (who was a Man of great
Authority under Candace Queen of the Ethiopians) to that great trouble to come
out of his Chariot, (if to sprinkle a little Water on his Face might have done)
and to go down into the Water and dip him; sure Philip would on this occasion
have dispensed with Immersion, and let Aspersion or Rantism have served,
considering he was a great Person, and on a Journey; he might have fetched a
little Water in his Hand, or otherwise, and have sprinkled him in his Chariot,
as some Ministers do now in their public Places of Worship. And thus you and
they make void the Command of Christ by your Traditions, to the abuse of
Christian-Baptism, and reproach of us that keep to his Sacred Institution.

Mr. Daniel Rogers, a most worthy Writer, says, Treatise of the Sacraments, p.
1. chap. 5.
in a Treatise of his, It ought to be the Churches part to cleave to the
Institution, which is Dipping, especially it being not left Arbitrary by our
Church, to the Discretion of the Minister; but required to Dip or Dive. And
further says, That he betrays the Church, whose Minister he is, to a
disordered Error, if he cleave not to the Institution.

O what abundance of the Betrayers of the Truth, and of Churches too, have we
in these, as well as in former Days! How little is the Institution of Christ,
or Practice of the Primitive Churches, minded by many good Men? Where is the
Spirit of Reformation? And doubtless that famous Author, and learned Critic in
the Greek Tongue, Casaubon, was in the Right; take his words.

I doubt not (says he) but contrary to our Church's Intention, Casaubon on
Mat. 3.11.
this Error having once crept in, is maintained still, by the carnal Ease of
such, as looking more at themselves than at God, stretch the Liberty of the
Church in this case, deeper and further than either the Church her self would,
or the solemness of this Sacrament may well and safely admit. Afterward he
says, I confess my self unconvinced, by Demonstrations of Scripture, for
Infants Sprinkling.

The truth is, the Church gave too great Liberty; she had no Power to alter in
the least Matter, but to have kept exactly to the Institution. She says,
Dipping [or Sprinkling] that spoils all, that Addition gives encouragement; Who
will Dip the Person, that can believe the Church that Sprinkling may serve? And
O how hard is it to retract an Error which has been so long, and so generally
received, especially when carnal Ease and Profit attends the keeping of it up,
and also when the true way of Baptizing is reproached, and looked upon to be so
contemptible a Practice, and those who own it, and dare not act otherwise,
vilified and reproached by such as you, with the scutillous Name of Anabaptist,
etc. although we are as much against Rebaptizing as any People in the World can
be.

The Learned Cajetan, upon Matthew. 3.5. says, Christ ascended out of the Water;
Cajetan on Mat. 3.5.
therefore Christ was baptized by John, not by sprinkling or pouring Water upon
him, but by Immersion, that is, by Dipping or Plunging into the Water. Musculus
on Mat. 3.5.


Moreover, Musculus on Matthew. 3. calls Baptism Dipping, and says, the Parties
baptized were dipped, not sprinkled.

To close with this, take one Argument.

If the Baptizer, and the Baptized, in the Days of Christ and his Apostles,
wen^ both down into the Water, and the Person baptized was dipped; then is
Baptism not Sprinkling, but Dipping: But the Baptizer, and the Baptized, in the
Days of Christ and his Apostles, went both down into the Water, and the Person
baptized was dipped. Ergo, Baptism is not Sprinkling, but Dipping.

CHAP. IX.
(...) Baptism is Dipping, Plunging, or Burying of the whole Body in Water, in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, from the
Spiritual signification of Baptism.

AS touching your last five Arguments, against Rebaptizing, I see no ground to
except against what you say there; only I shall take a brief view here of your
six General Propositions, p. 49.

And as to you first, I have, Burkit's first Proposition.
and shall yet further make it appear, that Dipping is not an Accident, but an
essential part of Baptism, viz. it is no Baptism at all, if not done by
Immersion, or Dipping.

2 ly, Whereas you say, His second Proposition.
the way or manner of applying Water is not positively determined in the Holy
Scripture, cannot be gathered either from the signification of the Word, or
from the significancy of the Ceremony.

Answ. This, as to the first part, viz. as to the signification of the Greek
word, we have fully confuted; and as to the significancy of the Ordinance, we
shall forthwith in this Chapter make most evidently appear.

3 ly, You say, His third Proposition.
There is a probability that Baptism was administered in the Apostles Times by
Immersion or Dipping, so there is likewise a probability that it was done by
Aspersion or Sprinkling.

Answ. We have, and shall yet further prove, that there is not the least
probability, that in the Apostles time Baptism was ever administered by
Aspersion, but by Immersion. You confess in hot Countries it was done by
dipping; and that that Country where they baptized, (...) which we read, was a
hot Country; so that (...) that Reason, by your own Argument, they (...) by
Immersion and not by Aspersion.

4 thly, His fourth Proposition.
You say you do not oppose the Lawfulness of Dipping in some cases, but the
Necessity of Dipping in all cases.

Answ. We have and shall prove the necessity of Dipping in all cases, and that
it is no baptism at all if not so done, let your Church say what she pleases.

5 thly, His fifth Proposition.
You say, that none ought to put a Divine Institution upon any Rite at their
own ^^easure, when it is in its own nature indifferent; and consequently lay
such stress upon dipping, as to pronounce the Baptism of all the Reformed
Churches throughout the World null and void, ought to prove it an unchangable
Rite.

Answ. This makes against your self, and all Pedo-baptists in the World. How
dare you change a Divine Institution of Jesus Christ? change his Law and holy
Ordinance, and substitute another thing in its stead and room? And if the Laws
and Institutions of Christ in their own nature are not unchangeable, what may
not Men do and yet be blameless? this opens a door to make all Christ's
Institutions null and void. But, Sir, we have showed in this Treatise, that for
1300 Years, in most parts of the World, Immersion was only used; and some
learned Pedo-Baptists have showed that Rantism is utterly to be rejected, as an
Innovation, and an insignificant Ceremony.

6 thly, His sixth Proposition.
That in the Sacraments it is not the Quantity of Elements, but the
Significancy of them that ought to be attended; in Circumcision it was not the
Quantity of Flesh cut off so much as the Signification of it, etc.

Answ. In the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper we grant it is not the Quantity of
Bread and Wine is to be observed, if so be it be administered in that order and
manner Christ has ordained, viz. to represent his Body broken, and his Blood
poured forth. The like we will say also in Baptism, we need not go where there
is more Water than what will serve to baptize, or dip the Person all over, so
that it may represent the Burial and Resurection of Christ, which was the very
thing it was appointed to hold forth, or represent when administered.

2. Should the People of Israel (as I have showed) in Circumcision only have
cut a little bit of the foreskin of the Flesh, and not round, or quite off, or
only have paired off the Nails of the Childrens Fingers with a little Skin with
it, would that have answered the Mind of God in that Rite? or they have been
born with, in pleading, it might as well answer Circumcision in Signification?
The Vanity and Sinfulness of this Assertion you will see fully in this Chapter
laid open and detected. But I shall now proceed to your first Argument against
Dipping.

Say you, Mr. Burkit's first Argument against Dipping.
such an Application of Water in the Administration of Baptism, as the Spirit
of God in Scripture expressly calls baptizing, is lawful and sufficient to the
use in Baptism.

But sprinkling or pouring Water upon the Party baptized without Dipping, is by
the Spirit of God in diverse Scriptures expressly called baptizing.

Therefore it is lawful and sufficient, and Dipping is not necessary.

Answ. That the primary literal, proper and genuine Signification of the Greek
word (...) is to dip, we have abundantly proved by a great Cloud of learned
Witnesses; and this indeed I see you dare not deny, saying in Page 51. that the
Primitive Word (...), from whence comes (...), signifies to dye, or give a new
Color. All know that which is dyed in the Dyers Fat is dipped all over; but
whereas you say it signifies also sometimes to wash, we have showed it is no
other washing than is by a total dipping or plunging the Thing or Person all
over in Water. And therefore now, to proceed, I shall further prove Baptism is
no other Act but Dipping, or burying the Body under the Water.

You say, Page 52. We read of diverse Washings under the Law, in the Original it
is diverse Baptisms: Now, say you, what were those Washings but Sprinklings, no
Persons were dipped in Blood, etc.

Answ. We deny those Washings which are called Baptisms, were either sprinkling
or pouring of Water on them, but total dipping of their whole Body; Ainsworth
his Annotat. on Levit. 11.32.
and so the Reverend Mr. Ainsworth, (a Man very learned in all Jewish Rites and
Ceremonies) positively affirms on Levit. 11.31. these are his words, viz. All
that are unclean, whether Men or Vessels, are not cleansed but by dipping, or
baptizing in Water; and wheresoever the Law speaks of washing a Man's Flesh,
Hence we read of thin Garments made for them.
or washing of Clothes for Uncleanness, it is not but by dipping the whole Body
therein: And whether they be Men or Vessels, there may not be any thing between
them and the Water to keep them asunder, as Clay, Pitch, or the like, that
cleaves to the Body or Vessel; Maim. Mikvaoth, c. 1.. 1, 2, 21.
if there be, then they are (says he) unclean, and their washing profits
them not. Maim. in Mikvaoth.

What can be a more full Confutation of what you affirm? But, Sir, where we
read of sprinkling of Blood, the word is not there baptizing. And now I shall
proceed further to prove, that Baptism, or baptizing, is not Sprinkling, but
Dipping, or plunging into the Water, in the Name of the Father, etc. and
besides all we have already said, clearly make this appear^ from the spiritual
Signification thereof, or what in a lively Figure or Symbol is held forth
thereby.

And first, to proceed; let it be in the fear of God considered, that as the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper does in a lively Figure represent the breaking
of Christ's Body, and the pouring forth of his precious Blood; so and in like
manner the Sacrament of Baptism does signify and hold forth the Death, Burial
and Resurrection of the same Lord Jesus Christ: and the holding forth and
confirming of these two great Gospel Truths, was doubtless the end of our
Savior in ordaining both these Gospel Ordinances, that so Christ crucified,
with his Burial and Resurrection, might not only in the Ministry of the Word be
preached to the hearing of our Ears, but by these two Institutions be also
preached (as it were) to the seeing of our Eyes. And that Baptism does hold
forth this, together with our Death unto Sin, and rising again to walk in
newness of Life, I shall prove in the next place; and that,

First, From express places of Scripture.

Secondly, By the Consent, Agreement and Arguments of a Cloud of Witnesses,
both Ancient Fathers, and Modern Divines, and worthy Protestant Writers.

1. The first Scripture is, Romans 6.3, 4, 5, 6. Therefore we are buried with him
in Baptism, etc. The Saints or whole Church of the Romans were to reckon
themselves dead to Sin, and bound to live no longer therein, and that because
by Baptism, as in a lively Figure, they held forth the same thing.

So that it appears Baptism has a twofold Signification.

(1.) There is in it, when truly and rightly administered, not only a
Representation of Christ's Buri^^ and Resurrection. But,

(2.) Also it signifies our Death unto Sin, and our rising again to walk in
newness of Life. And indeed the Apostle makes use of this as an Argument to
press newness of Life (the thing signified in Baptism) upon them all -- As if
he should say, As many of us as are baptized, must know this, that we were
baptized into Christ's Death, and therefore must die to Sin, and live a ne^
Life: But we have all been baptized, or buried with him in Baptism; therefore
must all of us die to Sin, and live a new Life.

Our late Annotators on the place say thus, Pool's Annotat.
He seems to allude to the manner of baptizing in those warm Countries, which
was, say they, to dip or plunge the Party baptized, and as it were to bury him
for a while under Water.

Cajetan upon the same Text says, Cajetan.
We are buried with Christ by Baptism into Death; by our burying he declares
our Death by the Ceremony of Baptism: because he (that is, the Party baptized)
is put under Water, and by this carries a Similitude of him that was buried,
who was put under the Earth. Now because none are buried but dead Men -- from
this very thing, that we are buried in Baptism, we are assimilated to Christ
buried, or when he was buried.

The Assembly in their Annotations on this Text of Scripture, The Assembly's
Annotat.
say likewise thus, viz. In this Phrase the Apostle seems to allude to the
ancient manner of baptizing, which was to dip the Party baptized, and as it
were to bury them under Water for a while, and then raise them up again out of
it; to represent the Burial of the Old Man, and the Resurrection to Newness of
Life. The same says Diodate.

Tilenus, a great Protestant Writer, Tilenus in his Dispute, p. 886, 889. on
Romans 3, 4.
speaks fully in this Case; Baptism, says he, is the first Sacrament of the
New Testament, instituted by Christ, in which there is an exact Analogy between
the Sign and the thing signified. The outward Rite in Baptism is threefold: 1.
Immersion into the Water. 2. Abiding under the Water. 3. A Resurrection out of
the Water.


The Form of Baptism, viz. external and essential, is no other than the
Analogical Proportion, which the Signs keep with the things signified thereby:
for the Properties of the Water washing away the Defilements of the Body, does
in a most suitable Similitude set forth the Efficacy of Christ's Blood, in
blotting out of Sin; so diping into the Water, in a most lively Similitude,
sets forth the Mortification of the Old Man; and rising out of the Water, the
Vivification of the New Man. The same plunging into the Water, says he, holds
forth to us that horrible Gulf of Divine Justice, in which Christ for our
sakes, for a while, was in a manner swallowed up; abiding under the Water, (how
little time soever) denotes his Descent into Hell Or Grave.
, even the very deepest of Lifelesness, which lying in the sealed or guarded
Sepulcher, he was accounted as one dead. Rising out of the Water, holds forth
to us a lively Similitude of that Conquest which this dead Man got over Death.
In like manner, says he, it is therefore meet that we being baptized into his
Death, and buried with him, should rise also with him, and to go on in a new
Life. Thus far Tilenus.

And let all thinking and serious Christians carefully consider, since this
sacred Ordinance was appointed to be thus significant, as this and other
learned Men observe; what a sad and lamentable thing it is that the true
Baptism should be changed from Dipping into Sprinkling, which neither does nor
can hold forth these great Mysteries, for which Purpose our Savior ordained
it: for it is evident Rantism or Sprinkling does not bear any proportion to
those Mysteries, nor can they be signified thereby. What Figure of a Burial of
Christ, or of the Old Man, is there in sprinkling a few Drops of Water on a
Person's Face? or what Representation is there in that Act of a Resurrection? O
how is Christ's Holy Baptism abused by this devised Rantism, and the
Signification thereof destroyed! the Lord open your Eyes, or the Eyes of my
godly and impartial Reader. This shows you clearly what Christ's true Baptism
is, as also the true Subject. But to proceed.

Ambrose.
St. Ambrose says, Water is that wherein the Body is plunged, to wash away all
Sin; there all Sin, says he, is buried. We suppose he means it is a Sign of
this, i. e. that all Sin is buried.

Chrysostom.
Moreover Chrysostom says, That the Old Man is buried and drowned in the
Immersion under Water; and when the baptized Person is afterward raised up out
of the Water, it represents the Resurrection of the New Man to Newness of Life;
and therefore concludes the contrary Custom, being not only against
Ecclesiastical Law, but against the Analogy and mystical Signification of the
Sacrament, is not to be complied with.

It has been too long, as I have formerly noted, God grant Men more Light to
see their Error, and abhor to do so any more.

Kecker Syst. Theol. l. 3. c. 8.
Kecker says, That Immersion, not Aspersion, was the first Institution of
Baptism, as it does, says he, plainly appear from Romans 6. 3. And say I, where
has Christ, since the first Institution, instituted Aspersion or Sprinkling in
the stead or room of Immersion or Dipping, or given Orders to change that
significant Sign into the insignificant Foppery of Sprinkling? Ought not we to
keep the Ordinances as they were first instituted and given to the Saints? Is
not God's Word to be our Rule in all Points of Faith and Practice, to the End
of the World? Has Christ given to any Men or Church a Dispensation to change
his Laws and Ordinances, or make them void by their Traditions, or to set up
their Post by his Post?

How does God complain by the Prophet against his People of Old, for presuming
to change his Laws, in Deuteronomy. 12.13? God gave particular Command to make an
Altar of Gold to offer Incense, Exodus 40.5. And he commanded, Exodus 20.24, 25.
that his Altars should be made of Earth or rough Stone. But in Isa. 65.3. he
reproves their horrid Transgression and Disobedience, in acting contrary to his
express Institution: A People (says God) that provoke me to Anger continually
to my Face, that sacrifices in Gardens, and burn Incense upon Altars of Brick.
You may think that was no great Error, instead of Gold or Stone, to make Altars
of Brick: But what says God, They for this, etc. provoke me continually to my
Face. O tremble ye who adventure to transgress God's Precept in as bad or worse
a manner! who commanded you to baptize or dip Believers in the Name of the
Father, etc. and you rantize or sprinkle Infants: Alas you know not how you
hereby provoke God; although he is yet silent, and does not manifest his
Displeasure, yet know he is a jealous God, and has the like Zeal for his
Gospel-Institutions as ever he had of those under the Law, and may manifest it
too in his own time. But to proceed and call in further Witnesses against your
Practice.

Daille on the Fathers, l. 2 p. 148.
Daille on the Fathers says, That it was a Custom heretofore in the ancient
Church to plunge those they baptized over Head and Ears in the Water, as says
he, Tertullian in his third Book, De Cor. Mil. Cyprian in his seventh Ep. p.
211. etc. and others testify.

Dr. Cave.
Dr. Cave says, That the Party baptized was wholly immerged, or put under the
Water; which was the almost-constant and universal Custom of those times,
whereby they did most notably and significantly express the great Ends and
Effects of Baptism: For as in immerging, there are in a manner three several
Acts; the putting the Person into the Water, his abiding under the Water, and
his rising up again, thereby representing Christ's Death, Burial, and
Resurrection. And in our Conformity thereunto, our dying to Sin, the
Destruction of its Power, and our Resurrection to a new Course of Life. So by
the Person's being put into the Water, was lively represented the putting off
the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, etc. by his being under it (which is a kind
of Burial into the Water) his entering into a State of Death or Mortification,
like as Christ remained for some time under the State or Power of Death:
therefore it is said, as many as are baptized into Christ, are baptized into
his Death, etc. And then by Emersion, or rising up out of the Water, is
signified his entering upon a new Course of Life, that like as Christ was raised
up by the Glory of the Father, so we should walk in Newness of Life.

Paraeus upon Ursin, p. 375.
We are said (says Paraeus) to die, and to be buried with Christ in Baptism. --
And further shows, that the external Act of being buried in Water, is a lively
Emblem of the internal Work of Regeneration.

Bernard.
St. Bernard says, Immersion is a Representation of Death and Burial.

Against all these Testimonies, and multitudes more of the best and most
learned Writers, and plain Scriptures, you in page 52. bring in your second
Argument against Dipping. Mr. Burkit's second Argument against Dipping, ( p.
25. of his Book) answered.


Arg. 2. If Baptism administered by pouring Water on the Face (represents the
whole Person) does answer the Use and End of Baptism, as well as when
administered by Dipping or Plunging; then Dipping is not essentially and
absolutely necessary in the Act of baptizing: But the one answers the Use and
End of Baptism as well as the other; therefore the one cannot be more necessary
than the other.

What is the Use and End of Baptism but to represent to our Minds the Effusion
of Christ's Blood, for to take away the Guilt of Sin; and the pouring forth of
the Holy Spirit, for the purging away the Filth of it? Now (say you) the
sprinkling of the Blood of Christ, and the pouring forth of the Holy Spirit
upon the Infant, are more fully and plainly represented by Baptism, ad
administered by Sprinkling, than by Dipping.

If, say you, the inward and spiritual Grace signified by Baptism, be more
lively represented by Sprinkling than by Dipping; then surely Sprinkling is not
only as lawful, but more expedient than Dipping: but the inward and spiritual
Grace signified by Baptism, to wit, the cleansing of the Soul by the Grace and
Spirit of Christ, is more lively represented by Sprinkling than by Dipping:
therefore more expedient. And accordingly we find Almighty God himself often
expressing that Mercy of Sanctification by this Action; Ezekiel. 36.25. Then will
I sprink^^ clean Water upon you, and ye shall be clean, etc.

Answ. 1. By denying your minor Proposition: Sprinkling does not answer the Use
and End of Baptism, as what I have said and produced by the Testimony of the
Scripture, and almost all learned Men, both ancient Fathers and modern Divines,
fully shows the contrary.

2. I thought the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper had been instituted by Christ,
to signify the Effusion or pouring forth his precious Blood, and not Baptism:
Will you confound the Use and End of one Sacrament with the other, to maintain
your own Innovation and Abuse of Christ's Holy Baptism?

3. Might not the Jews, who instead of making Altars of Gold of Stone, made
them Altars of Brick, say, that Altars of Brick might serve as well to answer
the Use and end of burning Incense? Nay, may be they might say they had not the
other to do it, and therefore built their Altars of Brick: but would this
Pretense do? No, no. What says Almighty God? They provoke me continually to my
Face. Also might not others argue thus, about the Sacrament of the Supper, viz.
What need we have Wine? If we use Mum, or some other red Liqour, instead of the
Fruit of the Grape, it will answer the Use and End of that Sacrament, as well
as Wine. O! whither would this lead us?

4. We utterly deny that Baptism was ordained or instituted by Christ to
signify either the pouring forth of his Blood, or the pouring forth of the Holy
Spirit; and must tell you, that you affirm what you please, without any Proof
from God's Word. But by the way let the Reader observe how you go from
Sprinkling to plead for pouring Water on the Face of Infants: I question
whether you ever do so or not? but if you should, that would be no more
Christ's Baptism than Sprinkling.

You are not to devise new Signs or Symbols of spiritual Mysteries, of which
God speaks nothing in his Word, nor ever instituted to such Ends. I affirm he
has appointed no Rite or Ordinance in the Gospel to represent the Sprinkling or
pouring forth of the Holy Spirit. The Papists have (you know) seven Sacraments,
and they tell us of the Use and End of them, and how wonderful significant they
are; and yet all their Use and Expediency of them were the Contrivances of
their own wicked Hearts. And I must tell you that they prove what they do and
say of those Sacraments, as well as you do what you speak of Pouring or
Sprinkling. Take what Tho. Aquinas most excellently has said on this Account.
Aquinas.
It belongs to the Signifier (says he) to determine what Sign is to be used for
the Signification: but God it is, who by things sensible, signifies spiritual
things in the Sacrament. Christ has ordained Baptism to be a Sign, Symbol or
lively Representation of his own Death, Burial and Resurrection, as I have
proved and confirmed by a Cloud of Witnesses. Will God endure or suffer men
(think you) to invent out of their own Brains new Signs and Symbols of Divine
Gospel-Mysteries, and then father them upon him, and call them his Ordinances?
Nay, more, be so bold as to say, these are more useful, and answer better the
End of God, than those which he himself instituted? For thus you speak of
Sprinkling, viz. it is not only lawful, but more expedient than Dipping, p. 55.
And hereby you seem to teach God Wisdom, or to magnify yours above his. Be
astonished, O Heavens and be thou horribly amazed, O Earth! Was ever any Man
thus bold before? First you contrive a new Rite, and new Significations of it,
which God never appointed to represent such things, and then say, it is more
expedient than Christ's Ordinance of Dipping, which was instituted by him for
other Ends and Significations; whereas the whole Body of all learned Men, and
Christians, witness to, and testify the contrary.

Sir Nort. Knatchbul in his Notes printed at Oxford, 1677.
Pray take what Sir Norton Knatchbul has wrote, in direct opposition to what
you affirm.

Says he, Baptism, which now saves us by Water, (speaking of the Text in 1
Pet. 3.20.) that is, by the assistance of Water, and is Antitypical of the Ark
of Noah, does not signify the laying down the Filth of the Flesh, but the
Covenant of a good Conscience toward God, while we are plunged in the Water,
which is to testify our Belief of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ; so that
there is a manifest Antithesis between these words, by Water, and by the
Resurrection. Nor is (says he) the Elegancy of it displeasing. As if he should
say, the Ark of Noah, not the Flood, was a Type of Baptism, and Baptism was an
Antitype of the Ark; not as if Baptism is a washing away of the Filth of the
Flesh by Water, wherein it answers not at all to the Ark; but as it is the
Covenant of a good Conscience toward God by the Resurrection of Christ, in the
belief of which Resurrection we are saved, as they were saved by the Ark of
Noah: for the Ark and Baptism were both a Type and Figure of the Resurrection.
So that the proper End [mark] of Baptism ought not to be understood as if it
were a Sign of the washing away of Sin, (although it be thus oftentimes taken
metonymically in the New Testament) and by the Fathers, but a particular Signal
of the Resurrection by Faith, in the Resurrection of Christ, of which Baptism
is a lively and emphatical Figure; as also was the Ark, out of which Noah
returned, as from the Sepulcher to a new Life; and therefore not unaptly called
by Philo, the Captain of the New Creation. And the Whales Belly, out of which
Jonas, after a burial of three days, was set at liberty: and the Cloud, and the
Red Sea, in which the People of Israel are said to have been Baptized, is not
washed, [mark] but buried, for they were all Types of the same thing, as
Baptism, viz. not the washing away of Sin, but of the Death and Resurrection of
Christ, and our own: to which the Apostles, the Fathers, the Scholasticks,
[mark] and all Interpreters agree. The thing (says he) is so apparent, as not
to need any Testimonies; but because there are not a few who do not vulgarly
teach this Doctrine, it will not be superfluous to produce some of these
innumerable Testimonies, that I may (says he) not seem to speak without book.
And,

First, Let us begin with St. Paul, Romans 6.3. Know ye not that so many of you
that have been baptized into Christ, were baptized into his Death? Therefore we
are buried with him in Baptism, into his Death, Col. 2.12.
etc. Else what shall they do, 1 Cor. 15.29.
that are baptized for the Dead, if the Dead rise not?

As if he had said, If there be no Resurrection, why are we baptized? In vain
does the Church use the Symbol of Baptism, if there be no Resurrection.

The like Testimonies frequently occur among the Fathers, says he

Ignatius says, that believing in his Death, Ignat. Epist ad Tral. id. Epist.
ad Philadelph.
we may be made partakers of his Resurrection by Baptism. Baptism was given in
memory of the Death of our Lord; we perform the Symbols of his Death. (Mark)
not of pouring forth his Blood or Holy Spirit, or sprinkling the Spirit on us,
or the Blood of Christ: No, no; this that Author says, is not signified in
Baptism, but the Burial and Resurrection of Christ; which Sprinkling no manner
of ways can represent.

Justin Martyr says, Justin Martyr.
We know but one saving Baptism, in regard there is but one Resurrection from
the Dead, of which Baptism is an Image.

And from hence, say I, we know not Infants Rantism or Sprinkling; for this is
none of Christ's true Baptism. Christ's Baptism in Water is but one, and it is
that of Believers; and it is not Sprinkling, but Dipping, to signify Christ's
Burial and Resurrection. He goes on, and cites other Authors.

Basil the Great.
Hear Paul exclaiming, they past through the Sea, and were all baptized in the
Cloud, and in the Sea.

Basil of Silencia. Chrysostom.
He calls Baptism the Passage of the Sea, for it was a flight of Death caused
by Water.

To be baptized, and so plunged, and to return up, and rise out of the Water,
is a Symbol of the descent into the Grave, and returning from thence.

Lactantius. Bernard.
Baptism is a Pledge and Representation of the Resurrection: Baptism is an
Earnest of the Resurrection: Immersion is a Representation of Death and Burial.
Innumerable are the Testimonies (says Sir Norton) which might be added; but
these I think sufficient to prove that Baptism is an Image of the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, (from whence we acknowledge the Mystery of our Religion,
says he, Christ's Deity and Humanity) and of all the Faithful, who are
baptized in his Faith, from death in Sin to newness of Life, which if they lead
in this World, they have a most assured Hope, that being dead, they shall
hereafter rise to Glory with Christ. -- Thus Sir Norton Knatchbul, a worthy
Knight, and of your Church too.

Perkins, 2 Vol. cap. 3. on Gal. p. 257.
Mr. Perkins says, The dipping of the Body signifies Mortification, or
Fellowship with Christ in his Death; the staying under the Water, signifies the
burial of Sin; and coming out of the Water, the resurrection from Sin to
newness of Life. In another Treatise of his, he says, The ancient Custom of
Baptizing, 1 Vol. cap. 33. p. 74.
was to dip, as it were to dive, all the Body of the Baptized in Water; Romans 6.
Council of Laodicea and Neocesarea.

And here let me add what Reverend Dr. Sharp (the present Archbishop of York)
has lately delivered in a Sermon preached before the Queen's Majesty, on
Easter Day, March 27, 1692.

And this in ancient times was taught every Christian (says he) in and by his
Baptism: His Sermon on Phil. 3.10. p. 9.
When ever a Person was baptized, he was not only to profess his Faith in
Christ's Death and Resurrection, but he was also to look upon himself as
obliged, in correspondence therewith, to mortify his former carnal Affections,
and to enter upon a new state of Life.

And the very Form of Baptism (says he) did lively represent this Obligation
to them: For what did their being plunged under Water signify, but their
undertaking, in imitation of Christ's Death and Burial, to forsake all their
former evil Courses? as their ascending out of the Water, did their engagement
to lead a holy, spiritual Life. This our Apostle does more than once declare to
us: thus Romans 6. 3, 4. We are buried (says he) with Christ by Baptism unto
Death, that like as Christ was raised up by the Glory of the Father, so we
should walk in newness of Life. Thus far Dr. Sharp.

Dr. Fowler (now Lord-Bishop of Gloucester) on Romans 6. 3, 4. says, Design of
Christianity page 90.
Christians being plunged into the Water, signifies their undertaking, and
obliging themselves in a spiritual sense to die, and to be buried with Jesus
Christ, in an utter renouncing and forsaking all their Sins; that so answering
to his Resurrection, they may live a holy and godly Life.

Also Dr. Sherlock (Dean of St. Paul's) on Romans 6. 3, 4. says, Charity without
Usury, p. 1.
Our conformity to the Death and Resurrection of our Savior, consists in dying
to Sin, and walking in newness of Life: Which, says he, St. Paul tells us, is
represented by the external Ceremony of Baptism, and rising out of his warry
Grave a newborn Creature.

And unto these let me add what the Reverend Dr. Tillotson (the present
Archbishop of Canterbury) has wrote: Sermons preached on several Occasions,
5th Ed^^. p. 188, 189.
speaking of the same Text, Romans 6.3, 4. Anciently (says he) those who were
baptized, put off their Garments, which signified the putting off the Body of
Sin; and were immersed and buried in the Water, to represent the Death of Sin;
and then did rise up again out of the Water, to signify their entrance upon a
new Life. And to these Customs the Apostle alludes, when he says, How shall we
that are dead to Sin, live any longer therein? Know ye not, that so many of us
that were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his Death, etc.

1. It Is a hard case, you neither will believe the holy Scripture, the Ancient
Fathers, and modern Divines, no nor those learned Prelates and Doctors of your
own Church, who (...) living; but contrary to the nature and tende^^y of holy
Baptism, plead for Sprinkling, and condemn Dipping, and cast reproach upon it,
and say also, that the thing signified thereby, is the pouring forth of
Christ's Blood, or the sprinkling or pouring out of the Holy Spirit,
notwithstanding we prove from the Scripture, and with the Testimony of all
these great Men, that Baptism signifies the Death, Burial, and Resorrection of
Jesus Christ, and not any of those things you affirm, as your own Concein,
without the Testimony of any learned or approved Author.

Therefore, Sir, that Baptism is any thing else than dipping, plunging, or
washing which is done by dipping, we do utterly deny: For as the cutting off a
little bit of the Foreskin of the Flesh, or not the twentieth part round, is
not Circumcision; so sprinkling a little Water on the Face, is not Baptism.

True, you call it Baptism, and will do so, tho it is nothing less nor more than
Rantism; it is not the thing, nor does it answer in signification. I may tell
you again, that the Jews, instead of circumcising the Foreskin of their
Childrens Flesh, might have as well presumed to dispense with that, and only
have paired off the Nails of the Finger^ of their Male Infants* and have called
that Circumcision, as you may call sprinkling or pouring a little Water,
Baptism. But may be you will say, in Circumcision they were to draw Blood; so
say I, they might in cutting the Nails of their Childrens Fingers; nay, and
they might better plead, that the things signified in Circumcision, might be as
well answered in that new Device, (the Nails being a sort of Excrement, they
might say signified the taking away the Filth of Sin, or Corruption of Nature)
better than the great Mysteries signified by Baptism or Dipping, can be
represented by Sprinkling or Pouring.

Furthermore, they might possibly plead the same Pretenses you do, viz. the
cutting off the Foreskin of the Flesh, put the Infants to great Pain; nay, may
be they might fancy it would cost them their Lives; nay, call it Murder, and
therefore let pairing off their Nails serve; as you, it seems, fear Dipping
would endanger the Lives of Infants, and therefore make Sprinkling to serve
instead thereof. But to proceed:

2. I am in a-maze to see these Men speak so fully and clearly to this glorious
Truth, ( i. e. that the great thing Christ ordained Baptism to represent, is
his Death, Burial and Resurrection, together with the baptized Person's Death
to Sin, and his rising again to walk in newness of Life;) that both those
shameful Abuses in your Church, and among other Churches also, are not
rectified, viz.

1 st. That Sprinkling, which does not, cannot answer or represent those
Gospel-Mysteries, should not be rejected.

2 dly. That Infants should be once deemed the proper Subjects of Baptism, since
nothing of a Death to Sin, nor rising again to walk in newness of Life, can
appear in them. For as the Learned observe, Baptism is a Symbol of present, not
of future Regeneration; it is an outward Sign of that inward Death unto Sin,
which the Party baptized passed under then, or ought to have done, when (or
before) he is baptized. They then professed themselves to be dead to Sin, i. e.
even when they were buried with Christ in their Baptism: for the Argument of
the Apostle lies in that respect, How shall we that are dead to Sin, live any
longer therein? Romans 6.3, 4
knowing that so many of us who have been baptized into Christ, were baptized
into his Death, both in Sign and Signification: And therefore, as Dr. Sherlock
says, rising out of that watery Grave a newborn Creature, denotes not only what
they should be hereafter, but what they were actually at that time. So that as
this Text, and Arguments drawn therefrom, utterly condemn Sprinkling, as not
being Christ's Baptism; so it excludes Infants from being the Subjects thereof,
because in them appears no such Death to Sin, nor can they be said to come out
of that watery Grave as newborn Creatures.

To these Testimonies I shall only add one or two more, and pass to your
Objections.

See that most learned Anonymous French Protestant Writer, See Dr. DuVeil on
Acts 8. p. 292, 293.
in his Answer to the famous Bishop of Meaux; It Is most certain (says he) that
Baptism has not hitherto been administered otherwise than by Sprinkling, by the
most of Protestants: But truly this Sprinkling is an Abuse. This Custom which,
without an accurate Examination* they have retained from the Romish Church, in
like manner as many other things, makes their Baptism very defective. It
corrupts its Institution, and ancient Use, and that nearness of Similitude,
which is needful should be betwixt it, and Faith, Repentance and Regeneration.
This Reflection of Mr. Bossuet deserves to be seriously considered, to wit,
(says he) that this Use of Plunging has continued for the space of a whole
thousand and three hundred Years; hence we may understand that we did not
carefully, as it was meet, examine things which we have received from the Roman
Church.

Calvin says, Calvin, l. 4. c. 16.
That Baptism is a form or way of Burial;and none but such as are already dead
to Sin, or have repented from dead Works, are to be buried.

1. From whose words I note, that Sprinkling is not the Form of Baptism,
because not the Form of a Burial.

2. That Infants are not the true Subjects of Baptism, because not such as are
already dead to Sin, or have repented from dead Works; and indeed, as they are
not able, they are not required so to do by Christ.

The last Author I shall quote, Zanchy on Col. 2.12.
is Learned Zanchy, There are two parts (says he) in Regeneration,
Mortification and Vivification; that is called a Burial with Christ, this a
Resurrection with Christ. The Sacrament of both these is Baptism, in which we
are overwhelmed or buried, and after that do come forth and rise again: It may
not be said Truly, but Sacramentally of all that are baptized, that they are
buried with Christ, and raised with him, but only of such as have true Faith.

Now we may appeal to all the World, whether Zanchy and all the rest do not
clearly and evidently testify the same thing that we assert, viz. That Baptism
is, and can be no other Act, than Immersion or Dipping, since Sprinkling, all
must confess, does not represent in a lively Figure the Burial and Resurrection
of Christ, nor our dying or being dead to Sin, and vivification to newness of
Life, says he, Sacramentally, i. e. Analogically, in respect of the near
resemblance between Baptism, and a Death and Resurrection. And this I say
cannot be said of them that are sprinkled only; for if in respect of
Mortification and Vivification, they may be denominated buried and raised with
Christ, (which cannot be said of Infants) yet that outward Rite or Sign cannot
denominate them so much as Sacramentally buried and raised with Christ, for
there is not so much as any likeness of such things in it but in true Baptism,
viz. total dipping the Body in Water, and raising it again, it is in a lively
Figure held forth to our very sight: And as Zanchy says, It cannot be said of
all, nor indeed of any, that they are (...) sacramentally dead, buried and
risen with Christ, but only of such as have true Faith. Therefore Infants are
excluded by his own Argument.

And thus your first and second Arguments against ^ipping are fully answered,
in the 52 d and 53 d pages of your Book.

Mr. Burkit's third Argument against Dipping, answered.
Your third Argument, or Objection, against Dipping, is this, viz.

If Dipping were essentially and absolutely necessary in Baptism; then in all
the Baptism recorded in Scripture, we should meet with full Proof, or at least
with fair Probability, that the Parties Baptized were all Dipped.

But (say you) in several Instances of Baptized Persons recorded in Scripture,
we meet with no such Proof, but the contrary, Ergo, etc.

The Text^ you cite, are first, Acts 9.18, 19. That Paul was baptized in his
Lodgings, being sick and weak, etc.

Answ. 1. Both these things you affirm without any Ground or Authority from the
Text.

For, first, the Text does not say, he was baptized in his Lodgings, therefore
you strive to make the Scripture speak what it does not. See, Reader, the 18 th
Verse, and you may find Mr. Burkit speaks an Untruth, or that which the Text
says not.

2. It Is false also, in that you say he was sick or weak, tho he might be
somewhat weakened and amazed by the good Hand of God upon him. But if he had
been weak, yet when God commanded him to be baptized, or dipped in Water, In
the Name of the Father, etc. he had no cause to fear or doubt of any Harm.

3. I have known sickly and weak Persons baptized in this col^ Climate, and yet
received not the least hurt thereby.

Your second Text is Acts 16.33. where it is said, The Jailer was baptized the
same Hour of the Night; and Paul newly washed of his Sores by his Stripes.

Answ. This is such silly reasoning, that it is not worth naming. He was not so
sore, but he might go into the Water to baptize the Jailer and those in his
House. And though in the same Hour of the Night it was done also: What of that,
might there not be a River or Pond near his House? Sir, this must be believed,
since Baptism is Immersion; and you are filled with Prejudice and Incredulity
if you believe it not.

3. The other Text is that of 3000 baptized in the same day, Acts 2.41.

Can any Body believe (in or near Jerusalem, that great City) there was not
Water enough to baptize so many Persons? And could not the twelve Apostles, and
the seventy Disciples, dip more than 3000 Persons in one day? Sir, it is enough,
the Holy Ghost says they were baptized, that is, Dipped, not Rantized:
therefore you do but go about to contradict the Holy Spirit, and fight with
your own Shadow.

Mr. Burkit's fourth Argument against Dipping, answered.
Your fourth Argument, against the Necessity Dipping, is taken from the
difficulty of the thing in some Countries, in regard they have not (you say)
scarce Water enough to drink, not a River or Brook in many miles.

2. In regard of the danger of the thing, doubtless (say you) our Savior, who
prefers Mercy before Sacrifice, allows the Administration of the Ordinance, in
such a way as is consistent with his Peoples Lives; which must in some
Countries, especially at some Seasons of the Year, be in extreme danger, etc.
Mentioning an Act made by the Senate at (...) in Switzerland, That if any
Anabaptist dipped any of their People, he should be punished with drowning.

Answ. 1. You should have told us what Countries they are, who have not Water
enough to baptize People in. I know generally it is said by Writers, that those
Countries that are without Water, are unhabitable.

2. But if they have Rivers or Ponds, though not in a (...), no doubt, such who
are convinced it is their Duty to be baptized by Christ's Commission, How far
did some of the Jews go to worship God at Jerusalem?
would never stick at their labor to go forty or fifty Miles to have it done;
for it is said by some Writers, our Savior went above forty Miles to be
baptized of John in the River Jordan.

3. As to the Danger, we say, what you affirm is ^^lse, (...) thousands in this
Nation, by their own Experience and Knowledge, can justify there is no Danger at
all attending the Dipping or Baptizing the Adult, who profess* Faith in Jesus
Christ, (...), although it be done in the sharpest or coldest Season of the
Year, many thousands of Persons, of both Sexes, and some ancient, others weak
and sickly, have been baptized in very cold Weather; and yet we do challenge
all the World to bring an Instance of any Harm any one Person ever received
thereby: And since the Bodies of Infants cannot bear it, it is a good Argument
they were not the Subjects Christ intended, etc.

4. Might not the Jews have pleaded for such a kind of Circumcision as I
mentioned before, as the pairing the Nails of their Childrens Fingers, and not
to cut the Foreskin of their Flesh, with the same Argument you speak of, viz.
God will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice? for you know who said, A bloody Husband
thou art to me, because of this Circumcision.

5. May be there were such wicked Men at Zurick in Switzerland, who might make
such an Act, That such who baptized People should be drowned.

Answ. What then? we have had as bad Acts here also in England, or worse, who
made an Act, That those who held such Doctrine which they called Heresy, should
be burned. And others of later Date, That such who assembled together, above
the number of Five, to Preach or Pray, should be Fined, Imprisoned, or their
Goods taken away: It Is no marvel to hear of such a Law, wicked Men always hated
Christ's Truth and People.

Your fifth Argument against Dipping is a terrible one indeed, if true, viz.
Because it has a tendency toward the breach of the 6 th and 7 th Commandment,
Thou shall not Kill: Thou shall not commit Adultery.

You positively assert, That Baptism by Dipping of some Persons, and in some
Places, may expose to all those Hazards, and infallibly destroy and make an end
of thousands.

Answ. As to the Sin of Murder, what I have now said, it appears it has no
tendency to that, and therefore you show a most unjust and malicious Spirit
against Christ's Sacred Institution, by what you speak here: not one Soul was
ever destroyed thereby that ever you heard of, or I either. True, should you
baptize Infants, who are not the Subjects, you may fear it might destroy them
indeed; and it would be a presumptuous Act so to do, because not commanded, but
you may be sure God will own his own Ordinance. And us to what you speak
concerning Adultery, that shows the like envious, bitter and vile Temper; who
do you charge? cannot you take a Woman by the Hand without having unclean
Thoughts in your Heart? Those whom we baptize, have decent Clothes upon them.
Therefore this Practice of ours, according to our Savior's Institution, cannot
endanger our own nor our Neighbor's Chastity, as your slanderous Pen says,
Page 56. we performing the Ordinance with all Gravity and Modesty imaginable
before many Witnesses.

But then, say you, the Clothes are baptized.

What then, were not Grave-Clothes always buried with the Person that was laid
in the Grave? Or, does it follow, because the Clothes were buried, the Body of
the Man or Woman was not buried also?

If you pour Water on the Face of a Child, the good Women will tell you, you
will baptize the Child's fine Clothes also: nay, have you never sprinkled, or
rantized the Childrens fine Clothes or Dresses, when you, as you call it, have
baptized them?

But who do you (by arguing thus) reflect upon and reproach? is it not the holy
and ever blessed Jesus who gave forth the Law, i. e. to dip Believers, or to
plunge them in Water, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost? and do you not acknowledge in the Primitive Times, and in hot
Countries, Baptism was done by Dipping? Why then, pray consider, do you think
they were in those times baptized naked; if so, may you not charge them with
the Sin of Adultery, as you do in a wicked and ungodly manner charge us? We
read of Women in the Scripture who were baptized (that is, as we have proved*)
dipped.

Therefore, Sir, there is no need to endeavor further to prove they were
dipped; for if the Word had been truly translated according to the literal,
genuine and proper Signification thereof, we should have read it, they were
dipped both Men and Women, Acts 8.12. and so the Dutch have translated it in
their Language.

Maer do sy Philippo getrofden die Euangeliam van het koninckrycke Godts end
[van] don name Jesus Christi verkondigh de wier den sy de doopt begde manan
endevrouwen. In English thus;

When they heard Philip preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and
the Name of Jesus Christ, they were dipped both Men and Women.

But you say, that which may be lawful and modest in one Country, may be sinful
and immodest in another, etc.

Answ. Did not our Lord Jesus Christ send his Disciples to Teach and Baptize in
all Countries, not to Rantize in cool Countries and baptize in hot? And dare
you, without blushing, Did Christ institute his Ordinance with respect had to
the Custom of the Countr^*
say or intimate, it is immodest and a sinful thing to do what he has commanded
in any one Country in the World, because it may be possibly censured, condemned
or accounted so by the Sons of Belial, wicked and ungodly Men and Women?

Besides, have you not granted the Case so far, that in hot Countries they did
dip? pray, was not that a hot Country? was it not in Judea, the same Country
our Savior lived when on Earth? By what you say here, it may appear that you
say and unsay the same thing, and seem to deny any were baptized in and about
the Land of Canaan by dipping, The Land of Canaan is a hot Country.
or any where else, tho you contradict all the Learned, both the Greek and
Latin Fathers, and all the eminent Divines, Bishops and Doctors, I have quoted
out of their Writings. I even am sick of such an impertinent Antagonist.

Mr. Burkit's sixth Argument against Dipping, answered.
As to your sixth and last Argument, That God has blessed and highly honored
the Administration of your way (of Babes Rantism) to the Comfort and Advantage
of Multitudes.

Answ. It Is wholly without Proof or Demonstration, and nothing but a bold,
presumptive and rash Assertion of your own: God has suffered it long it is true,
(as he has some other human Rites and Traditions) but you cannot prove he has
blessed either it or them, to any one Soul's profit --. And when did God ever
honor Infant Baptism? (for formerly they were baptized, i. e. dipped) God did
honor the Baptism of the Adult highly, when our Savior being 'about thirty
Years old was baptized by John; Mat. 3.16.
for the Heavens were opened, and a Voice heard, This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased; Luke 3.23.
and the Holy Ghost came down upon him.

And so in Acts 8.12, 14. those Men and Women who believed and were baptized,
the holy Spirit was given unto: nay, and so highly has God honored the
baptizing of Believers, that there is a Promise of Forgiveness of S^^ and of
the receiving the holy Spirit; nay, of Salvation made to them that believe and
are baptized, Acts 2.37, 38. Mark 16.16.

But there is no Promise made to Infants that are Baptized, much less to such
who are but only Rantized.

1. As to your Objection (in Page 57.) about the Dutch rendering baptizing
dipping, it is not their Annotators, but it is their Translators, and that too
from the literal and proper Signification of the Greek Word; It Is so read
Reader, in the Dutch Testament, they have translated the Greek word, and our
Translators have not.
therefore you say nothing to weaken what we have said upon that account.

2. And as touching what you speak, i. e. that in Page 57. ( viz. That Baptism
signifies the Death and Burial of Christ, we, and a Cloud of Witnesses
therefore say, that it is Dipping, because that is a most lively Representation
of his Death, Burial and Resurrection) But you say, Baptism may signify the
Death of Christ, and be so administered, as lively to represent the Death of our
Savior, without the exposing those who are baptized to the danger of Death;
and may signify Christ's Burial too without sending the Person baptized to his
Grave: even in Sprinkling, there is a plain Representation of Christ's Death;
for the pouring forth of the Water not unfitly represents the pouring forth the
Earth upon the dead Body.

Answ. If you did pour Water upon the Child indeed until it was quite buried,
or covered all over in Water, you had said something; tho that is not the way
of baptizing neither, but dipping, or plunging; yet that would, I must confess,
represent a Burial: But is the dead Body buried so soon as a handful of Earth
is poured upon him? if you should say it, no body would believe you, the Body
must be covered under the Earth before it can be said to be buried, and so must
the Person baptized be covered under the Water, or it is not baptized; for as
otherwise there is no actual Burial in the first, so there is no Representation
of a Burial in the second.

But, say you, if you will closely follow the Metaphor of a Burial in all
Particulars; then as the Person buried is altogether passive, and laid in the
Grave only by others, in like manner the Party baptized, say you, ought to put
neither Foot, nor Leg, nor Thigh into the Water, but the Dipper ought to take
him up in his Arms, and lay his entire Body into the Water, etc.

Answ. Are you not blameworthy to write after this sort? O that you were more
wise, and dreaded the holy Majesty of God! Is it not said, They went both down
into the Water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he (that is, Philip) baptized
or dipped him? this is the Rule, not to take the Person up into our Arms; yet
it is the Administrator notwithstanding that buries the Person in the Water:
his going into it himself does not baptize him, tho he should go in as high as
his Waste, but the Administrator does it. You know Metaphors do not go (as we
use to say) on all four, nor must they be strained further than the design and
purport of the holy Spirit; but you by sprinkling destroy and utterly make void
that sacred Allusion of the Holy Ghost, which is not to be born with: Baptism
is no Representation of a Burial at all, if Sprinkling be it. And if you have
heard that some have been kept so long under the Water till (as you say)
almost choked, or buried alive; I suppose it is not the first Untruth you have
heard.

In Page 58, and 59. about Christ's not being baptized till thirty Years of
Age, you say, Christ was circumcised at eight days old; and although he was not
baptized in his Infancy, yet he was baptized in the Infancy of Baptism: also
you intimate, that some expound the words for his coming up out of the Water,
that the Situation of the River Jordan was beneath the place where John was
teaching.

Answ. Circumcision was then in force, now it is gone, therefore in that Christ
could not be an Example for us, but in Baptism (which is an Ordinance of the
New Testament) he is our Example and Pattern, as his Precept is our Rule, in
that we should follow his Steps.

2. And let me tell you, if it was in the Infancy of Baptism, (you mean the
beginning of the Practice of it) you hereby contradict what you have said about
those Jewish Baptisms, which you say were long in use before our Savior's
time, and from hence he spoke so little of Infant Baptism; if it were so, how
was this in the Infancy of Baptism?

3. Then was the Ordinance in its Beauty and Primitive Purity, indeed in its
Virgin Glory and it was soon after the Apostles time corrupted, as well as
other Truths were. We ought to go to the Original Copy, to the Primitive, or
first Institution and Practice; Is not Christ's Precept our only Rule? and his
own Practice our sure and certain Pattern? 1 Cor. 11.2.
Were not the Saints to keep the Ordinances (and commanded so to do) as they
were first delivered to them? As to the Situation of the River Jordan, is a
Figment; it is not said he came up from the Water, but that he came up out of
the Water, therefore had been in it.

4. As to what you say, that John baptized in Aenon, because there was much
Water; that the word signifies many Waters, I have answered that already, but
take one word or two more here. True, the Greek word (...) signifies many
Waters, but not little Rivolets, but rather the tumultuousness and raging of
the Seas, which fully signifies the abundance and confluence of Waters,
contrary to what you affirm. See Rev. 14.2. where you have the same original
words, so Rev. 19.6.

5. And lastly, as to your Arguments against re-baptizing, I pass them over,
you might have saved your self that Pains, for we (as I told you before) are as
much against re-baptizing as you can be, or for any to renounce their true
Baptism; your Arguments therefore in that are good. And now from the whole take
two Arguments.

Arg. 1. If Baptism was ordained to represent the Death, Burial and
Resurrection of Christ in a lively Figure; then Sprinkling cannot be Christ's
true Baptism: But Baptism was ordained to represent the Death, Burial and
Resurrection of Christ in a lively Figure; therefore Sprinkling cannot be
Christ's true Baptism.

This Argument we have proved to be true in every part of it.

Arg. 2. If Baptism was appointed to hold forth or represent in a lively Figure
the Person's Death to Sin, who is baptized, or his present Regeneration, not
future, and his rising again to walk in Newness of Life; then Infants cannot be
the Subjects thereof. But Baptism was appointed to hold forth or represent in a
lively Figure the Person's Death to Sin, who is baptized, or his present
Regeneration, not future, and his rising again to walk in ^^wness of Life:
therefore Infants are not the Subjects thereof.

Typical Baptisms signify Dipping or Plunging, 1 Cor. 10.2.
4.There is yet one Proof further to make it yet clearer, that Baptism is
Immersion, Dipping, or Plunging, and nothing else, and that is taken from those
typical Baptisms spoken of in the Holy Scripture. 1. That of the red Sin,
wherein the Fathers were bu^^ed as it were unto Moses in the Sea, and under the
Cloud. See Pool's Annotations on the Place. Others, says he (more properly)
think the Apostle uses this term in regard of the great Analogy Betwixt Baptism
(as it was used) the Persons going down into the Waters, and being dipped in
them; and the Israelites going down into the Sea, the great Receptable of
Water, though the Water at that time was gathered on Heaps on either side of
them; yet they seemed buried in the Water, as Persons seemed buried in the
Water were in that Age, when they were baptized.

2. The second typical Baptism was that of Noah's Ark: See Sir Norton
Knatchbul, whom I quoted before, says he, Noah's Ark and Baptism were both a
Type and Figure of the Resurrection, not a Sign of the washing away of Sin,
though so taken metonymically, but a particular Signal of the Resurrection of
Christ; of this again, says he, is Baptism a lively and emphatical Figure, as
also was the Ark of Noah, out of which he returned as from a Sepulcher. From
hence I infer this Argument following.

Arg. 3. If those typical Baptisms spoken of in the Scriptures, signified
Immersion, or an overwhelming, or a Burial; then is Sprinkling no true Baptism:
But those typical Baptisms, etc. did signify Immersion, or an Overwhelming, or
a Burial; therefore Sprinkling is no true Baptism. Metaphorical Baptisms
signify Dipping or Plunging, Mat. 3.11.


5. And lastly, That Baptism is Dipping or Plunging, or a being buried in the
Water, appears by those metaphorical Baptisms we read of, which are twofold. 1
st. The Baptism of the Holy Spirit. 2 dly. The Baptism of Afflictions.


1. Says John Baptist, I indeed baptize you with Water; but he shall baptize
you with the Holy Spirit and Fire. Now it is not the sanctifying Gifts of the
Spirit which every godly Person receives, that is the Baptism of the Spirit;
but as the Learned observe, the miraculous Effusion of the Holy Spirit, like
that at Pentecost, Acts 1.4, 5. shall be baptized. The Greek word (...), says
Casaubon, is to dip or plunge, Casaubon.
etc. in which Sense, says he, the Apostles might be truly said to have been
baptized, for the House in which this was done was filled with the Holy Ghost.
So that the Apostles might seem to have been plunged into it, as in a large
Fish Pond. It Is not a Sprinkling of the Spirit that is the Baptism of the
Spirit, for so doubtless the Apostles had the Spirit before they were said to
be baptized with it.

Oecumenius on Acts 2. says, A Wind filled the whole House, that it seemed
like a Fish Pond, See Philologia sacra, p. 190.
because it was promised to the Apostles, that they should be baptized with the
Holy Ghost.

2. We read of the Baptism of Afflictions: I have a Baptism to be baptized
with, Matthew. 20.22, 23.
and how am I straightened till it be accomplished! From the literal Signification
of the word baptizo, immergo, plunge under, overwhelm, great Afflictions come
to be called Baptism, and signifies, as Vossius shows, not every light
Affliction, but like that of David, Psalm. 32.6. he drew me out of deep Waters:
Hence great Afflictions are called Waves; Thy Waves and thy Billows are gone
over me, Psalm. 42.7. It Is spoken of Christ's Sufferings, who was as it were
drowned, drenched or overwhelmed in Afflictions and Sufferings: every small
Affliction is not the Baptism of Afflictions, but great and deep Afflictions,
suffering even unto Blood and Death.

Pool's Annotat. on Mat. 20.22
Pool's Annotations say, to be baptized is to be dipped in Water,
metaphorically to be plunged in Afflictions.

I shall close this also with another Argument.

Arg. 4. If those metaphorical Baptisms which we read of in God's Word (as the
Baptism of the Spirit, and of Afflictions and Sufferings) are taken from the
literal Signification of the Greek word baptiz^, which signifies to dip* then
Sprinkling is not baptizing, but the former is true. Ergo, Sprinkling is not
baptizing.

CHAP. X.
Containing some brief practical Use of the whole; with seasonable Counsel to
Parents, etc.

1. FRom hence I infer that those who have only been sprinkled or rantized, who
are baptized afterward when they believe, are not rebaptized, as you affirm;
nor do they renounce their Baptism, though they do renounce the Practice and
humane Tradition of Sprinkling.

2. All you pious Parents, bless God for Christ and the Gospel, and for all
those Privileges he has bestowed upon you; and be sure make God's Word your
Rule, and tremble to do any thing in his Worship, without lawful Authority from
him, I mean Precept or Example from his Word; and do not adventure to baptize,
much less to rantize your Children, whatever Mr. Burkit or any Man on Earth
says, unless you can find it written in your Bibles; God has not commanded you
to bring them into a Baptismal Covenant, not made any Promise of Blessing to
assist them to perform it: If you do so, consider what I have said in this
Treatise about that devised and unwarrantable Covenant by which you may heap up
Guilt upon your selves, and lay such a Load and Burden on your Children, that
you are not aware of, and frighten them with the Thoughts of Perjury, etc.
sufficient to drive them into Despair, when indeed God never will charge them
with Perjury, since he never commanded them to enter into any such Covenant.

Can any Body think when your Children are grown up, and they by Light received
from God's Word, should be convinced they were never baptized at all, and so
renounce their Infants Rantism, that they thereby become guilty of Perjury, and
must be damned? Do not these Men teach such a kind of Doctrine as that is?

2 dly. Train up your Children in the Fear of God, and set them a good Example,
and pray for them, and over them, and give them good Instruction, or godly
Counsel and Admonitions; but dread to sprinkle them in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, because it is not done by his Authority
nor Appointment. Know it is not in the Power of Man by any external Rite to make
your Children Members of Christ, or visible Members of his Body. Baptism is not
Bread for Infants, but for Christ's newborn Babes; not for your Children as
such, but such who are the Children of God, who are born of his Spirit.

3 dly. Don't deceive your poor Children, and make them believe they are in a
good Condition, by reason they are the Seed of believing Parents, and baptized
(as these Men call it) and so look out for no further Work of Grace nor
Regeneration* but think they by that pretended Baptism were made Christians,
even Children of God, Members of Christ, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of
Heaven, when in Truth it is no such thing.

Nor have you any Cause to doubt but that your Infants who die (though not
baptized) are happy, as it appears from what we have said. Neither be ye so
ignorant to believe Baptism can save your Infants or the Adult either! nor let
poor Children cry out against their ungodly Parents, as Mr. Burkit intimates
they may do in page 62. Take a Taste of his strange Doctrine, thus he says.
Before your Children are born, (1.) Make sure, as much as in you lies, that
they may be born within the Covenant, and under the Promise, by your being in
Covenant with God your selves; See that the Lord be your God, ^ God in Covenant
with you, and then you may comfortably hope he will be the God of your Seed in
their Generations.

Answ. This is a way to bring poor Souls into Covenant, that God speaks nothing
of in his Word. You may be in Covenant, and your Children never in it whilst
they live, nay die out of the Covenant, as doubtless many godly People^
Children do. Nor has God made such a Covenant with every Christian Man and
their Seed, as he made with Abraham, who was the Father of all that Believe;
but so are not you, nor I, though we are in Covenant with God, and walk in
Abraham's steps.

Those who are in the Election of Grace of your Seed, never fear, God will
interest in his due time with all Covenant-Blessings and Privileges; but if any
of them are not comprehended in that Election of Grace, they being born of your
Loins, will not, cannot bring them into Covenant with God.

Your Business and your Childrens too, is to make your (and their) Election
sure, by special and effectual Calling.

It Is not the first Birth, but the Second, that brings either you or your
Children into the Gospel*Covenant, that God may be your God, and their God.

But mark Mr. Burkit's next words, p. 62.

O! were but Infants capable of Knowledge, how much would they dread being born
of wicked Parents? Make it your Endeavor, before your Children are born, to
sanctify your Children; this is done by Prayer, etc.

Answ.: 1. This is enough to set Children against their ungodly Parents, nay,
to (...) them in their Hearts. Alas, the Children of wicked Parents* I see not
but they may be i^ as good a Condition as the Children of Believers* for
doubtless God will not destroy poor children for the F^^^t and Sins of their
Parents. (...) by your begetting them, (though gracious) you cannot live them,
so you by begetting them, (though wicked) cannot damn or destroy them.

Perkins on Gal. 3. p. 264.
There is no reason (says Mr. Perkins) that the wickedness of the Parents
should prejudice the Child, in things pertaining to Eternal Life.

2. But if it be a^ you say, that when you are in Covenant, your Children are
in Covenant, doubtless they are in a safe Condition; and Baptism to them is
(...) cannot bring them into the Covenant beca^^^ they were in it be^^^e, and
therefore (...) enough.

3. But may not th^^ Doctrine pu^ ^ just Rebuke ^^on Unbelievers, or Ungodly
Persons, for once attempting to Marry; and beget Children, that are in such a
sad Condition, by reason their Pare^^s were not ^n Covenant w^^^ God! Ought
(...), nay, may they lawfully M^rry, this being considered, and such drea^^ul
(...) following? ^^^sider how far does the Covenant* Blessing ex^end* If my
Grand*father in Cov^^^nt, ^ho my Father (...) b^ very wic^ed and ungodly
Persons, am I not still in Coven^^t, and are not my Children i^ Covenant too?
Nay, if (...) was by my Great-Grandfather, will not that do, as well as if my
mo^^ (...) Father was* in Covenant with God?

Sir, The Opposers of Pedo-^^ptism do not creep out of Darkness and (...), as
you scandalously affirm; but God has graciously brought us out of the Darkness
you are in, and has given us (blessed be his Name) the Knowledge and Light of
his Word, and what his Goodwill and Pleasure is in this Matter, and mercifully
vouchsafed to us a gracious Freedom and Liberty to worship him ^^cording to our
Light and Consciences, which ^ou seem troubled at* and we are not ashamed to
show our Heads on the Housetop; nor do we scandalously dip our deluded
Proselytes, as you with Envy and Prejudice enough say, but do at Noonday, to
the Honor of God, a^^ in justification of his Wisdom and Holy Institution*
Baptize or Dip such who believe and are discipled by the Word; which is a
joyful Spectacle, no doubt, to the Holy Angels, and all enlightened good Men,
who see this reproached and contemned Ordinance in its Primitive Purity.

And as touching your Reflections, Burkit's Reflections on Mr. Tredwell,
answered.
in p. 66. on ^^y Faithful and worthy Brother Mr. Tredwell, whom you pretend to
pity, as one misled by prejudice of Education, undertaking an Office to get
Bread; and as if he was no ways qualified to preach the Gospel, because he
understands not the Original Tongues.

I answer; On my Knowledge, he had a good and warrantable Call to go and preach
the Gospel where he is; and was sent down also, as being approved as one able
to teach, to the Profit and Edification of the People. And truly you, and those
of your Brethren, have the least reason of any Men to talk as you do, about
Preaching for Bread, for that will not serve your turn, you must have Fat
Benefices. God has ordained, that they that preach the Gospel, should live of
the Gospel; and the Workman is worthy of his Meat; and would you not have him
have Bread to eat? I doubt not, it is the Honor of God, and the bringing of
Souls to Christ, my Brother Tredwill (...) a^; and had you no more for
Preaching than he has, you might be the more justified in something (I am
informed) you have done, or are about to do. And as for the Knowledge of the
Tongues, I hope you do not make that an Essential Qualification of a true
Minister; I am sure God's Word does it not* the Spirit's ^^^aching is above all
H^^ane Learning.

And now, Sir, by this time I hope you will see more cause of blushing (than he
has) at your Attempt, and rash Censuring and Condemning, and in a bad manner
reproaching of Christ's (...) Ordinance, and Sacred Institution, and his poor
and despised People, who wish you and all Men well, and did not, nor do intend
any Evil against you, nor had troubled our selves with you, had not you begun
with us. The Lord give you Repentance to the acknowledgment of the Truth, and
grant more Love and Charity one to another; For who art thou that judge
^^^ther Man's Servant?

AN APPENDIX, Containing several Queries and Arguments for Mr. Burkit to
answer, since the Athenian Society have not done it.
SIR,
I Having wrote a few Queries and Arguments lately about Infant Baptism, for
your Brethren the Athenian Society to answer upon their bold Challenge; and
since they are too hard for them to do it, having said nothing at all to the
purpose; I shall expect to see them answered by you, when you answer this Reply
to your Book. I shall not trouble you with all, but only with a few of them.

Query 1. Whether the being the male Children of Abraham, as such, gave them a
right to Circumcision, or not rather the mere positive Command of God to
Abraham?

To this they give no Answer.

Query 2. Whether Circumcision could be said to be a Seal of any Man's Faith,
save Abraham's only, seeing it is only called the Seal of the Righteousness of
his Faith, and also of that Faith which he had, being yet uncircumcised?

The Athenians Answer.
To this they say, Amongst the ancient Heretics they never met with such a
strange Position as this, viz. That the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith was
the Privilege of Abraham only. Is this an Answer? It Is a hard case Men must be
reckoned among Heretics, for asking a sober and pious Question
Besides, they mistake, it is no^ a Position, but a Question. Furthermore, it is
said, ^^braham rec^^ved the Sign of Circumcision; not only as a Seal of the
Righteousness of that Faith he had, being yet uncircumcised, but also (mark)
that he might be the Father of all that believe. Was this the Privilege of any
save Abraham only?

Query 3. What do you conceive Circumcisi^^ did, or Baptism does seal or make
sure to ^^fants, since a Seal usually makes firm all the Blessings and
Privileges contained in that Covenant it is affixed to?

The A^henians Answer.
They answer, It seals, and did seal to all that belong to Christ, Life and
Salvation; but to such as do not, it seals nothing at all.

To which I reply* How dare any Man to seal the Covenant of Salvation to such,
who have not that Faith Abraham had before he received that Seal? It was not a
Seal of that Faith he might have o^ might not have afterward, but of that
Faith he had before he received it. 3. I affirm Baptism is no Seal at all of
Salvation; for if it was* and of God's Appointment, all so sealed, would be
saved* but many who are baptized, may perish eternally, and do no doubt.

Query 4. I demand to know what those external Privileges are, Infants partake
of by Baptism, seeing they are denied the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and
all other external Rites whatsoever? If you say, When they believe, they shall
partake of those Privileges and Blessings; so say I shall the Children of
Unbelievers, Turks and Pagans, as well as they.

They answer; The Athenians Answer.
We insist not upon external Privileges; it is foreign to the Matter: if you say
when they believe; so say I shall the Children of Unbelievers.

Reply. If you insist not on internal Privileges, nor on external Privileges
that are sealed to Infants that are baptized, what does their Baptism signify?
just nothing; -- but which is worse, it is a Profanation of Christ's holy
significant Ordinance of Baptism, and that is worst of all.

Query 5. If the fleshly Seed or Children of believing Gentiles, as such, are
to be accounted the Seed of Abraham; I query, Whether they are his Spiritual
Seed, or his Natural Seed? If not his Spiritual Seed, nor his Natural Seed,
what right can they have to Baptism or Church Membership, from any
Covenant-Transaction God made with Abraham?

They answer; The Athenians Answer.
They are his Spiritual Seed visible, for so far only belongs to us to judge;
and therefore they have a right to the Seal of that Covenant.

Reply. What they say cannot be true; because the Scripture positively says,
that such who are the spiritual Seed of Abraham, have the Faith of Abraham, and
walk in the steps of Abraham, and are Christ's, Gal. 3. ult. But Infants of
Believers, as such, cannot be said to have the Faith of Abraham, nor to walk in
Abraham's steps, etc.

2. Such who are Abraham's spiritual Seed, are in the Election of Grace, and
are always his Seed, not for so long, etc. but for ever.

3. We can judge none to be Abraham's spiritual Seed, but such only in whom
these Signs appear beforementioned: but none of those Signs appear; nor can
appear in Infants; therefore we cannot judge they are his spiritual Seed, to
whom the Seal of the Covenant of Grace of right does belong.

Query 6. Whether the Children of Belie^^rs are in the Covenant of Grace
absolutely, or but conditionally? If only conditionally, (...) ^^ther Privilege
have they then (...) the Children of Unbelievers?

Query 7. Whether those different (...) upon which the Right of Infant Baptism
i^ pre^^^ted by the ancient Fathers of old, and the (...) Divines, does well
agree with an Institution that is a mere positive Right, wholly depending on
the sovereign Will of the Legislation, does not give just cause to all ^o
question its Authority*

1. Some Pedo-Baptists asserted, it took away Original Sin; and such who denied
it, were Anathematized.

2. Some affirm, That Children are in Covenant, and being the Seed of
Believers, are federally ^oly, therefore to be baptized.

3. Another sort of Pedo-Baptists say, They ought to be baptized, by virtue of
their Parents Faith.

4. Another sort baptize them upon the Faith of their Sureties.

5. Others say, By the Faith of the Church, as Au^^i^, Bernard, etc.

6. Others say, they have Faith themselves, and therefore must be baptized.

7. Some say, it is a (...) Apostolical (...) Tradition; but others deny that,
and say, it may be proved from the Scripture.

8. Others say, it is a regenerating Ordinance, and Infants thereby are put
into a savable Some: Others say, the Infants of Believers are safe before,
because in Covenant with their Parents.

To this Query they say nothing, pretending they had answered it before.

Query 8. Whether that can be an Ordinance of Christ, Consequences was not in
our former Query.
for which there is neither Precept nor Example, nor plain and undeniable
Consequences for it in all God's Word, nor Promise made to such who do it, nor
Threat denounced on such who neglect it?

This they say they answered in one of our Arguments. The Athenians Answer.


Their Answer is there about Women's receiving the Sacrament, etc.

Query 9. Whether in matter of mere positive Right, such as Bap^ism is, we
ought not to keep expressly and punctually to the Revelation of the Will of the
Law* giver?

They answer, Yes.

Reply. Then your Cause is lost, for God's Word expressly directs us to baptize
only such who are first taught, or made Disciples by teaching, or who make a
Profession of their Faith: And Dipping is the express and direct Act of
Baptizing, as practiced in the New Testament, and a great Cloud of Witnesses
testify.

Query 10. Wh^^her the Baptism of Infants be not a dangerous Error, since it
tends to deceive poor ignorant People, who think they were thereby made
Christians, and regenerated, and so never look after any other Regeneration nor
Baptism, that represents or holds forth that inwar^ Work of God's Grace?

They answer, They never tell them they are made Christians thoroughly, etc.

Reply. Then I appeal to all Men who have read the old Church-Catechism -- In
my Baptism, wherein I was made a Child of God, a Member of Christ, and an
Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven.

11. Since we read but of one Baptism in Water, and that one Baptism is that of
the Adult, i. e. such who profess Faith, etc. how can Infant Baptism, or rather
Rantism, be an Ordinance of Christ?

12. Whether God has any where commanded or injoined Parents to bring their
little Babes of two or ten days old; into a Covenant with himself by Baptism,
since it is not to be found in all the Scripture*

If not, how can that Covenant oblige their Child when he comes to Age, if it
be so great a Sin not to perform that Covenant, or to renounce the thing it
self?

Whether there is any Covenant appointed by Christ for Infants to enter into,
unto, which no Promise is made of Assistance to perform it, nor of Blessing if
it be kept, nor one Threatening, if cast off and disowned?

13. What should be the reason that our Translators of the holy Bible should
leave the Greek word Baptism^ or Baptisma, ^^^ranslated, seeing the Dutch have
not done so, but contrariwise translate for John Baptist, John the Dipper, and
for he baptized them, he dipped them?

The Athenian Society answ^^, They are the best Judges themselves; if we can
understand them, it is enough.

Reply. No* tho the Learned in the Greek do know what the word Baptizo and
Baptisma is, yet the Unlearned in that Tongue, do not know that it is to dip, or
Immersion, therefore it is not enough.

14. Whether such who have only been sprinkled, ought not to be deemed
unbaptized Persons, since Aspersion is not Immersion, or Rantizing not
Baptizing, seeing the Greek word signifies to dip; and tho sometimes to wash,
yet such a washing as is by dipping, as the Learned confess?

To this they say, Those that doubt, may be of the sure side.

Ten ARGUMENTS against Pedo-Baptism.
Arg. I. Those that our Savior commanded in his Commission to be baptized,
were such who were first discipled by the Word.

Infants are not discipled by the Word: Ergo, Infants, according to Christ's
Command in the Commission, ought not to be baptized.

Arg. II. To believe, and repent, are required of all that ought to be baptized.

Infants are not required to believe and repent: Ergo, They ought not to be
baptized.

Arg. III. The Church of England says, Faith and Repentance is required of
such who are to be baptized, and she speaks the Truth in so saying: and if
Infants cannot perform Faith and Repentance, then Infants ought not to be
baptized.

But the Church of England says, Faith and Repentance is required of such who
are to be baptized, and she speaks the Truth in so saying, and Infants cannot
perform Faith and Repentance: Ergo, Infants ought not to be baptized.

The Athenians in Answer to this Argument say, The Church of England means only
the Adult who are capable, etc.

Reply. They mean Infants also, why else do they add, Yes verily they (that is,
Infants) do perform it by their Sureties, etc. And how true that is, I leave to
all Men to judge.

Arg. IV. If there is not one Precedent in all the Scripture (as there is no
Precept) that one Infant was baptized, then Infant Baptism is unlawful.

But there is not one Precedent in all the Scripture (as there is not one
Precept) that one Infant was baptized: Ergo, Infant Baptism is unlawful.

The Athenians answer, Show us a Precedent for our Wives communicating, (they
mean to receive the Lord's Supper) which we have answered already.

Arg. V. St. Paul declared, or made known the whole Counsel of God.

St. Paul did not declare or make known Infant Baptism: Ergo, Infant Baptism is
none of God's Counsel.

Arg. VI. The holy Scripture being a perfect Rule of Faith and Practice, either
by Precept or Example, makes known every positive Law and Institution of Christ.

But the holy Scripture does not make known, neither by Precept for Example,
Infant Baptism: Ergo, Infant Baptism is no Institution of Christ.

Arg. VII. That Doctrine and Practice that reflects on the Honor and
Faithfulness of Jesus Christ, who was not less faithful than Moses, can be no
Ordinance of Christ.

But the Doctrine and Practice of Infant Baptism reflects on the Honor and
Faithfulness of Jesus Christ, who was not less faithful than Moses; Ergo,
Infant Baptism is no Ordinance of Christ.

The Athenian Society answer, The Obscurity of the Ordinance of Infant Baptism
does not at all reflect on the Honor and Faithfulness of Christ, since the
Apostles to whom he delivered his Commission were Jews; and since at the same
time it was a continual and settled Custom among the Jews to baptize Men, Women
and Children of proselyted Heathens, and Infants being not exempted out of the
Commission. To which I have in this Treatise given a full Answer.

Arg. VIII. If there be but one Baptism in Water left by Christ in the New
Testament, and but one way or manner of Right for all, both Parents and
Children, to be admitted into the Church, and that one Baptism in Water is that
of the Adult, who upon their Profession of Faith ought to be baptized, and so
admitted into the Church. Then none, either Parents or Children, must be
admitted either to Baptism, or into the Church, without such a Profession of
Faith. But the former is true. The Athenians Answer*


There is no need the Scripture should particularly mention the Ends of
Pedo-Baptism, since there is but one Baptism for all, though more Subjects to
that one Baptism. -- You run, say they, too fast, and take it for granted that
Baptism is only of the Adult.

Answ. Since there is but one Baptism mentioned in Scripture, and that is of
the Adult, and the End and Design of Christ in it is expressly laid down as to
that: We say therefore there is Reason why the End of Infant Baptism should be
certain, and we run not too fast. We say the Subjects are but one, since the
Baptism is but one, and manner of Right thereto being but one also.

Arg. IX. If no Parents at any time or times have been by God the Father, Jesus
Christ, or his Apostles, either commended for baptizing their Children, or
reproved for not baptizing them; then Infant Baptism is no Ordinance of God:
but the former is true. Ergo.

Your Answer says, The Athenians Answer.
The Athenian Society is answered, unless you will destroy Laying on of Hands,
one of the Principles of the Christian Religion; none were ever commended (...)
reproved for ever being or not being subject to that, etc.

Answ. Do we ^^t read in Acts 8.17. Acts 19.6. that those Men and Women who
were baptized, did subject to Laying on of Hands, being Believers, as such?
Sure what is said of their coming under it, or submitting to it, is spoken to
their Commendation* However as it is called a Principle of Christ's Doctrine,
Heb. 6.1, 2. so here are two Precedents of Persons that subjected to it: Show
us the like as to Infant Baptism.

Arg. X. Baptism is Dipping: Infants are not dipped. Ergo, Infants are not
baptized.

As to the other Arguments sent to the Athenian Society, with their Answers, I
have spoken to several of them in this Treatise, and I shall add no more new;
but ^e^ve all I have said to the Blessing of God, hoping the time is near when
this Truth I contend for will be cleared up to all, which is now to enrich
despised; that Wisdom may be justified of her Children, and God may be
honored, to whom be Glory now and for ever-more. Amen.

FINIS.
Faults escaped the Press.
Page 10. line 13, 14, 15. blot out the double Comma's. Page 25. line 22. for
makes mention, read, makes no mention. There are other Errata's and
dispointing, which the Reader is desired to correct.


