Pharmacopoeia Lemeriana Contracta: LEMERY's Universal Pharmacopoeia abridg'd,
IN A COLLECTION OF Recepe's and Observations, Compared With the London and with
Bates's Dispensatories; and also, with Charas's Royal Pharmacy.

To which are added, Some Remedies recommended by the Members of the French
Royal Academy of Sciences, most collected out of the History of that Society,
lately published by John Baptista du Hamel.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's-head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1700.

THE PREFACE.
THE Choice, due Preparation and Mixture of Medicines are of such known
consequence to the welfare of Mankind, that I should lose time, if I spent any
in recommending Pharmacy; and it being little less obvious, that a Skill in
Chemistry is indispensably necessary to make an able Apothecary, I shall think
it needless to insist upon any Praises of Mr. Lemery in this particular, since
his Ingenious and Learned Treatise upon the Subject, so well received over all
Europe, that it has been printed nine times in French, thrice in English, and
several times in Latin, is an unquestinable proof of his Ability. Therefore I
take the only thing incumbent on me, to be, to account why I have taken so
little from a Book which I take pains to insinuate, is valuable; for which I
shall offer these reasons. 1. That upon comparing his to the London and Bates's
Dispensatories, and with Monsieur Charas's Royal Pharmacy already Englished, I
have found very many good Remedies borrowed from the two first, and not a few
taken from the latter, which I thought as needless as disingenuous to insert in
this Collection, those Books being in most peoples hands already; if I take
notice of any, it is very seldom but where some alteration is made, or to
vindicate our Compositions from faults my Author pretends to find in them. 2. I
do often abridge into ten or a dozen words what I find spun out uselesly into
twenty or thirty lines: It is in telling what quantity of different Ingredients
are contained in a determinate portion of a Composition; my Author is not
content to say, that there is so much contained in a Scruple or in a Dram,
but begins anew, and tells there is so much contained in two Scruples, and in
two Drachms, and commences again, and goes on often to an Ounce and a half, and
that sometimes in such ordinary Compositions as Lenitive Electuary for
Glisters. For my part, I believe neither this nor any other Book would be of
use to such as should want Brains to calculate, that if a Dram contains so
many Grains of an Ingredient, two Drachms of the same Composition must contain
twice so many Grains; and so any other assignable quantity thereof, more or
less as it is contained in, or contains a Dram. 3. I avoid what does
considerably augment the Bulk of this great Pharmacy, viz. a frequent
Repetition of tedious Remarks, designed for the Instruction of Novices, but
altogether useless to such as are under the direction of Masters to learn their
Calling, and far short of Sufficiency to render any other an Artist; for there
is a certain Modus, a nice secundum Artem in duly preparing Medicines, which
is as impossible to be learned by dry Precepts without Manual Operation
directed by a viva voce Instruction, as it is unlikely to become a famous
Fencer by Contemplation and serious Study of Agrippa's or any other great
Artist's Posture-Book. And truly it is wonderful, that in such a Nation as this
is, where plenty affords due means to preserve Health, people should risque
this Comfort of Life, in making use of the adulterate, diliterious, slovenly
Compositions of ignorant pretending Quacks, whose number grows daily upon us
through the Dissension of Physicians among themselves, and the unhappy Difference
of the College with the Apothecaries, whereof there can likely be no prospect
of Accommodation, when Methods are taken to widen the Breach to the
considerable detriment of Physic in general, and no less disreputation of
English Physicians, hitherto deservedly famous over all the Learned World. To
heal a Wound by irritating it, and putting its severed parts at a greater
distance, was never learned (...) Hippocrates, and will be always as
unsuccessful as the attempts of a late ingenious Author to ridicule Men into
Conformity. Such Constraints are too like Dragooning to take in this free
Nation, and it is pity he has thrown away so much truly noble Verse,
Claudian-like, on so mean a Subject. As for the anonymous Author that has so
disingeniously labored to lessen Apothecaries, they set so little by his
mighty Performance, that upon discovery of his Name; they have only cut off the
Initial Letter, and it is said, the best of them are so little averse to a fair
Accommodation with the College, that they would not be against a Subordination,
equally distant from vying with approved able Physicians and a too servile
dependence on them. It is more than probable, that such a temper would prove to
the Credit and Interest of both. But I must leave this Subject to acquaint the
Reader, that I generally prefer the less Compound when larger Compositions are
not recommended by experienced Practitioners; for all Plants and Minerals are
in themselves Compositions where Nature has regulated the Doses and Mixtures of
Principles with an exactness unattainable by Art, if we were but fortunate
enough to hit upon them and to apply them right; on the other hand, the
over-nice uncompoundedness sought after by laborious and tiresome Analyzes,
seems an equal Error, many Quintessences, Elixirs, Ethereal Oils, and such
others, called, the Souls of Mixts, proving short of the efficacy of the
grosser parts, witness the Kinkina. Let Experience guide here as in cases of
this nature it ought, being the only Test that can be safely relied on in the
use and choice of Medicines, for Taste and Smell (Dr. Floyer's Touchstone)
prove woefully deceitful on many occasions, and do not reach some Sovereign
Remedies, as the Ipecacuanha and Jesuit's Bark, that have no Smell at all, and
Mercury and Antimony that have neither Taste nor Smell. Before I conclude this
Preface, I must take notice of a Method in Practice peculiar (for what I can
learn) to Mr. Lemery, viz. leaving on or continuing Blistering-Plaisters to the
same part for 16 or 20 days together, and that he says with success in young
Children troubled with obstinate Defluxions on their Eyes. Though his Vesicatory
is not so strong of the Cantharides as ours generally are, I believe few will
think it safe to prescribe it his way here, where there is a fresh Instance of
that degree of prejudice against the foreign Fly, that some have been severely
handled for ordering the internal use in a very small quantity and wary
circumspect manner; the case so desperate, that ordinary Medicines proved
ineffectual. In my Judgment the Reasons urged against the Practice, well
considered, proved it safe. I will add my Thoughts, and humbly submit them to
the unbiased Reader.

The Arguments used against the internal use of the Cantharides ran most thus,
That an external application raises Blisters, tears the Flesh, causes often a
great pain in the Bladder, accompanied sometimes with bloody Urine, etc.
therefore, if taken inwardly they will of necessity excoriate the Stomach, tear
the tender Blood Vessels in the Lungs, and endanger all the noble parts.

If we duly examine how Blistering-Plaisters applied to the Neck, Arms, or
other external parts, cause the Pain and Bloody-Urine complained of, we will
find, that both are occasioned by an adhesion of some Corrosive Particles of
the Cantharides to the inner Membrane and Neck of the Bladder; and if we
examine how such Particles come to these parts from the Back or Arms, we will
find, they must of necessity pass through the Lungs and Heart, and that
probably several times before they are carried off by Urine; for passing
gradually with the refluent Blood to the Heart, it is not unlike they
impregnate the Mass equally; and if so, there can be no more carried to the
Kidneys in one Circulation, than what the Blood of the Emulgent Arteries
happens to be then loaded with, which must bear the same proportion to the
whole, as this quantity of Blood does to the entire Mass, the rest of the
Cantharides at the same time, being carried to those called Noble, as well as
to other parts, as they receive more or less of the impregnated Fluid. Since
thus it is manifest, that the Acrimonious Salts of the Cantharides pass through
the Lungs and Heart when from an external application they affect the Bladder,
and that it seems more than probable, that some portion is at the same time
conveyed with the Blood to all the other Noble Parts, it follows, that either
the fear of giving them inwardly in a small quantity and with good correctives
is groundless, or that there must be evident danger in a frequent External
Application, which is contrary to daily Experience. If Cantharides were so
pernicious as some imagine, what dreadful effects would they not work when
applied in Vesicatories to such as are apt to spit Blood, or are subject to
Dysenteries? What a condition must they be in, that have half a dozen Blisters
on at a time? can it be supposed that there is not more of the Fly circulating
among their Noble Parts than would be in one that should take in half a Grain
at the Mouth; certainly the great benefit found by Vesicatories in the fusion
of a gross sluggish Serum, and the consequent excretion of that with the
Peccant Matter by Urine and copious Sweats, is an unquestionable proof of the
intimate mixture of a considerable part of their Acrimonious Particles with the
Mass of Blood if there were no other Argument to prove it. Much more might be
alleged on this Subject from matters of fact, but that would make the Preface
as big as the Book, so I shall end here, and beg the Reader to pardon some
false pointings and literal errors, and to take the words Filter and Filtration
(which are often used in this small Collection) in their larger Sense, for
ordinary straining, not for passing Liquors through Cap-paper as Chemists use
them.

OF INFUSIONS AND Decoctions.
HEre they are deservedly censured, that overcharge their Liquor with too great
a quantity and number of Drugs, it being manifest, that neither Infusion nor
Decoction becomes thereby the stronger, because no assignable Menstruum can
load it self, nor take up more of any substance, than fills its pores, or can
adjust it self to its insensible constituent parts. But these intercepted
Interstices varying in Figure and Capacity, it follows, that when a Liquor is
so satiate with a certain substance, that it will not dissolve one Grain more
of it, though it should stand never so long thereon; yet it will readily take
up another body, whose minute parts are more proportionate to its unpossess'd
Pores, or can adjust themselves better to its inconspicuous Principles. I add
this last, because it is demonstrable, that the parts of the dissolved body are
not all received into the empty spaces that lie interspersed in the dissolving
Liquor; since this does often considerably increase in Volume, and that
sometimes proportionably to the bulk of what is dissolved therein, which could
not be, if only vacuola, or intercepted empty spaces, became satiate. What is
here advanced, is manifestly proved by the following easy and unexpensive
Experiments. Take 6 or 8 Ounces of water, throw common Salt into it, until it
will dissolve no more, then pour off the Liquor, and add Sugar until that
remains unaltered: then take Nitre, Sal-Armoniac, Alum, Vitriol, Borax, and you
will find, that your water will still dissolve a small quantity of each,
because the Receptacles commensurate to the figure and size of their minute
parts did not admit the undissolv'd part of the common Salt and Sugar, by
reason of their different shape and bulk. You may observe, that water will take
up four times as much Sugar as of green Vitriol, and twenty times the quantity
of Sugar that it will dissolve of Borax, that what dissolves soonest raises the
water less; and e contra.

It is by the proportion of the Figure, Size, and Site of the parts of the
dissoluble bodies to the dissolving Liquors, that we can account why common
water is a fit Menstruum for Senna, Rhubarb, and Tamarinds, but altogether
improper for Jalap, Turbith, and such other resinous Mixtures as require
sulphurous Liquors, as Spirit of Wine, etc. Hence it appears how absolutely
necessary it is for Apothecaries to know the various Substances of medicinal
Drugs, both that they may choose the properest Menstruums, and duly regulate
their Infusions and Decoctions, as to degree of fire, length of time, and other
circumstances, left by prescription solely to their Prudence and Discretion.

When several Drugs are used in a Decoction, the most solid, such as Woods, are
first put in, then Roots, Barks and Fruits; next Herbs, Berries and Seeds;
Flowers the last of all. The Woods, Roots and Barks are rasp'd, bruised or cut
small, Fruits slit, Herbs chopped, Berries and Seeds slightly beat, and Flowers
put in whole. However this method, though pretty general, admits of exception,
for thin and fpungy Wood requires less boiling than one that is more close and
solid. Barley whole endures as much boiling as Wood. On the other hand,
Aromatic Roots and Woods will not bear long boiling, but their better and more
essential parts will dissipate. Barks, Fruits, and Aromatic Seeds require only
a bare Infusion. Liquorish-Roots is put in after the Herbs. The Maiden-Hairs or
Capillaries at the same time with the Liquorish or immediately after. The cold
Seeds at the same time as the Flowers.

Cephalic Decoction.
. Misletoe of the Oak, Roots of Male Peony, Avens, of each six Drams; shavings
of an Elk's hoof, Juniper Berries, of each three Drams; leaves of Sage, Betony,
Marjoram, Basil, of each an handful; Flowers of Cassadonie, Lilies of the
Valleys, Clove-Gilly-Flowers, Lime-tree, of each one Pugil; let them be boiled
according to art, in three quarts of common water.

This Decoction strained and settled will hardly keep above two days in Summer,
if not placed in a cold Cellar, nor above four in Winter. It is recommended
against Epilepsies, Apoplexies, Lethargies, and other distempers of the head,
occasioned chiefly by stoppages in the passage, and small Channels of the
Animal Spirits, of from the turgency of crude Humors that press overmuch the
substance of the Brain.

He boils River-Crabs in his pectoral Decoction, borrows Sydenham's decoctum
album, which he sweetens with Syrup of Comfrey instead of Sugar, when he
designs Astriction. His bitter Decoction is the same with ours, only that he
uses equal parts of Wine and Water, this and other Bitters are Febrifuges
because the saline and sulphurous parts they consist of, attenuate and
dissolve gross viscid Humors, and so raise the Obstructions that occasion
Fevers.

A Sudorific Decoction or Diet-Drink.
. Of Sarsaparilla 2 Ounces, Chinaroot 1 Ounce, Contrayerva and Holy-wood of
each half an Ounce, crude Antimony grossly beat and tied in a knot 4 Ounces; let
them be infused hot in 4 quarts of common water for 12 hours, then boiled to
the consumption of a third part; add toward the latter end 6 Ounces of sliced
Liquorish, with 3 Drams of Sassafras Wood.

This drink is taken three or four times a day, about six Ounces at a time, and
continued for some days in Rheumatisms to attenuate the viscid roapy Serum, and
in the close of the cure of a Gonorrhea, to correct and carry off the peccant
Humors by Transpiration.

Prisans and Decoctions differ only in this, that the first are less loaded
with Ingredients, for being designed for the ordinary drink of sick persons,
the less they are clogged with Drugs, the more agreeable and palatable they
prove. They are much used in France, the following is the common Ptisan.

. Picked Barley cleansed from all filth one handful, let it boil in 2 quarts
of common water to the consumption of a third part, then add sliced and beaten
Liquorish half an Ounce, and make the Ptisan according to art.

The Liquorish is but slightly boiled, because otherwise it would communicate
an unpleasant bitterness, especially if new. There may be added Citron Peel,
Coriander Seed, Cinnamon, etc. to please those that love these things. The
Prisan makers, that sell it all Summer long in the Streets of Paris, content
themselves with a bare Infusion of Liquorish in fair water. Ptisans may be made
Pectoral by addition of Raisins, Jujubs, etc. aperitive by making use of
openning roots, or binding thus.

. Whole Barley 2 Ounces, shavings of Hartshorn 1 Ounce, Tormentil roots half
an Ounce, Berberries one handful, boil them in three quarts of water, until a
third part be consumed.

They that would have i^ more astringent, may, instead of common, make use of
steeled water.

They use the following Infusion at Paris, as we do the decoctum Sennae
Gercinis here.

The common purging Infusion.
. Choice cleans'd Senna 3 Drams, Salt of Tartar 1 Scruple; infuse them hot a
whole night in 8 Ounces of water, then strain and press out the Liquor for a
Dose.

Three Drams of Senna will impregnate six Ounces of water, so that the Tincture
will not become stronger by addition of a greater quantity, since a Menstruum
(as was said before) cannot load it self, but with a determinate portion of any
substance. This Infusion in water is esteemed preferable to others made in
Decoctions, because the Liquor in these is already so charged with Particles of
other Ingredients, that there is little or no room left for those of the Senna.
The Salt of Tartar does not only render the Menstruum more penetrating, and
consequently fitter to draw a Tincture from the Senna, but also attenuates and
rarifies the viscid substance drawn from the leaves, and so prevents the
griping pains that would be occasioned by the adhesion of this gluish
substance, to the inward Membrane of the Intestines. Instead of Salt of Tartar
may be used Sal Polycrestum, crystal Mineral, or soluble Tartar, commonly
called Vegetable Salt; but of all Salts the Alkaline are the most proper to
dissolve the viscous slimy Substances, that yield the Tincture, and to prevent
Gripes. The Ancients unacquainted with these Salts, made use of Cinnamon,
Citron, and Orange-Peel, Ginger, and Carminative Seeds, which in all respects
come far short of the other.

Senna is said to purge off Melancholy more than other Humors, which if true,
is perhaps, because it consists of fixed parts that have a greater disposition
to unite and adhere to this Humor, which is fixed and earthy, and by irritating
the parts wherein it is chiefly lodged cause its excretion.

Instead of Spirit of Vitriol in drawing a Tincture from Roses, he sometimes
uses Spirit of Sugar, sometimes the Juices of Barberries and Currants making
amends for their lesser acidity in the greater quantity. These Tinctures are
used instead of Prisans in Diarrhoea's, Hemorrhagies, Gonorrhoea's, Whites, etc.

A Cephalic purging Apozem.
. Roots of Avens, Male-Peonie, Misletoe of the Oak, of each half an Ounce;
leaves of Betony, Rosemary, Sage, of each half a handful: let them be boiled
according to art in two quarts of water, to the Consumption of a fourth part in
this Liquor strained without expression; infuse for 15 hours, picked Senna 6
Drams, choice Rhubarb, Agaric trochisk'd, of each two Drams, Juniper Berries 1
Dram, soluble Tartar ^ Drams: then let the Infusion be strained and pressed
out, in which diffolve Syrup of solutive Roses, compounded with Agaric an^
Syrup of Peach Flowers of each 2 Ounces.

This Apozem is taken for some days together, a glass or two a day, adding to
or lessening the quantity according as it works. The quantity of the
Ingredients is the lesser in the Decoction, that there may be more room left
for the Particles of the purging Drugs in the Infusion.

An astringent Emulsion.
. Sweet Almonds blanched, 6 couple; Seeds of Cotton-tree, Plantain, Meadow-Rue,
white Poppies, Quinces, Sumach, of each a Dram and a half; beat them in a
Mortar, pouring in by degrees a quart of the Decoction of Barley, Roots of
Plantain, and great Comfrey; then strain and add Syrup of dry Roses, and
Barberries of each 2 Ounces, and you have an Emulsion to be taken in four doses.

This is used in spitting of Blood, in Dysenteries, Hemorrhagies, Gonorrhoea's,
Whites, or wherever Astriction is proper; which it causes probably in
correcting the sharpness of the blood by its aqueous mucilage, and checking its
brisk Circulation by mixture of its sluggish, spiritless parts.

An Almond Milk.
. Sweet Almonds blanched 2 Ounces, beat them in a Marble Mortar, pouring in by
degrees a pint of Barley-water, and when you have strained the Liquor, dissolve
therein an Ounce and a half of the best refined Sugar.

If you put to this half an Ounce of Orange-Flower-Water, perfume it with Musk
or Ambergreece, and keep it in Ice it will drink deliciously. It is much
esteemed at Paris, and called there, Orgeat des Limonadiers.

An Antinephritic Potion.
. Syrup of Marsh Mallows, Oil of sweet Almonds drawn without fire, of each an
Ounce and a half; bost white Wine 3 Ounces, water of Radishes, and Pellitory of
the wall, of each 2 Ounces; Crystal Mineral 1 Dram, Spirit of Turpentine, and
of Salt, of each 8 drops, mix them all for 2 Doses.

This mixture is used in Nephritick Colicks. Its oily slimy parts, smooth and
lenifie the urinary passages, dull the edge of the sabulous matter, and
facilitate its Excretion.

A Diuretic mixture.
. Spirit of Turpentine one Ounce, rectified Spirit of Salt, dulcified Spirit of
Nitre, Spirit of Cresses, Amber, and of Elixir proprietatis, of each 2 Drams;
mix all together.

This Mixture is taken in white Wine and in other appropriate Liquors, from 4
to 15 drops: it is useful in Suppression of Urine, Nephritick Cholicks; it
attenuates and incides the gravelly matter, and cleanses the Kidneys.

An Antiepileptic Mixture.
. Imperial water, Cinnamon water, of each one Ounce, rectified Spirit of Man's
Skull 2 Drams; rectified Oil of Amber, Volatile oleous Salt, and Tincture of
Salt of Tartar, of each one Dram; mix all together.

This Mixture is proper in the falling sickness, and other Distempers of the
Brain; it is taken in and out of the fit to two Scruples.

Of Gargarisms, Masticatories, Errhines, or Tents put up into the Nostrils,
Injections and Pessaries.
GArgarisms are liquid mixtures designed for Diseases of the Throat, Mouth,
Palate and Gums; they are also used sometimes to stop a Salivation, they are to
be held in the mouth and not swallowed.

Masticatories are sharp hot Drugs, that being chewed in the Mouth, open the
salival Ducts, incide gross Humors that stop the Glands, and so provoke
spitting; Tabaco, Ginger, Pellitory of Spain, Mustard Seed, Pepper,
Orrice-root, and such like may be used as Masticatories.

Errhines are akin to these they are put in the Nose to make it run, or to
provoke sneezing, they may be either of a liquid or solid form.

Injections are used upon several occasions, especially in venereal cases, to
allay pain, to stop a running, etc. and in deep Wounds.

Pessaries are used only for Women, to provoke the Menses, stop undue Fluxes,
or heal Ulcers: we add but a few Formules, because those are to be seen in most
practical Books.

A Gargle to stop a Salivation raised by Mercury.
. Whole Barley 1 Ounce, leaves of Plantain, knot Grass, red Roses, of each half
an handful, Cypress Nuts, Rinds of Granates; Flowers of Sumach, of each half
an Ounce; Berberry-Seeds 2 Drams; let them be boiled in a quart of red Wine and
Water, to the Consumption of a third part, then strained, dissolve in a pint of
the Liquor 2 Drams of the astringent Extract of Mars, half a Dram of Salt of
Saturn, and 2 Drams of Honey of Roses.

This Gargle deterges and dries the Ulcers of the Mouth, fastneth the loose
Teeth, strengthens the Gums, Cheeks, and if often used, entirely stops a
Salivation that continues over long.

Pastills to be held in the Mouth and chewed.
. Roots of Orrice, Stavesacre, of each half an Ounce; long Pepper, Pellitory of
Spain, and Mustard Seed, of each 2 Drams; let them be all powdered and mixed
with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of pale Roses, that they may be made
into Pastills.

These being put into a piece of fine Linen, and slightly chewed, open the
salival Glands, and excretory Ducts, and by stimulating the parts, cause a
great discharge of tough viscid Phlegm.

Sneezing Powder.
. White Hellebore, Tabaco-roots, of Florence Orice, of each 2 Drams; Flowers of
Lilies of Valleys, leaves of Betony, Marjoram, and Sage, of each one Dram;
powder all together.

This Powder may be made stronger, by adding a Scruple of Euphorbium to it. It
may be of good use in Apoplexies, Lethargies and other soporiferous Distempers.

An Injection to stop a Gonorrhoea.
. Plantain and Rose Water, of each 4 Ounces; Honey of Roses 1 Ounce,
medicamental Stone 1 Dram; mix them for an Injection.

When it is proper to use this Injection, it will be convenient to take
astringent Pills to strengthen the relaxed parts: if instead of the Stone [you
use the Trochisks of Rasis, the Injection will be the milder, but not so
drying, detersive nor astringent.

A Vulnerary Injection.
. Roots of round Birthwort 1 Ounce; let it boil in a pint and a half of white
Wine, to the Consumption of a third part; then add to the Liquor strained and
pressed out an Ounce and half of Honey of Roses, Tincture of Myrrh, and Aloes,
of each half an Ounce.

This Injection being squirted or syring'd into Wounds, cleanses and deterges
them, resists putrefaction, and prevents in a great measure a Gangrene; the
Pledgets and Compresses may be drenched in it.

A Lotion to kill Vermin in the Head.
. Stavesacre 2 Ounces, Worm-Seed 1 Ounce, Wormwood, Tansey, Betony, lesser
Centaury, of each 2 handfulls; let them boil in 2 quarts of water, to the
Consumption of a third part; bath and wash the head with Sponges drenched in
the strained Liquor.

They that would have this Lotion stronger, may boil the Ingredients in Urine.

A Lotion against the Itch.
. Roots of sharp-pointed Dock, Elecampane, of each four Ounces, white Hellebore
1 Ounce, leaves of Wormwood, Watercresses, of each 1 handful; boil them in
two quarts of water to the Consumption of a third part; in the straining, made
with expression, dissolve 6 Drams of Salt of Tartar.

If the Ingredients were boiled in the Lotions of white Precipitate, the Liquor
would prove much more efficacious against the Itch, running Sores, Scab,
Tettars, etc.

A Wash to make Hair black.
. Rinds of green Wall-nuts half a pound, Bark of Oak, Alder, Galls, of each 2
Ounces; leaves of Myrtle, Pomegranate, of each 1 handful; boil them in three
pints of water, until a third part is consumed; then strain with a strong
expression, and dissolve in the Liquor an Ounce and a half of Rock-Alum, and
the like quantity of English green Vitriol.

This darkens red hair wonderfully, if often moistened and, left to dry of it
self without rubbing.

The common emollient Mucilage.
. Roots of Marsh Mallows 4 Ounces, Lin-Seeds, Seeds of Fenugreek, of each 1
Ounce; let them be infused for 12 hours in two quarts of common water over hot
embers, then boiled in a slow heat to the Consumption of half the water, and
the Mucilage strained with expression.

This is not only used as a Mucilage, but also as a Fomentation to allay Pains,
soften Tumors, and to dispose them to Dissolution or Suppuration.

A Mucilage to stop Hemorrhagies.
. Seeds of Flea-wort and of Quinces, of each half an Ounce; infuse them for 12
hours over hot embers in a pint of the distilled waters of Plantain and Roses;
then boil them slowly until a third part is boiled away, and let them be
strained and pressed out.

This Mucilage being mixed with an equal quantity of Syrup of Quinces, or some
other astringent Syrup is taken often, and by large Spoonfulls in all sorts of
Hemorrhagies: it causes a smoothness in the Palate, defends the Throat from the
sharpness of Rheums, and by its slime and roapy parts check the violent motion
of Humors, inviscating their sharp saline Particles.

Mucilage or Gelly of Isinglass.
. Isinglass out small 1 Ounce, infuse it in a pint of water, and boil it gently
to a Gelly.

It may be made in Milk. It is good in most Fluxes, in Whites, and proves
effectual, when many other Medicines fail in stopping an inveterate troublesome
Gleet.

A Powder for quilted or spice Caps.
. Cloves, Cinnamon, Aromatick-Reed, sweet Rush, Orrice, Marjoram, Rosemary,
Betony, Sage, Cassidonie, of each 1 Dram; Laurel Berries, Storax, Benjamin,
Tacamahac, of each half a Dram, powder all grossly, and put them into Cotton for
spice Caps.

Quilted spice Caps were formerly much more in use than they are now; they were
believed to strengthen and refresh the Brain, and were therefore commended
against Epilepsies, Lethargies, Palsies and Apoplexies; they consist of subtle
volatile parts, which may in some small quantity get through the Sutures of the
Skull, and by attenuating and rarifying tough and viscid Humors, render them
more flux'd and easier of discharge. Musk and Amber may be added, if the
patient be not subject to Vapors. The Powders are not to be beaten fine, that
they may not spend themselves too soon, nor pass through the thin Taffities the
Caps are made of. The same, or like Powders may be quilted in Stomachers, which
if they do not comfort and fortify the Stomach, will at least keep it the
warmer.

Perfumes.
MEdicinal Perfumes are not all equally agreeable, there being many scarce
supportable, that are nevertheless very beneficial on several occasions, where
the more pleasant would prove destructive. Perfumers mix Florence Orrice,
Benjamin, Storax, Lignum Rhodium, yellow Saunders, Aromatick-Reed, Somes,
Flowers of Benjamin, and a few Cloves, moisten them with Orange-Flower-Water,
and keep them in the cold, in a Mattress, and when they have occasion to use the
mixture, they pour some into Cassolets or perfuming Pans, which placed in a
gentle heat, yield a most pleasant sweet smell.

A Fumigation to raise a Salivation in the Venereal Pox.
. Cinnabar an Ounce and a half, Juniper Berries, Frankincense, Mastick,
Ladanum, of each a Dram and a half; let them be powdered and kept for use.

This way of receiving Mercury is dangerous, being often attended with grievous
Accidents; whether because it is all received into one part, or affects the
Nerves more. Most certain it is, that it will prove far safer to proceed by
Friction, and other preparations of Mercury to raise a Flux; and that where
these do not prove unsuccessfull, fuming with Cinnabar is by no means to be
attempted. It is used with less danger for stubborn venereal Ulcers, that lie
remote from the Head and Throat. This Powder, when used, is to be cast into a
Chafingdish of live Coals, and the Fume to be received, and this to be repeated
at different times, until the Mouth begins to be sore, then is to be
discontinued.

Women troubled with Suppression of their Menstrua's, and laboring under
hysteric Passions, may sit over the Fumes of fit and appropriate Pomanders: to
slaken and dissolve the sluggish gross Humors that stagnate or circulate but
very slowly in the Womb-Vessels.

Some Asthmaticks also receive Fumes and Smoke at the Mouth and Nose, to cut
and attenuate the thick and viscous Phlegm that obstructs; but this method
ought not to be recommended to such as have spit Blood, or have Ulcers in the
Lungs.

D. Brunis's Collyrium, or Eye-water.
. Aloes Succotrine 1 Dram, white Wino and white Rose Water of each an Ounce and
a half; after they have stood some days, filtrate the water and keep it for use.

Madam Fouquet's Eye-water.
. Prepared Tutia 2 Ounces, Mace finely powdered 1 Ounce, white Vitriol 1 Dram,
Fennel and Rose Water, of each a pint, and half a pint of Plantain-water; mix
them together, and expose them for some days to the Summer Sun in a well-stop'd
bottle, then keep the Collyrium for use.

These Collyrium's are of good use in infirmities of the eyes; they deterge and
dry small Ulcers, cure Redness and Inflammations, and either entirely consume
Webs and Pins, or check their growth.

A Water to preserve the Eyes against the Small Pox.
. Oriental Saffron 1 Scruple, infuse it for three hours in an Ounce and a half
of Rose, Plantain, and Eye-bright-waters, dissolve-sixteen grains of the
medicamental Stone in the filtrated Liquor.

This clears the sight, and by drying and consuming the filthy sharp Ichor of
the Small Pox, hinders its making an impression upon the eyes.

. Orpine two Drams, Verdigreece one Dram, Myrrh, Aloes of each a Dram, dissolve
all finely powdered in a pint of white Wine, and six Ounces of Plantain and
Rose Water.

This is used in Injection to cleanse and dry Ulcers in the Urethra, and to
stop runnings or a Gleet, the Virulency being corrected by precedent proper
Medicines. It may be weakened by addition of a greater quantity of
Plantain-water.

Notwithstanding what many famous Physicians and Chemists have writ in
commendation of red Coral, Mr. Lemery pretends, that they are not to be
preferred to other Alcaline bodies, whose whole virtue consists in dulling
Acids, by destroying their sharp points, or sheathing their cutting edges: and
says the so much famed Tincture of Coral, is owing altogether to an
inconsiderable quantity of worthless Bitumen contained in that mixture and
concludes that white Coral is every whit as good as the red.

Rob of Speedwell.
. Depurated juice of Speedwell 2 pound, Sugar or clarified Honey 1 pound; let
them boil on a slow fire in an earthen glazed vessel to the consistence of
Honey.

Speedwell or Fluellin is recommended by many good Practitioners, as an
extraordinary purifier of the Blood, and healer of Ulcers in the Lungs. Doctor
Else of Hartfordshire is a great admirer of it, as having often used it with
good success.

The French Acacia is made as the Germans make their juice of Sloes inspissated
in B. M. It is substituted for the true Acacia.

Lotions and boiling deprive Turpentine of a great part of its essential Salts,
and consequently of much of its virtues; wherefore it is better to mix it with
opening Powders, viz. Millepedes, crystal Mineral, etc. to give it the
consistence chiefly designed in boiling it.

Because chemical Oils and Essences do n^ dissolve in, nor mix with Water
through the disproportion of the Texture of their minute parts with this
Menstruum, they are mixed with Sugar, wherein they divide themselves into
imperceptible parts; and this Intermedium readily dissolving in water, keeps
the Oils and Essences so divided, that though they make the Liquor look
somewhat more white, they can never unite so as to appear what they were. There
is no need of Sugar to make these Essences mix with Spirit of Wine or other
sulphurous Liquors, for here being a conformity of Texture, they readily unite.

Here follows the description of a Drug sold for the juice of Liquorish, though
it is nothing but a Gum impregnated with a few parts of that root. The
Adulteration is owing to Blois. In a decoction of Liquorice they dissolve a
vast quantity of Gum Arabic grossly powdered, add a little Sugar, then filter
the Liquor and evaporate it to a due consistence, which though thus
sophisticated is much better for the Lungs than a great part of that called
Spanish Liquorice, which being gritty and full of impurities, must be rather
obnoxious than beneficial.

The Ladies of Tours, much famed* for sweet Meats, make their Gelly of Currants
thus. They boil 3 pounds of Sugar in common water to the consistence of
Tablets, to which they then put four pounds of fair ripe Currants, and let them
boil ten or a dozen Wambles, until the Currants burst without being touched
with a Spoon; then they pour them upon a hair sieve reversed, under which is
placed an earthen Dish to receive the Gelly, which is said to be the best that
is made in France.

A purging Wine.
. Cleansed leaves of Senna 6 drains, Hermodactyles, roots of Arum, dried Seeds
of Violets, of each 2 drams; Agaric trochisk'd, choice Rhubarb, of each a dram
and a half; Cinnamon 1 dram; let all be infused for 24 hours in a quart of
white Wine, and then filtered to be kept for use.

This Wine is proper for cold phlegmatic Constitutions; it may be used a
considerable time: the dose is a glass in the morning fasting.

A Febrifuge Wine.
. Jesuit's bark reduced into powder 2 Ounces, good white Wine 2 quarts; put
them into a large Mattress, so that a third part remain empty; then having
stopped the Vesselelose, shake it well, and put it for 24 hours in a sand bath
or in some other moderate heat, stirring and shaking the mixture now and again;
which done, pour off the Wine by inclination, leaving the mark or dregs at the
bottom.

As soon as the fit is over, let the patient drink a glass of this Wine and
repeat it every fourth hour. The more turbid and less clear he takes his Wine,
the more effectual he will find it. For this reason, that the bark in substance
being of greater efficacy than any known preparation of it; that which contains
most of this substance, must work the greatest effects.

A Steel Wine.
. Opening Saffron of Mars prepared without fire 4 Ounces, Cinnamon, outward
rind of bitter Oranges, of each 2 drams, Mace 1 dram, Saffron half a dram;
infuse and let them stand to digest for 15 days in 2 quarts of good white Wine;
then filter and keep the Wine for use.

This Wine being an extraordinary aperitive, brings down Women's Menses, opens
the Obstructions of the Spleen and Mesentery; it may be taken from one to three
Ounces, with a sufficient quantity of Sugar, or Syrup of opening roots to make
it palatable.

Wine called Hypocrate.
. Refined Sugar reduced into powder, two pound and a half, sweet Almonds
blanched and bruised 4 Ounces, Cinnamon grossly powdered one Ounce and a half;
let all be mixed and put in infusion for 24 hours in 7 quarts of good Claret,
and a pint of the best Brandy; then pass twice or trice through a Wine Sack, or
through Hippocrates 's sleeve, and dissolve in the strained Liquor half a grain
of Ambergreese, and the like quantity of Musk.

This Wine warms the Stomach, and helps Digestion, yet is oftener taken for
Pleasure than as Physic. It is called Hypocrate, either because Hippocrates
invented some such Liquor, or that it is strained through such a cloth as he
used in his Filtrations. This is different from common preparation.

The compound Claret water.
. Cinnamon, Mace, Cloves, of each 1 Ounce, Galangale half an Ounce, lesser
Cardamoms, Aromatick-reed, of each 2 drams; Ginger half a dram, Sugar powdered
eight Ounces, Brandy one quart, leave them to digest together for 24 hours,
then filter the liquor three or four times through Hippocrates' s sleeve and
put it up for use.

This water being a Tincture of the Aromatic Ingredients sweetened with Sugar,
helps Digestion, expells Wind, and is a good cordial Water; it will be
purgative if you dissolve a dram of Resin of Jalap and Scammony in it; and
Emetic, if you infuse an Ounce of Crocus metallorum in it for four or five days.

A purging Ale.
. Roots of Polypodie of the Oak 1 pound, Monk's Rhubarb, leaves of Senna,
stoned Raisins, sliced Rhubarb and Horseradish, of each three Ounces; leaves
of Garden Scurvy Grass and Sage, of each four handfulls; sliced Oranges number
four; infuse them in 5 or 6 Gallons of Ale, when it is working.

This purges mildly by Stool and Urine, it is given in the Scurvy, Gout,
Rheumatisms, Defluxions of thin saline Humors to purify the mass of Blood, is
continued for a fortnight or three weeks to be drunk in the morning.

Ratafia of Cherries.
. Depurated juice of Cherries 6 quarts, juice of Currants and Rasberries, of
each 3 pints, good brandy 5 quarts; infuse in these for two days 2 pound of
Kernels or broken Stones of Cherries, 8 pound of refined Sugar; powdered
Coriander-seed, Cinnamon, Cloves grossly powdered, of each an Ounce and a half;
let them be stirred and shook together to the perfect dissolution of the Sugar,
then strained through Hippocrates' s steeve and botled.

This Liquor is much in fashion now in France, and is differently prepared
according to the different fancies and palates of those that make it. This
preparation comes short of none, either for taste or goodness, and is abundantly
better than the common Cherry-water, which loses much of the strength of the
Brandy in being set so long in the Sun as is usual.

Ratafia of Clove-gilly-flowers.
. Flowers of red single garden Finks, well picked and cleans'd from the green
herby part 2 pounds; infuse them for 8 days in 10 quarts of very good Brandy,
in a close stopped Vessel; let the Infusion be filtrated with a slight
expression; then put to it 7 pound of fine Sugar, Peach and Apricock Kernels a
little bruised, of each one dozen; Cinnamon 1 Ounce, Cloves grossly powdered
half an Ounce; let them stand for 6 days together, shaking them sometimes, that
the Sugar may be entirely dissolved; then strain the Liquor through a woollen
cloth or Wine sack, until it appears fine and clear fit to be bottled for use.

This Ratafia is much stronger than the former, because the Brandy is not
weakened by the addition of so great a quantity of juices, as the other is. Some
to have a deeper Tincture put into the infusion 7 or 8 Ounces of the flowers of
Corn-Poppies dried in the Sun.

Ratafia of Kernels or Kernel-water.
. Peach and Apricock Kernels beaten in a Mortar, of each a pound and a half,
Cinnamon 1 Ounce, Cloves and Corianderseeds grossly powdered, of each half an
ounce; fine powdered Sugar 2 pound and a half; infuse the whole in five quarts
of good Brandy in a close stopped Vessel for 20 days; then let the Liquor be
filtered until it becomes clear, then bottle and lay it up for use.

Some who think this Ratafia too strong, weaken it with the juice of Apricocks,
other with the expression of Muscadine-Raisins, and some perfume it with Musk
and Ambergreese.

Some Ladies put in the Kernels whole, because when they beat them, they find
the water thick and heavy; but this fault is corrected by repeated Filtrations,
through a Wine Sack, and the beaten Kernels load the Menstruum more. The mixture
must be often shook whilst in digestion.

A preparation of Verjuice.
. Sugar Candy 2 ounces, roch Alum, Magistery of Bismuth, prepared Porcelain
Shells, of each an ounce; Salt of glass 3 drams; these being powdered, mixed,
and put into a glass bottle, pour on six quarts of distilled Verjuice; then
stop the bottle, and let it stand in the Sun for 15 days, stirring and shaking
it often, then let it be filtered and kept for use.

This preparation of Verjuice is recommended to smooth, whiten and preserve the
complexions of Ladies. It takes away Freckles, Morphew, and Sun-burning.

A preparation of Ox-gall.
. Sugar Candy 2 ounces, Roch-Allum half an ounce, Borax and Salt of glass, of
each 3 drams; powder all and put them into a glass bottle; pour upon them 3
quarts of distilled Ox-gall; stop the bottle and expose it for 15 days to the
Sun, shaking it often, then filter the liquor and keep it for use.

This has much the same virtues with the other, but is somewhat more detersive
and cleansing.

A Conserve of the roots of Enula Campana.
. Roots of Enula Campana what quantity you please, boil them in fountain water,
to a due softness, then mash and pulp them through an inversed Sieve. Let the
Decoction be boiled over a gentle fire, with a double weight of Sugar to the
root, to the consistence of a solid Electuary; and when it grows a little cold,
add the pulp and put it up for use.

This Conserve is of good effect in Asthma's, because it consists of sulphurous
saline parts, proper to incide and attenuate the gross Phlegm that is impacted
to the Lungs.

The Conserve of Violets is somewhat loosning by reason of sharp Salt envelop'd
in its mucilaginous and slimy parts. The Ancients preferred the stale Conserve
of Roses to the fresh made; because the first had fermented more, and had
therefore its parts more loose and disengaged.

Some sprinkle their Roses with a few drops of Vitriol, which rarifying and
dividing the parts that yield the color, render the Conserve much more
beautiful. He makes a Conserve of the tops of Parsely, of the roots of Enula
Campana, and of the roots of Althaea, to be used in Distempers of the Lungs.

Before Sugar was so common as now, Honey was much in use, and is still on
several accounts preferred to Sugar. It purges more in glisters, deterges and
cleanses Wounds better; for which reason it is mixed with Digestives, unites
and preserves the great Compositions of Treacle and Mithridate much better than
Sugar would do.

The Honey of Dauphine, Languedoc and Narbonne is commended beyond all other,
because those Provinces abound in flowers of Thime, Rosemary, Violets, Lilies
of the Valleys, and other odoriferous Plants from which this Balsom of life is
gathered, for Democritus was of opinion, that the best method to prolong life
was to moisten the inwards with Honey, and to anoint the outward parts with
Oil. Yet such as are of a bilious hot Constitution, ought to forbear the use of
it, because it is apt to change into Choler the too great heat of the Bowels,
turning it bitter as Sugar, liquorice, and other sweet things when boiled too
long acquire that taste.

Honey of Tabaco.
. Depurated juice of Tabaco, and common Honey equal parts, let them boil to the
consistence of a Syrup.

This Oil purges violently; it is used in Glisters for Apoplectick and
Lethargick Patients. Syrups being but liquid Conserves, the Syrup of
Maidenhair may be very well made of the Conserve of Maiden hair brought from
Canada; besides the Herb having fermented with the Sugar in that composition,
its more active parts are loosened and disengaged, and the more adapted for the
Syrup which is thus made.

Take a pound of Conserve of Maidenhair, infuse it in two quarts of warm water
for four or five hours, then filter the Infusion with expression, and mix
therewith three pounds of fine Sugar, and having clarified it with the white of
an Egg, boil it to the consistence of a Syrup. There are some at Paris, that
sell well clarified Sugar for this Syrup, which by reason of its more agreeable
taste, takes with most Patients preferrably to the genuine Syrup of Maidenhair.

Mr. Lemery is much against Spice as corrective in the Syrup of Succory with
Rhubarb, because they heat the body and clog the Menstruum, so that it cannot
receive so many particles of the Rhubarb, as otherwise it would; whereas fixed
Alkali salts, as that of Succory helps to draw a more saturate Tincture from
the Rhubarb, and renders the Syrup considerably more deobstruent.

He recommends soluble Tartar for a general corrective of purgers, because
being a Salt, it is much more proper to attenuate and rarifie viscous roapy
Substances, that otherwise would be apt to adhere to the inward Membranes of
the Bowels, and gripe in their passage.

In the composition of the Syrup of Peach flowers, may be used the more tender
leaves of the tree; and the Infusion of both is to be repeated, until they
come out undiscolour'd, then the Menstruum is as much impregnated as it can be
from these Substances.

The Syrup of dry Roses becomes of a much fairer color, by adding to it when
boiled to its due consistence; ten^ twelve drops of Spirit of Vitriol or (...)
Sulphur, or a dram and a half of the Spirit of Sugar or 2 ounces of the Syrup
of Berberries or of Pomegranate.

Experience teaches, that the surest corrective of the Syrup of
Buck-thorn-berries is to eat soon after taking of it.

Syrup of Scammony.
. Choice Scammony grossly powdered 6 drams, Liquorice rasp'd and beaten 3 drams;
infuse them for three days in a pint and a half of good Brandy; then filter the
Tincture, add 2 pound of Sugar, and evaporate it into a Syrup.

Diagridium Glycyrrhisatum is made after this manner. Half an ounce of sliced
Liquorice being infused for 2 hours in 9 ounces of hot water, the Liquor is
poured into an earthen glazed Pipkin upon 4 ounces of Scammony, and put upon a
gentle fire until the moisture being consumed, the Scammony becomes solid and
firm as before: this given from half a Scruple to a Scruple purges briskly
without griping in the least.

Syrup of wild Saffron.
. Seeds of wild Saffron bruised 4 ounces, leaves of Senna cleansed 1 ounce and
a half, choice Rhubarb 6 drams, Agaric trochisk'd, and soluble Tartar, of each
half an ounce, infuse them over hot embers for 24 hours in 3 pints of distilled
Bugloss-water; then having boiled them a little, filter with expression. In the
strained Liquor clarified by settling, and a second filtration, dissolve a pound
and a half of refined Sugar, half a pound of solutive Syrup of Roses, and then
boil them in a gentle heat to the consistence of a Syrup.

This Syrup purges gently, and carries off a great quantity of Serosity, and
may be used upon most occasions, where purging is proper, especially in
Cachexies, Dropsies, and Rheumatisms, Melancholy, Mania, from half an ounce to
an ounce and a half in white Wine or some aperient Decoction.

Syrup of Spanish Broom corrected.
. Depurate juice of Broom-flowers 3 pints, tops of keys of Ash and Fumitory, of
each one pound; add to them Senna 4 ounces, Tamarinds 3 ounces, seeds of
Violets beaten 2 ounces, Polypody of the Oak pounded 1 ounce and a half, Salt
of Broom 1 ounce, let them macerate together for three days over hot Embers,
then being boiled a little and strained, depurated and settling, and a second
filtration, dissolve in it two pound of refined Sugar, a pound of the
uncompound Syrup of Apples, and boil it over a gentle fire into Syrup.

This Syrup is given with success to open Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen,
Mesentery and Matrix, it purges gently viscous and tenacious humors, the
Original of Cachexies, Dropsies, Melancholy, and often of the suppression and
irregularities of the Menses. It is a great purifier of the blood, may be taken
alone, from half an ounce to two ounces, or mixed with distilled waters, white
Wine or some appropriated Decoction.

An Emetic Syrup.
. Liver of Antimony finely powdered an ounce and a half, depurated juice of
Quinces 1 quart, put them to digest over hot embers, for 6 days in a Mattress
well stopped, shaking and stirring it often; then filter the liquor, and with a
pound of refined Sugar boil it over a gentle fire to the consistence of a Syrup.

This Syrup empties the Stomach of humors that are sometimes so obstinately
fixed, as not to yield to purgatives, there is no preparation of Antimony that
works with more gentleness, or with less trouble; but should it at any time
prove rough and churlish in its operation, either fat broth or oil will in
entangling and involving its keen edges abate the, irritation. It is given to
all Ages and Sexes, proportioning the dose to the strength of the patient: it
may be taken alone or in white Wine broth or other convenient liquor, and it is
sometimes mixed with Purgatives. The usual dose, when it is given alone, is
from 6 drams to an ounce and a half.

In the remarks upon the Syrup of Wormwood, we find this method of making a
Syrup of Wormwood at pleasure without fire, viz.. Wine of Wormwood and refined
Sugar reduced into powder, of each equal weight, put a small quantity of
Cinnamon Water to them, and shake all together to the entire dissolution of the
Sugar. A good Tincture may be made thus; put what quantity you please of dry
tops of Wormwood into a Mattress, pour on Spirit of Wine, until they are
thoroughly humected, then stop the vessel, and leave them to digest 5 or six
days, afterward filter the liquor with expression, and when it has settled,
strain it a second time: it strengthens the Stomach, helps Digestion, and
provokes Women's Ordinaries, being given from 6 drops to 30.

Besides the Syrup of Verjuice, there is a water, which is nothing else but
common water and Sugar put to the depurated or distilled Juice; and this will
keep better, if you add a small quantity of Salt to it. It cools, refreshes,
and provokes Urine.

He makes a Syrup of the white of 8 Eggs beaten and dissolved in 3 pints of
water, and boiled with 2 pounds of Sugar unto the consistence of a Syrup, to be
used where mucilaginous Medicines are proper.

The compound Magisterial Syrup.
. Roots of common Orrice, Hermodactyles, of each 2 ounces, gummy Turbith,
Mechoacan, Jalap, of each 1 ounce and a half; dwarf Elder and choice Rhubarb,
leaves of Senna, soluble Tartar, of each an ounce; trochisk^d Agaric, Seeds of
Violets, leaves of bastard Hedge-Hyssop, of each half an ounce; let all be
pounded, then infused for 4 days in 2 quarts of good white Wine; filter the
Tincture through Cap-paper, or through Hippocrates 's sleeve, and evaporate it
upon a slow fire to the consistence of a Syrup. Then let the drugs that were
infused be boiled in three quarts of common water to the consumption of a
quart, and then being filtered, boil the liquor with 4 pound of good Sugar, and
with 4 ounces of clarified Honey to the consistence of a Syrup, mixing exactly
the above mentioned Tincture with it, as it boils to its due consistence.

This Syrup purges briskly, and may be given with good success in hydropical
and gouty cases. It is taken in white Wine in an appropriate decoction, or by
it self, from half an ounce to an ounce and a half.

They that mix Acids with their Syrup of Violets, as Spirit of Vitriol, Spirit
of Sulphur, Juice of Citrons, etc. do, its true, heighten its color, and
render it more pleasant to the Palate, but this mixture soon occasions a
Fermentation that turns the Syrup reddish and makes it keep the less.

A strengthing Syrup.
. Choice Rhubarb slie'd 4 ounces, red Roses well picked and cleansed three
ounces, white Tartar grossly powdered one ounce; let all infuse 24 hours in
three quarts of steeled water over hot embers, then boil it a little, which
done, strain the liquor from the gross Ingredients; add 4 pound of Sugar,
clarify it with the white of an Egg, and boil it into a Syrup.

This Syrup is highly commended to strengthen the Stomach, and to repair the
impaired Tone of its Fibers. It is of good use in Diarrhoeas, Lienteries, and
bloody Fluxes, in the overflowing of the Menses, Whites, troublesome Gleets,
etc. It is taken fasting alone, or mixed with proper Decoctions from 1 to 2
ounces.

The Syrup of Coral is found fault with, because the virtue of the Coral, which
wholly consists in its absorbing Acids, is so much impaired by the sour Juice
of Berberries, that it can dull but few peccant Acids in the body, the Pores
wherein it might sheath them, being already satiate. And most certainly to
powder Coral very fine is the best way to prepare it for medicinal use.

Syrup of Cinnamon.
. Best Cinnamon grossly powdered half a pound, put it into a glass Cucurbit, and
pour on it a quart of Sack; then place it in B. and having fitted a head and
recipient, let it stand in Digestion 3 days, and then be distilled with a
moderate fire to 8 ounces; when the Cucurbit is cold, take out the remainder,
put a pint of common water to it, and boil it a little, then filter the liquor
with expression, and having added 2 pound of refined Sugar, clarif^ it, and let
it be boiled to the consistence of an opiate, mixing with it as it grows cold
its spirituous water, and 6 drops of oil of Cinnamon.

By this distillation you preserve the spirituous-volatile parts, that would be
lost and by the boiling you have what is more fixed. After this method may be
prepared Syrup of Cloves, Sassafras-wood, Anisa and Coriander Seeds, Mace,
Juniper Berries, etc. It strengthens the Stomach, helps Digestion, provokes the
Catamenia, and is good against a stinking breath, it may be taken to an ounce.

The Syrup of white Poppies is not given in as large a Dose in Provence,
Languedoc, and other hot Climates as with us, because they are more Narcotick
there, than in our colder Country; their effect seems to proceed chiefly from
their slimy glutinous substance, which in thickning their humors, stays
Defluxions and takes off the Acrimony that often interrupts sleep; they stop
the violence of coughing, and give great help to those that spit blood.

Syrup of Quina Quinae, or Jesuits Bark.
. Jesuits Bark, grossly beat half a pound, infuse it for 3 days over hot embers
in two quarts of white Wine, then boil it gently to the consumption of a fourth
part, then filter and add to the strained liquor 3 pounds of refined Sugar,
clarify and boil it to a Syrup.

It may be to 2 ounces in a glass of Centaury water.

The Strawberry and Rasberry waters, sold by the Limonadiers at Paris are thus
prepared: They mash the fruit in a Marble Mortar; then they add as much Sugar
and water as is necessary to render the liquor clear and palatable; and having
let it stand for some hours, they pour it several times out of one vessel into
another; then they filter it through a woollen cloth, until it becomes clear,
which when it does, they put it to cool in Ice.

Syrup of Mucilages.
. Seeds of Althea, Mallows, Quinces, of each one ounce, Gumm Tragacanth, 3
drams, infuse them over hot Embers for 6 hours in a quart of Decoction of
Mallow-seeds; of white Poppies, and Alkekengiberries; then press out the
Mucilage, and add to it a pound and a half of the best Sugar and boil it to the
consistence of a Syrup.

This Syrup is deservedly commended in diseases of the Breast, chiefly where
sharp acrimonious and thin humors are to be stayed and allayed. It defends by
its slimy Mucilage the Throat from the sharpness of Rheums, the Stomach from
corrosive Humors and Medicines, and the Ureters and Urethra from sometimes
scarce the insupportable Acrimony of the Urine.

Syrupus Kermesinus without fire, may be made thus: beat grains of Kermes full
ripe in a Marble Mortar, and mix with them a triple quantity of refined Sugar
finely powdered; stir them often together, and leave them to digest in the cold
ten or twelve Hours, then strain them with expression through a clean Linen
Cloth; the filtered Liquor is the Syrup, and retains some Volatile parts that
would be lost the ordinary way: Syrup of Limons may be thus made, and a Syrup
of Peach Flowers by beating and mixing in a Marble Mortar some Pounds of the
Flowers with an equal weight of Sugar; as 4 Pound of each, putting half a Pint
of Water to them, and stirring them together to the consistence of a Liquid
Conserve, then cover an Earthen Pot glazed, with Linen or Taffety, tie the
Cloth round the Brim, that it may bear down in the middle, where put the
Conserve; cover it with another Cloth, and place the Pot in a cold Cellar; the
Liquor that will drop into the Pot is the Syrup, what remains being boiled in
Water, and clarified, will make the common Syrup of Peach-Flowers.

A Powder against Worms used by the Physicians of Paris.
. Seeds of Tansey, common Wormwood, Purslain, Aloes, of each half an Ounce;
choice Rhubarb, picked Senna, Corallina, dry tops of Scordium, of each 2
Drachms, powder all together.

This Powder kills Worms, and carries them off, together with a nasty Slime; it
also brings down Women's Menstrua. It may be taken to half a Dram in Syrup,
Conserve, or in the Pulp of a roasted Apple The Semen contra vermes or Wormseed
is less nauseous, wherefore it may be given Children without any addition.

Mynsicht's Powder of Jalap.
. The best and most resinous Root of Jalap two Ounces and a half, crystal of
Tartar half an Ounce, Oil of Cinnamon one Scruple, beat them into fine Powder.

This Powder is given in Dropsies, ^urning and fixed Gouts, Rheumatisms, and*
from one Scruple to four: Some call (...) Pulvis Solutivus Tartarisatus.

An Anti-epileptick Powder, common^ called Powder of Gutteta.
. Roots of Male Peony, Misletoe ^ the Oak, unburied Human Scull, Hoof of an
Elke of each three Drachms, Seeds of Basil and of Peony, of each two Drachms;
Flowers of Betony, Tyle, of each 4 Scruples; Powder of Diambra without Musk,
one Dram; Sugar of Roses equal weight to all the rest, or two Ounces six
Drachms; ten Leaves of Gold; powder all according to art.

Gutteta in the Languedoc Patois signifies, the Falling Sickness, against which
this Powder is of great efficacy, as also against Apoplexies and Palsies. It is
usually given from half a Scruple to half a Dram in Cephalic Waters.
Children born in the Southern Countries are more subject to Worms, and
consequently to Fits, than those born in the more cold and Northern Climates.

A famous Anti-epileptick Powder.
. Shavings of a Man's Scull dead of a violent Death, Livers and Hearts of
Vipers, Elke's-hoof, of each five Drachms; Misletoe of the Oak, Roots of Peony,
Valerian, Contrayerva, and White Amber, of each half an Ounce; Woman's
After-burthen ^leans'd from its Membranes and dried, Bone taken out of a Deers
Heart, Peacocks Dung, of each three Drachms; Cinnabar of Antimony and Volatile
Salt of Hartshorn, of each one Dram; powder all according to art.

This Composition consists of choice and appropriate Ingredients, and may be
preferred to any yet publicly known, not only against Epilepsies but against
Convulsions of any kind. It may be taken by Women without danger of raising
Vapors a whole Month without intermission, in Syrup of Peony or some
appropriate Conserve, in Cephalic Waters or Decoctions.

An extraordinary Powder against Dysenteries.
. Root of Ipecacuanha two Ounces, Yellow Myrabolans, choice Rhubarb, of each
three Drachms; Seeds of Meadow Rue two Drachms; powder all according to art.

This Powder Vomits, and works by Stool. It owes its chief virtue to the
Ipecacuanha, the best and most Sovereign Remedy now known against Dysenteries
and other Belly Fluxes. It was brought into France in 86 by one Helvetius a
young Dutchman, and held a great Secret until the King purchased it for his
Soldiers, and afterward charitably published it for the public good. Being at
Paris that Summer, I do remember the College Physicians did what lay in them to
hinder the use of this Remedy, would not allow trial to be made of it at
L'Hotel dieu or other Hospitals, though a great number died daily of a Dysentery
that was very rife that Season, until the King hearing that Fluxes began to
sweep away a great many of his Swiss that were at work at Marli, sent absolute
Orders it should be tried in the City Hospitals. Then the Physicians delegated
two of their number to attend Helvetius, hear what Questions he asked, see what
he gave, and the Success; who observing that his Powder did only vomit and
purge, mixed emetick Tartar and Rhubarb, which curing two or three slight
Dysenteries, they concluded, the Secret was some such common Mixture, but
further trial soon disabus'd them, and made them own, they knew nothing
comparable to his, which seldom fails if timely given, or unless the Patient is
diseased in his Lungs, under considerable decay, Hydropick, disordered in his
Head, has a Hiccough, vomiting pains, in the lower Belly, accompanied with
Stools resembling the washing of Flesh and smelling like Carrion. Gulielmus
Piso in his Medicina Brasiliensis describes two sorts of Ipecacuanha, one a
thick stringy white Root, called by the Portuguese, Ipecacuanha Blancha, to
distinguish it from the other, it is the milder of the two; and may be safely
given to Big-bellied Women and to Children; the other is a small crooked knotty
Root, of a darkish color, of an ungrateful, bitter, hot, and acrimonious taste.
It is given in Powder to a Dram, in Infusion to about two Drachms; the
Natives use the Infusion most. The Powder that has stood in Infusion is not to
be despised, for though it purges but weakly, it is a very good Astringent and
Strengthener of the relaxed Fibers of the Stomach and Guts. Georgius
Marogravius in his Historia rerum naturalium Brasiliae, says, That this Root is
not unlike Tormentil in Color, that it has a white Pith in the middle, easily
separable from the other part; says, that when it is fresh it has a very bitter
biting taste; and adds, that a Dram or two of its Powder steeped all Night in
a Mixture of Wine and Water, slightly boiled in the Morning, the Infusion
filtered and drunk, is not only an excellent Remedy in Dysenteries, obstinate
Obstructions, and Disaffections of the Stomach, but also a great resister of
Poison. I have dwelt the longer upon this Root because it begins to be pretty
much prescribed now with us, and will not fail of growing into greater use.

A Powder to help Digestion.
. Sweet Fenil-Seeds, Annis-Seed, and Coriander-seed, of each an Ounce and a
half; Cinnamon, outward Rind of Citron and Orange, of each three Drachms;
Cloves and Rhubarb of each one Dram, Sugar Candy eight Ounces; powder all
according to art.

This Powder helps Digestion, creates an Appetite, strengthens a weak, cold
Stomach, expells Wind. It will correct the noisome Steams of the Stomach and
Lungs, and so sweeten stinking Breath if a few Grains of Ambergrise be added.
It may be taken to two Drachms.

Hartman's Simple Cachectick Powder.
. Of the opening Saffron of Mars half an Ounce, Cinnamon or Cassia Lignea one
Ounce and a half, Sugar Candy two Ounces; reduce all into Powder.

It is given to raise Obstructions, and is commended against the Retention and
Irregularities of the Menses, Jaundice, and all manner of ill habits of Body
proceeding from, or fomented by want of due Secretions. It is taken from half a
Dram to two Drachms, and continued a considerable time; the Patient must walk
and exercise during its use.

At Toulouse and in several other places about it are found Bodies still entire
that have been buried two hundred Years ago, but it is observable that Lime
has been formerly kept in the Cellars wherein they are found; they appear so
little altered, that many are seen with their Beards. It is also observable,
that Embalming succeeds better in hot than in colder Countries, because the
Moisture of Vaults in cold Climates makes the Drugs give and run, whereas in
those that are warmer, the Earth being dry, and abounding more with Salt, helps
to preserve Bodies from Corruption. In hot Countries are also sometimes found
dead Bodies on the Seacoasts, which being salted by the Seawater, and
afterward dried by the Sun may be used for Mummy.

A Powder that hastens the Birth.
. Cinnanton, Cretan Dittany, Saffron, Borax, of each two Drachms; Trochisces of
Myrrh one Dram, Savine half a Dram; reduce them into Powder.

It quickens Labor, brings on the Pains, and expells the After-burthen. It may
be also given with success to bring down the Menstrua. The Dose from 15 Grains
to two Scruples in White Wind or Mugwort Water.

A Diuretic Powder.
. River Crab's-Eyes, the stony Bones found in the Heads of Pearches, and lesser
Whitings, dried Cheslops or Hogs-lice, Goat's Blood prepared, and Seeds of
Gromel, of each an Ounce; powder them for use.

This Powder is aperitive, proper in Nephritick Cholicks, stoppages of Urine
from slimy Gravel, etc. It is given to a Dram in White Wind, or in an
appropriate opening Decoction.

The Solutive Powder of Sarsaparilla.
. Sarsaparilla an Ounce and a half, Leaves of Senna one Ounce, Hermodactyles,
Turpethum, Jalap, of each half an Ounce; Diagrydium and white Tartar of each
two Drachms, Olibanum and Annis-seed of each one Dram; reduce them into
Powder according to art.

This Powder purges serous watery Humors, is used not only in Dropsies,
Suppression of the Menses, Sciatica's, and such like Distempers, but also to
carry off by Stool and Transpiration the Dregs of an inveterate Clap or Pox; it
is given from one Scruple to sour.

. Warts that grow on the inside of Horses Legs taken off in the Spring, one
Ounce; Assafaetida, Horn and Hoof of a Goat, of each one Dram; reduce them
into powder.

The Dukes Compound Powder.
. Cinnamon two Drachms, Ginger, lesser Galangal, Cloves, Nutmegs, Cardamoms,
Cubebs, long Pepper, of each one Scruple; Saffron half a scruple, Sugar Candy
half a Pound; reduce them into powder.

This Powder rarifies and dissipates gross viscous Humors that adhere to the
inner Coat of the Stomach and hinder Digestion. The simple Powder consisting of
half an Ounce of Cinnamon, and half a Pound of Sugar Candy is more palatable
than this, but is not of equal efficacy; the Seeds of Wild Carrot, Gromel,
Sweetfennil, Parsley, and such like other with Juniper Berries, Leaves of
Cretan Dittany, Powder of the Roots of Florence Orrice may be added to the
Compound Powder to extend its Virtue to expel Wind and Gravel, and to make it
more convenient in Nephritick Cholicks. These Powders may be made up into an
Electuary with a convenient quantity of Sugar or clarified Honey.

An Ophthalmick Powder.
. White Sugar Candy two Drachms, prepared Tutty one Dram, Aloes, Salt of
Saturn, White Vitriol, Sarcocolla, of each half a Dram, Florence Orrice half
a Scruple.

This Powder is blown into the Eyes to cleanse them from Filth and Corruption,
to dissipate Cataracts and consume outward Films.

The Gray Imperial Powder against the Plague.
. Roots of Burnet, Gentian, Tormentil, Serpentwort, Juniper Berries, Leaves of
Rue and Wormwood, of each one Ounce; Castoreum half an Ounce; reduce them into
Powder according to art.

This Powder is given in Malignant Fevers, and as well to cure as preserve from
Infection in time of Pestilence from ten Grains to two Scruples. It may be made
into Pills with equal parts of Treacle and Vinegar of Roses, and a Paste of
beaten Nuts; or with Treacle, Mithridate, and a little quantity of Spirits of
Wine. There is a red powder designed for the same end with this, it contains
besides these Ingredients, Bole-Armoniack, Brimstone, Zedoary, Ginger, Cretan
Dittany, Hartshorn, Myrrh, Camphire, and Saffron; it may be made into Pills as
the other; both so made are called Plague Pills.

The Golden Powder.
. Opening Saffron of Mars, refined Sugar, of each two ounces; Cinnamon and
Galangal, of each half an ounce; Annisseed two drachms, four leaves of Gold;
reduce them into powder.

This Powder opens Obstructions, provokes the Menses, and cures pale
Complexions; it will be convenient to walk upon the taking this or any other
Cachectick Remedy, to promote its distribution. It is given from a Scruple to a
Dram.

Powder of Ashes corrected.
. Ashes of the Herb Kali and Roots of Colewort, of each three drachms; Seeds of
Stone Parsley, Marshmallows, black Pepper, tops of Pennyroyal, of each a
dram and a half; sweet Flag, prepared Goat's Blood, Scorpions and dried
Egg-shells, of each one dram; mix and reduce them to powder.

This Powder is given to cleanse the Kidneys and Bladder from Gravel and
troublesome roapy Mucus, that sometimes obstructs the urinary passage.

A Carminative Powder.
. Cummin and Annisseeds of each three ounces, white Ginger six drachms, Mace
three drachms, and Oriental Saffron one dram; reduce all into very fine
powder.

This Powder is proper in the Wind Cholick, and does help Digestion: It may be
taken immediately after Meals from half a dram to a dram and a half.

This Powder consisting of. Salino-Sulphureous Volatile Parts, is therefore
proper to open the Obstructions of the Matrix, part thereof being cast upon
Coals and the Fumes received in the lower parts through a Funnel. It also helps
Women subject to Fits, and is a quick Remedy and much relied on in Suffocations
of the Womb.

A dram and a half of Red Roses well dried infused in three ounces of
dulcified Spirit of Vitriol, yield a most beautiful Red. This Spirit is given
in Diarrhaea's, Lienteries, and in Bloody Fluxes, in overflowings of the
Menses, vomiting, spitting of Blood, and all manner of Hemorrhagies. It is also
mixed to a grateful Acidity in appropriate Liquors in Fevers.

Powder of Steel used by the Physicians of Paris.
. Filings of Steel prepared two ounces, Cinnamon six drachms, Myrrh, roots of
Birthwort, and the greater Madder, tops of Time, Wild-marjoram, Feverfew,
Mountain Calamint, Penyroyal, Mugwort, Hyssop, Horehound, Balm, Mint,
Pimpernel, Betony, Savine, of each two drachms; Seeds of Lovage, Rue, Parsley,
great Cummin, of each a dram and a half; Mace two Scruples; reduce all into
powder to be kept for use.

This Powder opens gently obstructions of the Bowels, and is therefore a good
Remedy against the Green Sickness, Cachexies, Jaundice, and a coming Dropsy;
it kills Worms, brings down the Menses: It is given from a Scruple to a Dram
made into Pills.

A Hand Powder.
. Dregs or Cakes of bitter and sweet Almonds, Rice flower, of each six ounces;
Roots of Florence Orice and prepared white Chalk, of each one ounce, Benzoin,
Sperma ceti, Salt of Tartar, of each two drachms, Oil of Rhodian Wood half an
ounce; reduce them into powder.

A Powder against a Pleurisy.
. Prepared Goats Blood one ounce, powder of Vipers, Antimonium diaphoreticum,
flowers of Corn Poppies, prepared Crab's-eyes, Boar's-tooth, seeds of Carduns
Benedictus, Olibanum, of each one dram; reduce them into powder.

This Powder absorbs the Acids that fix and stagnate the Blood, so helps to
give it its due circulation, and to throw off by transpiration the hostile
matter.

The Imperial Powder.
. Cinnamon ten drachms, Ginger one ounce, Cloves half an ounce, lesser
Galangal, Mace, Nutmegs, of each two drachms, Musk ten grains.

This helps Concoction, expels Wind, corrects the noisome Steams of the Stomach
and ill smell of the mouth.

Powder of Cinnabar.
. Native Cinnabar prepared half an ounce, shaving of an Elks Horn three
drachms, Man's Skull, Misletoe of the Oak, of each two drachms; dry roots and
seeds of Peony of each a dram and a half, powders called Diamoschi and
Diambra of each one dram, Oriental Saffron, and volatile Salt of Amber, of
each one scruple; powder all.

This is used as other Anti-epileptick Powders against the Falling Sickness and
other Convulsions: It is taken from one scruple to two.

Powder of Turbith with Rhubarb corrected.
. Gummy Turbith two ounces, choice Rhubarb ten drachms, Hermodactyles one
ounce, Diagrydium, Chrystals of Tartar and Violet seeds, of each half an ounce;
reduce all into powder: That may be given to a dram.

Mort's Sudorifick Powder.
. Roots of Contrayerva five drachms, roots of Valerian, Masterwort and Angelica
of each half an ounce, leaves of blessed Thistle, Crab's-eyes and Mussel-shells
prepared, of each two drachms; Saffron four scruples, Camphire two scruples,
Laudanum half a dram; reduce them into powder.

This Powder is a good Sudorifick, and is therefore successfully used in
malignant and intermitting Fevers; it abates Hysteric Vapors; it is given
from a scruple to a dram.

Trochisks of Ramich correct.
. Cypress Nuts, Myrtle Berries, Gum Arabic, of each an ounce and a half, red
Roses, yellow Saunders, of each ten drachms; Sumach, shavings of Ivory, of each
one ounce, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, of each half an ounce; Camphire four
scruples; powder all and mix them into a Past with the inspissated Juice of
Sorrel, and form Trochisks according to art.

They are given to a dram in Fluxes and Hemorrhagies, and in all other cases
where Astriction is proper: They are to be finely powdered, and to be mixed
with Astringent Waters or Decoctions, and to be taken at a distance from Meals.

Trochisks for a Gonorrhea.
. Bole Armene two drachms, prepared Amber, shavings of Ivory, of each one
dram and a half, Seeds of Plantain four scruples, Agnus Castus, Lettice,
flowers of Pomgranate and red Roses of each one dram, Wood of Sassafras two
scruples: let all be powdered and mixed with Mucelage drawn from the seeds of
Quinces in the Water of Nymphea or Water Lily, and let them be made into
Trochisks.

A dram of these Trochisks may be dissolved in eight ounces of Plantane
Water, and an ounce of Honey of Roses added for an Injection; but neither this
nor any other Astringent is ever to be used until the Virulency is carried off
by Stool and Urine, and the running appears white and of a due consistence. To
use any sooner is a certain way to lodge the Infection and give the Pox.

Trochisks of Pomgranate Flowers.
. Pomgranate flowers one ounce, red Roses, Bole-armene, Gum Arabic, of each
half an ounce, true Acacia three drachms; powder and mix them all with a
sufficient quantity of the Mucilage of Gum-Tragacanth extracted in Rose Water,
then form the Trochisks.

These are used as the former, and may be given where it is convenient to bind,
as in all Hemorraghies, Belly Fluxes, in the Diabetes, Diseases of the Breast
caused by Defluxions, for they thicken Humors and qualify Acrimony.

Escharotick Trochisks.
. Corrosive Sublimate, Minium, equal parts, with a sufficient quantity of the
Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, that thence may be formed hard and stiff Trochisks.

These are used for making Escars, and to consume proud Flesh and Excrescencies
about the Anus from illicit and preposterous Coition; they are also applied to
Venereal Cancers, Scrophulous Tumors, they do not spread, and are quick in
operating.

Trochisks of Arsenick.
. White Arsenick four ounces, Corrosive Sublimatte half an ounce; powder both,
and form them into Trochisks with the Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth.

These Trochisks are used as the former and being applied whole or in Powder to
Corns consume and eat them away. The Arsenick contains a very corrosive Salt,
which being envelop'd in a great quantity of Sulphur would disengage it self,
but slowly without the addition of the corrosive Sublimate. Though this Compound
is an extraordinary Caustic, yet it does not cause great pain because the
Sulphur of the Arsenick and Mucilage of the Gum do in a great measure curb the
Salts, and check their motion, involving their points in the branchy parts of
the one, and slimy roapy particles of the other.

Trochisks to be used in a Diabetes.
. Myrtle Berries, seeds of Wood Sorrel, of each three ounces; Gum Arabic,
pounded Wheat Flour, of each an ounce; reduce them into powder, and make them
into Trochisks with a sufficient quantity of Mucilage of Fleawort seeds.

These are said to strengthen the Sphincter of the Bladder, and thicken the
Serum of the Blood, which makes them not only proper in a Diabetes, but also
fit to be given in appropriate astringent Decoction in Hemorrhagies occasioned
by over-thin and sharp Blood; on the other hand, Aloes being a provoker of the
Menstrua in thinning and inciding the Blood, and opening the Womb Vessels, is
not to be given in the cases before mentioned.

Trochisks of Enula Campane.
. Dried roots of Enula Campane two ounces, flourr of pounded Wheat, Gum
Tragacanth, Gum Arabic, root of Florence Orrice, Magistery of Sulphur, of each
two drachms, flowers of Corn-poppy a dram and a half, flowers of Benzoin one
scruple, Balsam of Sulphur annisated ten drops, with a sufficient quantity of
Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth drawn in Corn Poppy-water; form Trochisks to be
dried in the shade.

These are used in inveterate Coughs and Asthma's; they incide and attenuate
tough roapy Phlegm, and facilitate its Expectoration; they are taken from a
scruple to a dram.

Trochisks of Orrice.
. Roots of Florence Orrice, white Pepper, and Gum Armoniack, of each half an
ounce.

These attenuate and dissolve viscid Humors, and facilitate their
Expectoration; they are also proper to open Obstructions of the Spleen and
Womb, and to cure pale Complexions: They may be taken from half a dram to
four scruples.

Mynsichi's Hydragogue Pills reformed.
. Mineral Turbith half an ounce, Trochisks of Alhandal, roots of black
Hellebore, of each three drachms; choice Rhubarb and Elaterium, of each two
drachms; Saffron of Metals prepared with Salt of Wormwood one dram, Spirit of
Vitriol dulcified half a dram; mix and make them into a Mass with Syrup of
Buckthorn.

This Pill purges and vomits with some violence; it is given in Dropsies,
Mania's, the Pox, Scurvy, and King's Evil, and other like obstinate Distempers,
from half a scruple to half a dram. The Crocus Metallorum calcined, with an
equal weight of Salt of Wormwood, and often washed with warm Water, is less
vomitive than the common, because the fixed alkaline Salt has destroyed some of
its irritating points. This preparation of Antimony often purges and causes
sweat; it is given to eight grains.

The Imperial Pills of the Physicians of Lions.
. Extract of Aloes four ounces, Rhubarb one ounce, Mastick half an ounce, and
with the Juice of Roses form a Mass of Pills.

These Pills may be taken just before Meals, that the Salt of the Aloes being
dulled by the particles of the Food may gripe the less. These Ingredients mixed
with the Extract of Juniper Berries will make much such a Pill as Dr.
Anderson's.

Bontius's Hydropical Pills.
. Aloes Succotrine two ounces and a half, Gambogia well powdered dissolved in
Malmsey and dried, one ounce and a half, Diagrydium prepared the same way one
ounce, choice Gum Ammoniack one ounce and half, Tartarum Vitriolatum half an
ounce; make them into a Mass with Solutive Syrup of Roses.

The Tartarum Vitriolatum does not only serve as an opener in this Composition,
but also fixes the salin emetick Sulphur of the Gum. Gut. and determines it to
purge by Stool, which it does with some vehemence. It is given from half a
scruple to two, to purge off serous Humors, particularly in Dropsies, for the
cure of which it was chiefly studied.

Mercurial Pills.
. Choice Rhubarb, Trochisks of Alhandal, Diagrydium, sweet Sublimate, of each
one ounce, Venice Turpentine washed in its own distilled Oil a sufficient
quantity to make them into a Mass for Pills.

Though these Pills are properly designed against Venereal Distempers, yet they
may be successfully given in the King's Evil, and in obstinate Rheumatisms. Mr.
Lemery is of opinion, that they would prove more effectual in Venereal
Distempers, if instead of the sweet Sublimate an equal quantity of crude
Mercury be put, killed, as they call it, in Venice Turpentine; for this reason,
that the Pores of the crude Mercury not being satiate as those of the sweet
Sublimate are, they would load themselves with a greater quantity of the
Venereal Venom, and carry it off either by Stool or Transpiration. They that
shall like this reason may use the following Pills.

Pills of Barbarosse corected.
. Mercury well killed in a sufficient quantity of Venice Turpentine six
drachms, Agarick trochisc'd half an ounce, choice Rhubarb two drachms; mix and
make them into a Mass of Pills.

In this the Spices are left out as being useless in the other common
Prescription, and Turpentine is used instead of the Juice of Roses, it being
scarce possible to kill the Mercury in this latter as Barbarosse directs. These
Pills are given from a scruple to a dram, and may be taken at Night going to
Bed, or in the Morning fasting.

Quercetan's Tartarous Pill reformed.
. Succotrine Aloes four ounces, Cream of Tartar and yellow Myrobalans of each
two ounces, picked Senna one ounce, roots of black Hellebore, Turbith, of each
half an ounce; Salt of Wormwood and Ash of each two drachms; mix and make them
into a Mass with the Syrup of Apples of King Sabor. The Dose from half a
scruple to half a dram.

These Pills purge Tartarous heavy Humors and tough Phlegm; they are
prescribed in Mania's, Hypochondriack Affections, and also in the suppression
of the Menses.

The greater Pills of Bdellium.
. Best Bdellium one ounce and a half, Annis Seed three drachms, Myrobalans
yellow, Indian, Emblick, and Bellerick, Porcelain-shells burnt, Amber, of each
two drachms and a half, with the Juice of Leeks make a Mass.

This is given as an astringent to stop ^he overflowing of the Menses,
Hemorrhodies, etc. There is a Pill called the lesser Pill of Bdellium; it
consists of 15 drachms of Bdellium, and of 5 drachms of the Myrobalans mixed
and made into Pills with Juice of Leeks.

Pills of Gambogia.
. Aloes Succotrine two ounces and a half, Gummi Gutta, Gum Ammoniack of each an
ounce and a half, Rosine of Scammony one ounce, Tartarum Vitriolatum half an
ounce; make them into a Mass of Pills with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of
Buck-thorn.

Gambogia is of it self both Emetick and Purgative, but being mixed with the
Tartarum Vitriolatum purges only by Stool* It is given from half a scruple to
half a dram, in which Dose it powerfully carries off watery humors without
any considerable gripes.

The Spaw Pill.
. Crystal of Tartar three ounces, Diagrydium half an ounce, Salt of Steel two
drachms, with Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth drawn in the Spaw-water: make Mass for
Pills.

This is called Spaw Pill, not only because the Mucilage is extracted in
Spawwater, but chiefly because they that drink the Waters do often make use of
it. Henricus ab Here in his Spadacrene commends this Pill, and the Waters
against many Distempers, especially Hemicrania's, Vertigoes, Obstructions, and
even Scyrrhus's (if not inveterate) of the Liver and Spleen, and the Diseases
springing thence, as Jaundice, Melancholy, Hypochondrianism, Dropsies, etc. as
also against Gravel, Ulcers of the Kidneys, Caruncles in the Urethra and
resembling Affections, Leprosy, Cancers and Scyrrhus's of the Womb, Fluxes,
Sterility, Worms, etc. They may be given from a scruple to a dram, and may be
taken with good success by such as drink Tunbridge Waters.

Pill. Rudii corrected.
. Aloes succotrine one ounce, Trochisks of Alhandal six drachms, Agaricks,
Scammony, roots of black Hellebore, Turbith, of each half an ounce; soluble
Tartar three drachms, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Buckthorn, make
them into Pills.

Mr. Lemery says, That when we evaporate our Tincture for the Extract we lose a
great deal of the purging Particles of the Druggs in the exhaling Steams, and
prefers the soluble Tartar for reasons mentioned before. There may be somewhat
in this last Remark, but there is but very little in the other, for since the
Pill made according to our Dispensatory works as well as any can do, and as
strong as upon most occasions is required, what need we be concerned at the
loss of some gross foetid Sulphurs, that in making the Pill stronger, would
render it more rough and churlish in the operation. I have added this, to show
upon what grounds some will correct and reform, as they call it, but must do
Mr. Lemery Justice, he is generally civil to the London and to Bates's
Dispensatory, from both which he has taken several Receipts, and gives them for
the most part unaltered, always quoting the Books, which he has forgot to do to
others; especially to Charas, from whom he has borrowed considerably, but
seldom mentions him.

. Juice of Liquorice, Frankincense, of each half an ounce, Myrrh, best Saffron,
Opium, of each four scruples; make them into a Mass of Pills with Syrup of Corn
Poppies.

These Pills thicken and allay thin sharp Humors, stay Defluxions, and cause
Rest; they are given to a scruple in dry husking Coughs; a scruple contains two
grains of Opium.

Turpentine Pills.
. Venice Turpentine boiled in Water of Radishes or of Pellitory of the Wall,
four ounces; Liquorice finely powdered one ounce; mix them for Pills.

. Good clear Turpentine four ounces, roots of Marshmallows dried and powdered,
Crab's-eyes prepared, of each an ounce; purified Nitre and Hogs-lice prepared,
of each an ounce; Salt of Amber two drachms; make them into-a Mass for Pills.

In this last Preparation the Salt of Turpentine is preserved, part of which,
in the former, is evaporated in the boiling, and part dissolved in the Water.
The Powders also do better second the Intention of the Pills than Liquorice can
do, but the Mass will hardly keep of due Consistence, especially in Summer.
Both Pills are Diuretic, and are of good use to carry off Gravel, to cleanse
the Kidneys and Bladder; they may be given in the beginning of a Gonorrhea from
one scruple to four. They loosen and carry off the Viscous and Tartarous
Concretions that stop the urinary passages, and for that reason are helpful in
suppressions of Urine.

The Diuretic Pills of Clossaeus.
. Venice Turpentine and white Vitriol reduced into very fine powder of each
equal parts, mix into a Mass.

Turpentine in this Composition checks and destroys the emetick quality of the
Vitriol, for being wholly Viscous and Sulphurous, it does so entangle and
embarass the volatile acid Salt of the Vitriol by its branchy parts, that it
cannot sufficiently irritate or excite that kind of Convulsion wherein vomiting
consists; but being carried with the Turpentine into the Mass of Blood, it
incides and attenuates its gross roapy Serosities, and so proves a great
Piss-driver. These Pills discharge the Reins and Ureters of gravelly and
tenacious Concretions, and make the urinary passages slippery and easy.

Astringent Pills to stop a Running or Gonorrhea.
. Mineral Diaphoretick, sealed Earth, Amber, Dragon's Blood, prepared Coral,
binding Extract of Steel, of each half an ounce; red Roses, rinds of Granates,
Mastick, Seeds of Meadow Rue, of each three drachms; Salt of Saturn four
scruples, Opium one scruple, with a sufficient quantity of Turpentine half
boiled, make them into a Mass.

These Pills absorb and suck into their Pores the viscous saline Humor that
gletes from the Vessels, and strengthens their relaxed Fibers. But whereas it
often proves very difficult to stop inveterate runnings, especially where the
parts affected have been much impaired by irregular living, hard riding, or
other violent exercise we must second the Pills with proper Injections, with
astringent fomentations on the Perineum, and with drying Diet-drinks, Tincture
of Roses, in dulcified Spirit of Vitriol, etc. These Pills are to be taken
twice a day for a considerable time.

Le Mort's sweating Pills.
. Gum Guajacum one ounce, Extract of Contrayerva six drachms, Myrrh five
drachms and one scruple, Saffron half an ounce, Camphire two drachms and two
scruples, Laudanum Opiatum two scruples; mix them according to art into a Mass
with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers.

This Pill is commended against Poison and Infection; it eases pain, causes
rest, and provokes Sweat, quiets the inordinate motion of the Blood and
Spirits; it is given in malignant Fevers from a scruple to a dram.

Hysteric Pills.
. Extract of Aloes prepared with the Juice of Mugwort ten drachms, Faeculas or
Dregs of Bryony, choice Myrrh, Vitriol of Mars, Salt of Mugwort, of each two
drachms, Castoreum, Camphire, leaves of Rue, of each two scruples; make them
into Pills with the Juice of Mugwort.

These Pills provoke the Menses, suppress Vapors, and carry off the Impurities
of the Matrix; they are taken for several days together, the Dose not above
half a dram if they be continued for any time.

Pills consisting of two Ingredients.
. Trochisks of Alhandal, Scammony, of each equal parts; Syrup of Buckthorn
Berries a sufficient quantity to make them into Pills.

These Pills purge Phlegm and gross roapy Serosities; they are given in the
Gout and Dropsies from eight grains to a scruple.

Anti-epileptick Pills corrected.
. Dried roots of Male Peony six drachms, fecules or dregs of Briony three
drachms, mineral Cinnabar eight scruples, Castoreum, Amber, Solar precipitate,
of each two drachms, leaves of black Hellebore, Oil of Antimony, of each four
scruples, Oil of Angelica, Spirit of Vitriol, of each twenty drops; make them
into a Paste with the Juice of Leeks.

This Pill is given from half a scruple to half a dram. The Solar Precipitate
is made thus, one part of Gold cut small and five parts of Mercury are put into
a Mattress into a Lamp-fire until they dissolve and become a red Calx.

Anti-hypochondriacal Pills.
. Succotrine Aloes half a pound, roots of black Hellebore one ounce,
Hermodactyles, Gum Ammoniack depurated, Salt Armoniack sublimed with Mars,
Vitriol of Mars, of each three drachms; make them into a Mass with a sufficient
quantity of Syrup of Buckthorn.

This Pill purges the gross tartarous Humors that cause Obstructions in the
Bowels, and send gross nasty Effluvia into the Blood that disorder its
Circulation, and discompose the Brain; they may be given to two scruples or a
dram.

Chalybeat Pills.
. Best succotrine Aloes one ounce, opening Saffron of Mars five drachms,
Scammony, Gum Ammoniack, of each half an ounce, Saffron, Tartarum Vitriolatum,
of each a dram and a half; make them into a Paste with Oximel of Squills.

These Pills carry off tartarous and mucilaginous Humors, open Obstructions of
the Liver, Spleen, and Matrix, and cure the Diseases that proceed from thence.

Angelick Pills.
. Extract of Aloes half a Pound, Rhubarb half an ounce, Agarick trochisk'd two
drachms, Cinnamon one dram; make them into a Mass with Syrup of Roses.

These Pills require no regiment at all, they purge gently, may be taken at
meals, or a little before eating, that the Aloes may gripe the less. They are
given to a dram.

Pills of Savine.
. Venice Borax, Mass of Pilulae Foetidae, of each one ounce and a half; leaves
of Savine and Salt of the same six drachms, Juniper Berries and Essence of
Savine, of each three drachms, Saffron one scruple; make them into a Mass with
Syrup of Mugwort.

These Pills provoke the Menses, dissolve the gross viscid Humors that
obstruct the Womb Vessels, and clog the Blood, suppress Hysteric Vapors; they
may be given to a dram.

Gout Pills.
. Resin of Jalap half an ounce, Diagrydium, Rhubarb, of each four scruples;
Tartarum Vitriolatum and Diaphoretick Mars of each one scruple; make them into
a Mass with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Apples.

This Pill is used in the running and fixed Gout, in Rheumatisms, old Aches and
Pains; it may be taken from a scruple to a dram. See the Preparation of Mars
Diaphoreticus in the Third Edition of Lemery in English.

Sweating Pills.
. Crystals of Tartar, Cinnabar of Antimony, of each six drachms, Myrrh and
Aloes, of each three drachms; make them into a Paste with a sufficient quantity
of Oil of Guajacum.

These correct the Acids that fix the Blood, and hinder its Rarefaction,
quicken the Circulation, and dispose the Serum to pass by the cuticular Glands;
they are given from half a scruple to half a dram.

Schroder's Tartar Pills.
. Best shining Aloes washed and impregnated with the Juice of Strawberries two
ounces, Gum Ammoniack purged from all filth seven drachms, purging Magistery of
Tartar dissolved several times in Buglosswater and again coagulated half an
ounce, Extract of Gentian three Drachms, Salt of Steel and Tincture of Saffron,
of each two drachms, with Tincture of Tartar make them into a Mass.

These Pills purge off the tartarous earthy Humors that create Obstructions in
the Bowels, and are successfully used in Cachexia's, suppression of Menses,
etc. The purging Magistery of Tartar consists of the fixed Salt of Tartar well
satiate with distilled Vinegar, and then mixed with Spirit of Wine, which being
twice or thrice distilled from it leaves this purging Magistery.

Anodine Pills.
. Laudanum half an ounce, Indian Pepper infused a whole Night in Vinegar and
dried, two drachms; Saffron four scruples, Myrrh two scruples, Musk six grains;
mix and make them into a Mass with Sack.

These Pills are proper to stay Defluxions upon any part, procure Sleep, etc.
but were chiefly designed against Cholicks and Belly-fluxes; they may be taken
to six Grains.

Sweet scented Pills.
. Best Syrian Storax one ounce, Benzoin half an ounce, root of Florence Orrice,
Trochisks of Gallia Moschata, yellow Saunders, of each four scruples; Chemical
Oil of Rosemary two scruples; mix and make them into a Mass with the Mucilage
of Gum Tragacanth prepared in Cinnamonwater.

The use of this Pill is against a stinking loathsome Breath, which it corrects,
being put into a hollow Tooth or otherwise held in the Mouth.

Tablets of Manna.
. Calabrian Manna one ounce and a half, refined Sugar one pound; make them into
Tablets.

These are pleasant to the taste, keep the Body soluble; they are most proper
for Children, and such as are a verse to less grateful Physic.

Treacle Tablets reformed.
. Old Treacle one ounce, Balsam of Sulphur, seeds of Sorrel, Elk's hoof, roots
of Enula Campana and Angelica, wood of Aloes, bone of a Deer's heart, white
Amber; Camphire and Myrrh, of each one dram; Oil of Cinnamon eight drops,
refined Sugar one pound; mix them in a Marble Mortar, and with a sufficient
quantity of Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth drawn in Carduus Water make a solid
mass, of which form the Tablets.

These Tablets strengthen the Noble Parts, resist the Infection of the Air;
they may be taken in time of Sickness from one dram to three.

Emetick Tablets or Lozenges.
. Emetick Tartar, Liquorice-ras'd Wheat Flour, of each two ounces; refined
Sugar half a pound, with Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth make Tablets of half a
dram each.

These Lozenges both vomit, and purge by Stool, they are pleasant to the taste;
if they should chance to work with too much violence, fat Broth or Oil of sweet
Almonds will check it; two Tablets will prove a full Dose.

Compound Tablets of Marsh mallows.
. Pulp of Marsh-mallow-roots two ounces, seeds of white Poppies, powder of
Florence Orrice, Liquorice, and of the powder called Diatragacanthum frigidum,
of each three drachms; refined Sugar boiled in Rose water one pound, make
Tablets according to art.

These are used in inveterate Coughs and Asthma's, to cut and loosen the
impacted Phlegm, and facilitate its Expectoration; they are held in the Mouth
to dissolve slowly.

Mort's purging Tablets.
. Seeds of Zedoary, Corallina, of each three drachms; root of Jalap two
drachms, Diagrydium one dram, sweet Sublimate one scruple, best refined Sugar
boiled in the Infusion of Tansey to the consistence of Tablets one pound, form
the Tablets.

They purge mildly, kill and expel Worms, hinder the corruption of Humors:
They may be taken from a dram to an ounce. The three last days of the Moon
are made choice of in giving this and other Medicines against Worms, though no
reason appears, why they should prevail then more than at any other time.

Mercurial Tablets.
. Mercurial Panacaea two ounces, sharp biting Cinnamon, Florence Orrice,
Ginger, of each one dram; fine Sugar four ounces, with the Mucilage of Gum
Tragacanth form a solid Mass, of which make your Tablets of a dram weight
each.

They are to be chewed by those in whom it is difficult to raise a Salivation,
the Ginger and Mace heat the Mouth, and open the salival excretory Ducts, and
serve as a Vehicle to the Panacaea. The Salivation they raise when used alone
is but slight, and may be stopped almost at pleasure by the use of an astringent
Gargle.

The Panacaea is sweet Sublimate thus prepared; Take what quantity you please
of sweet Sublimate, beat it into fine Powder, put it into a Mattress upon a
Sand-bath, lute on a Head; after it has stood in that heat an hour, augment the
Fire by degrees until all is sublimed; then take it off, let the Vessel cool,
then break it; powder your Sublimate again; and do all as before; repeat this
seven times, then having reduced your Sublimate into fine Powder pour on it
Spirit of Wine alkoliz'd, four Fingers high, leave it to steep fifteen days,
stirring it pretty often with an Ivory Slice; at last place it in Baln. M. draw
the Spirit off, and dry your Panacaea in a Sand-fire. This is a most noble
Medicine in wary Hands against all foulness of Blood, whether Venereal or
Scorbutical, against Itch, Tettars, Scabs, Scald-heads. See a fuller account in
the third English Edition of Mr. Lemery's Chemistry.

Rotules of white Poppies.
. Syrup of white Poppies newly made what quantity you please, and having boiled
it to the consistence of a solid Electuary form the Tablet.

They have the same virtue with the Syrup that is by their slimy Mucilage; they
allay the sharpness of thin corrosive Phlegm, hinder the too great expansion of
the Spirits and the inordinate agitation of Humors.

Mort's hot Philonium.
. Annis, Fennil and Carraway seeds, of each five drachms, Cinnamon half an
ounce, Ginger and Extract of Opium of each three drachms, Nutmegs two drachms,
clarified Honey ten ounces; make them into an Opiate according to art.

This though less compound than others of this name, yields to none in goodness;
it eases Pain, resists the maliguity of Humors, and causes Rest; it is given
from a scruple to a dram.

Some make an Extract of new made Treacle in Spirit of Wine, and call the
Preparation Laudanum tutissimum; but old Treacle having in its longer
fermentation subtilized and exalted its active parts more than the new, seems
the fitter to rarifie and dissolve the Coagulations caused in the Blood, and
Humors by the bite or sting of Venomous Beasts coagulating Poisons, infected
Air, or a too great quantity of Acids accumulated in the Body.

He commends the Apothecaries of Paris for leaving out Silk in their Confectio
Alkermes, asserting, that neither wrought, nor raw Silk can communicate the
least virtue to that or any other Composition. But Dr. Lister could inform him
otherwise, and tell him as he did Dr. Turnfort, That Silk yields a noble
Spirit, the finest, he says, that ever was tasted, with an incredible quantity
of Volatile Salt, which being refined and often cohobated with rich Aromatic
Chemical Oils, he thinks makes that called King Charles's Salt. However Silk
being a dry Gelly of the Insect kind, which for the most part consist of
extreme active parts, is not so despicable for physical uses as Mr. Lemery and
Zwelfer would insinuate.

Among the Remarks made upon Electuarium de Ovo Quercetani, we have this method
of preparing the Diaphoretick Sulphur of Gold, called by Chemists Potable Gold,
or the true Tincture of Sol.

Dissolve what quantity of Gold you please in Aqua Regalis, evaporate the
Dissolution over a gentle Fire, and there will remain a Calx of Gold, which
moisten into a Liquid Past with the Essence of Cinnamon; and having put the
mixture in a Mattress, pour upon it Spirit of Wine tartariz'd until it appears
an Inch over; then having stopped the Vessel very close, put it to digest until
the Liquor seems fully tinctured, which done, pour it off and add new until the
Spirit ceases to draw a Tincture, then mix the Dissolutions together and keep
them for use.

This Preparation is a Dissolution of some parts of the Substance of the Gold
in the Sulphurs of the Cinnamon and of the Spirit of Wine; for if it were quite
divested of its Sulphur, as some Chemists foolishly pretend the Calx could be
never reduced into Gold again, which it easily can being well dried, and adding
a small quantity of Borax to it.

Mort's cold Philonium.
. Red Roses one ounce, Cassia Lignea six drachms, Bole-armene, roots of
Snake-weed, of each half an ounce; Extract of Opium two drachms and a half,
clarified Honey nine ounces; mix and make them into an Opiate according to art.

This is proper in all losses of Blood in Diarrhaea's, Lienteries, and
Bloody-fluxes, it allays Pain and causes rest; it is given from half a scruple
to a dram.

Mr. Lemery justly suspects the truth of what is said of King Mithridates's
having been poison-proof, and to have owed this to the Composition that bears
his Name, whereof he himself is said to have been the Inventor. It might indeed
have been of good use against Coagulating Poisons, such as Hemlock,
Wolf's-bane, the biting of Vipers or Serpents, stings of Scorpions and the
Tarantula; but is of little efficacy against Corrosive Sublimate and Arsenick.

The Confection of Jacinth corrected.
. Jacinth Stones prepared, red Coral sealed Earth, of each one ounce; shaving
of Hart's-Horn six drachms, of the Bone of a Deer's Heart, roots of Tormentil
and Dittany, leaves of Cretan-dittany, Saffron, Myrrh, red Roses, Seeds of
Sorrel, Purslain, of each three drachms; Crab's Eyes prepared, outward rind of
Citrons and bitter Oranges dried, of each four scruples; Oriental Musk and
Ambergrease of each ten grains, Syrup of Kermes one ounce, Syrup of
Clove-gilliflowers three pound; mix them according to art.

In this Reformation the Gold and Silver are left out as incapable of
alteration in our Bodies. They dry Kermes grains as effete and worthless, and
the Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers made use of, because the Syrup of Coral
commonly used, destroys in great part the Alkaline Ingredients of the
Confection, whose chief Cordial virtue consists in the Disposition of their
Pores, and texture of their parts that fit them to sheath the points and edges
of the hostile peccant Acids, which the Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers does in no
wise do; but being a strengthener of the Heart and Brain, and other noble
parts, does considerably second the good effects of the Composition. If it
should be objected, That the Juice of Limons, the foundation of the Syrup of
that name, is useful in opening the Stones and Earth, we will answer, That this
being much weakened by addition of the Sugar, it rather clogs than opens;
besides, they being Natural Alcalies, as is apparent by their great
effervescence with this Syrup, there is no necessity of opening them otherwise
than in multiplying their absorbing Superficies by fine grinding, certainly the
best Preparation of such Concretes for Medicinal use, as was said before in our
Discourse upon Coral. He substitutes Syrup of Kermes to the Grains, because
these grow worthless and effete by the loss of their inward succulent substance
which is spent, and turns into little Worms as it dries. The shavings of
Hartshorn are deservedly preferred to the burnt, because the shavings retain
all the valuable parts that the Horn loses in the ustion; for they not only
contain the Mucilaginous and Cordial parts which the Horn affords to Gellies,
but also the Volatile Spirit, Salt, and Oil which it yields by Distillation;
all which are quite lost in Calcination. Crab's-eyes, he says, are every whit
as good as Pearl, though considerably cheaper. Gold, he says, though never so thin
beat into leaves, is incapable of alteration in our Bodies; and truly
considering the compact texture of that Metal, and how few known dissolvents
can disunite its parts, I should be apt to think it more ornamental than useful
in Physic, did I not consider how many Substances, and of how differing
natures are dissolved by the ferment of our Stomach: Besides, what Mr. Boil
says of a Menstruum drawn from Bread that entirely dissolves Gold, and what
Monsieur Couder, a skilful Apothecary of Milhan in Rouvergne affirms of Capons
fed for a considerable time with a Paste made of Vipers, leaf Gold and Wheat;
viz. that having carefully preserved their Dung all the time, and calcined it
at length, adding Mercury to amalgamate with the Gold exhaled the Quicksilver,
and fus'd what was left with the addition of a small quantity of Borax; he
recovered not above two parts in six, or a third of what the Fowl had eat, and
this too very much paler than ordinary Gold.

This Confection is said to repair and recreate the Vital and Animal Spirits,
and is therefore recommended in palpitations of the Heart, and in swooning
fits, to resist Putrefaction, and to re-establish languishing and decayed
Strength. It is given from a scruple to a dram in Wine Broth or Cordial
Liquors, and is mixed with Epithemes for the Heart. A part of the Composition
is to be kept without addition of Musk or Ambergrease, because those Perfumes
do not agree with Hysteric, and several other Patients.

The Toulouse Hydrotick Opiate.
. Conserve of Eglantine and flowers of Enula Campana or French Orrice, of each
two ounces; powder of Rhubarb, picked Senna, of each two drachms; Resin of Jalap
and Scammony of each one dram, Salt of Wormwood and Tamarisk of each two
scruples, Extract of Hedge Hyssop prepared with Spirit of Wine half a dram,
Syrup of Buckthorn as much as is requisite to make them into an Opiate.

This Preparation as well as many other is improperly called Opiate, not
containing the least quantity of Opium. It purges serous Humors both by Stool
and Urine, is prescribed in Distempers of the Spleen and Mesentery to open
Obstructions in Retention or Irregularities of Women's courses. It may be taken
every other day to the quantity of two drachms. Our Author prefers the leaves
of Gratjola dried and reduced to powder to its Extract, because the Spirit used
in preparing the Extract carries with it in the Evaporation much of the purging
particles of the Rhubarb, etc.

The Cordial Opiate of Lions.
. Juniper Berries four ounces, powder of Vipers, Mace, roots of Angelica, long
and round Birthwort, Suakeweed, Carline Thistle, Contrayerva, Cretan Spignel,
of each one ounce, with Narbonac Honey boiled in Water of Scordium, make an
Opiate according to art.

This Opiate is used with success in Malignant Fevers, Epidemick Diseases, and
is not only a Cure of Pestilence, but also a good preservative against it: It
resists Putrefaction, and is therefore successfully taken against Worms,
Crudities, etc. It is taken from a scruple to a dram in a Bolus, or dissolved
in Wine or some Cordial Liquor.

An Opiate against Worms.
. Wormseed one ounce, choice Rhubarb, sweet Sublimate, of each half an ounce;
Syrup of the Juice of Purslain boiled to the consistence of a soft Electuary
half a pint; mix them into an Opiate.

Sylvius's Diascordium corrected.
. Dry leaves of Scordium, roots of Masterwort, Cinnamon, of each one ounce;
roots of Gentian, leaves of blessed Thistle, Cretan Dittany, Bole Armene, Gum
Arabic, of each half an ounce; Nutmegs three drachms, roots of Angelica,
Opium, Saffron, of each two drachms; true Acacia one dram and a half, Honey
of Rosemary boiled to the consistence of a soft Electuary two pound; make them
into an Opiate according to art.

This Electuary is a good Sudorifick, is used with good success in Malignant
Fevers, Fluxes, Cholick, and against Worms; it is given to half a dram.

A Camphir'd Electuary.
. Camphire, Ginger, prepared Pearl, of each half an ounce, roots of white
Dittander, Tormentil, bone of a Stags heart, of each two drachms; Treacle of
Andromachus four ounces, refined Sugar boiled in the Water of Wood Sorrel one
pound; make it into an Electuary according to art.

This Electuary provokes Sweat, is a good Hysteric, and powerfully resists the
malignity and corruption of Humors; it owes its chief virtue to the Camphire
and Treacle, both experienced Remedies in Epidemick Distempers: It is given to
two drachms.

An Electuary of the Juice of Rue.
. Roots of long and round Birthwort, Dyers Madder, Berries of Laurel and
Juniper, Savine, seeds of wild Carrot, Agnus Castus and Rue, of each one
dram, pithy part of Piony-seeds two scruples, Cretan Dittany half a dram,
Saffron, Myrrh, Castoreum, of each one Scruple; mingle and reduce the whole
into powder, and with three ounces of refined Sugar dissolved in the Juice of
Rue make them into an Electuary according to art.

This provokes the Menses, suppresses Hysteric Vapors, hastens Delivery and
the coming away of the After-burthen. It is given from one scruple to four.

The Royal Electuary.
. Pine Kernels one ounce and a half, sweet Almonds half an ounce, red Roses two
drachms, yellow Saunders two scruples, Ambergrease half a scruple, Musk three
grains, white Sugar dissolved in Rose Water one pound; make them into an
Electuary.

This is said to strengthen the Stomach and Breast, to raise the Spirits and
provoke Lust.

Hoffman's Orvietan.
. Roots of Swallow-wort, Zedoary, Carlina, Angelica, Butter-bur, Valerian,
white Dittander, Enula Campana, Celandine, of each three ounces; leaves of
Cretan Dittany, Scordium, Rue, of each three hands full; powder of Vipers two
ounces, Oriental Saffron one ounce or six drachms, Galbanum an ounce and a
half, choice Myrrh, Sulphur and sealed Earth, of each one ounce, volatile Salt
of Vipers six drachms, Cinnamon, Cloves, of each half an ounce; Opium corrected
or laudanum Opiatum three drachms, Oil of Amber and of Citrons of each one
dram and a half, Honey of Juniper ten pound, mix them well and leave them to
ferment for some Months in a close Vessel.

This is the best Preparation of the kind, and has been preferred as such to all
others by the Apothecaries of Paris in 94; it is used in Malignant Fevers, and
all Epidemick Diseases, as Plague, etc. where it proves a cure and
preservative, as also against the stings and bitings of venomous Creatures,
Fluxes, Indigestion, etc. It is given to a dram and a half.

A Chalybeat Electuary.
. Opening Extract of Mars half a pound, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, of each six drachms,
best Rhubarb half an ounce, clarified Honey and Sugar of each one pound; mix
and make them into an Electuary according to art.

This Electuary opens Obstructions of all sorts, is given with good success in
Hypochondriacal Distempers, and cachexies, Green Sickness, etc. It may be taken
along with Mineral Waters or other deobstruent Liquors.

Zwelfer's Hydrogogue Electuary.
. Middle rind of Elder, roots of dwarf Elder, of each three drachms; wild
Cucumber two ounces, seeds of dwarf Elder one ounce and a half, Colefoot,
leaves of black Hellebore and Hedge Hyssop of each one cunce; being all cut
small and pounded, let them boil in a sufficient quantity of common Water to a
quart, then filter with expression, and having clarified the strained Liquor,
add refined Sugar and clarified Honey of each ten ounces, powder of Jalap three
ounces, Cinnamon six drachms, Cloves, Nutmegs, Gambogia and Elaterium, of each
half an ounce; make them into an Electuary.

This Electuary purges Serosities powerfully, and is therefore of good use in
an Ascites, if taken in hand before the Liver, Spleen, and other Bowels become
corrupted, and if it be closely followed. It may be given to half an ounce
dissolved in White Wind or some opening Liquor, or may be made into a Bolus.

Sylvius Delboe's Hydrotick Electuary.
. Extract of Juniper, Pulp of Tamarinds, of each four ounces, Jalap one ounce
and a half, choice Scammony one ounce, Cinnamon, sweet Fennel seeds, of each
two drachms, white Sugar dissolved and boiled in common Water ten ounces; make
them into an Electuary.

Mr. Lemery's Hydragogue Electuary.

. White Sugar ten ounces, boil them in a sufficient quantity of common Water to
the consistence of Honey, then add four ounces of Extract of Juniper Berries,
as much Cassia Fistula; powder of Jalap one ounce and a half, Scammony one
ounce, soluble Tartar half an ounce; make them into an Electuary.

This and Sylvius's Electuary are not only recommended for all sorts of
Dropsies, but are also proper to cleanse the Kidneys and Bladder from a slimy
and gravelly Mucus that often counterfeits the Stone; they are also proper in
Hypochondriack Affections, Cachexies, suppression of the Menses or Urine, in
the Gout, Rheumatism, etc. they are taken to six drachms.

An Electuary of Garlic.
. Eight cloves of Garlic, to which fried and mash'd with Honey add four
scruples of Castor, Sperma Ceti, Juniper Berries, and dried leaves of Pellitory
of the Wall, of each two scruples, Mithridate five drachms, Oxymel of Squills
boiled to the consistence of an Opiate four ounces; make them into an Electuary
according to art.

It is proper in Nephritick and Wind Cholicks, in running and fixed Gouts, in
Asthma's, Dropsies, and most sorts of Cachexies; for it cuts and attenuates
tough roapy Humors, that obstruct both the Conglobate and Conglomerate Glands,
and so hinder the due Secretion of the useful, and the discharge of
Excrementitious Humors. It is used in time of Pestilence. The Dose from a
scruple to a dram.

A Terebinthinate Electuary.
. Good clear Turpentine one pound, roots of Mallows, of Grass, rest Harrow,
Butchers Broom, Liquorice, of each one ounce; Gum Arabic, Tragacanth, prepared
Crab's-eyes, Nitre purified, Salt of Sulphur, Cheslops prepared, of each three
drachms; Volatile Salt of Amber and sweet Sublimate of each two drachms; make
them up into an Electuary according to art.

This Electuary attenuates and wears by degrees the Stone in the Kidneys and
Bladder, carries off the Gravel and all gravelly Slime or Tartareous
Concretions by Urine, and is therefore proper in Nephritick Cholicks: It
deterges and heals Ulcers in the Urinary Passages, and in the Matrix, wherefore
it is successfully prescribed in Gonorrhaea's and in suppression of Urine.

A Wound Water.
. Leaves and roots of great Cumfrey, leaves of Sage, Mugwort, Bugle, of each
four handfulls, Betony, Sanicle, Ox-eye, Water Betony, lesser Consound,
Plantain, Agrimony, Vervein, Wormwood, Fennil, St. John's Wort, Birthwort,
Sengreen, Paul 's Betony, lesser Centory, Yarrow, Tobacco, Mint, Hyssop, of
each one handful; let all be beaten mixed and macerated for three days in six
quarts of White Wine over hot Embers, then distill them in B. M. and keep the
Water for use.

This Water is much used in France for Contusions, Dislocations and the
Resolution of Tumors, to cleanse Wounds and Ulcers, and to resist
Mortification; they call it Eau d'arquebusade.

The Nephritick Water corrected.
. Narbon Honey half a pound, Venice Turpentine two ounces, Nephritick Wood,
Rest Harrow, of each an ounce and a half; Wood of Aloes one ounce, Galengale,
Cloves, Cinnamon, Mace, Cubebs, Mastick, of each half an ounce; beat and pound
what is to be pounded, and let the whole be macerated in two quarts of Brandy,
then distilled with a gentle fire.

It discharges the Kidneys, Ureters, and Bladder of a gravelly tenacious Mucus,
and helps in Wind and Nepritick Cholicks; it may be given to half an ounce in
white Wine or some appropriate Decoction.

Clossaeus's Cosmetick Water with Myrrh.
. New Goat's Milk two quarts, Spanish Wine three pints, Juice of the greatest
Housleek a pint and a half, Water of Water-Lilies and white Roses of each one
pint, whites of twelve Eggs; distill them in B. M.

. Of the above described Water a quart, best Myrrh finely powdered two ounces;
let them stand in digestion for 24 hours, then distill again. You may dissolve
in half a pint of this myrrh'd Water Sugar Candy two drachms, Borax one dram,
burnt Alum one scruple.

This Water smooths, beautifies and preserves the Complexions of Ladies, takes
off Sun-burning, Freckles, or Spots; it is to be used with a Linen Cloth or
Sponge.

Sylvius's Prophylactick Water.
. Green unripe Wallnuts cut small two pound, fresh Cirrons sliced one pound,
leaves of Garden-Rue four ounces, Balm, Scabious, Marygold-flowers, roots of
Butter-Dock, of each two ounces; Setwall, Angelica, of each an ounce; pour upon
all l^ten together sin quarts of distilled Vinegar, let them stand a whole
Night, next Mornign distill with a gentle fire almost to a dryness.

This Water or rather Vinegar is highly commended against the Plague, and in
all Contagious and Epidemick Distempers. It resists Poison and the Contagious
Effluvia of an Infectious Air; cures the biting of venomous Beasts, kills
Worms, and in attenuating gross viscid matter quickens Digestion. It is mingled
in Potions and in liquid Epithems put up into the Nostrils, and applied to the
Temples, Stomach and Wrists. A Sponge soaked in it, put into a Box with little
holes in the Lid, is carried in the Pocket to be smelled to in Sickness-time.
Mr. Lemery who attributes the good effects of this Compound to the Volatile
Particles of its Ingredients, would change the Vinegar, which fixes too much,
for white Wine; but since the Experience not only of Sylvius, Diemerbroeck and
Deker, but of many other considerable Practitioners has found this Preparation
efficacious, I should not alter it for the sake of a specious notion,
especially Vinegar and such like mild Acids proving extraordinary Remedies in
Distempers wherein the Texture of the Blood is depraved, and the Mass inclines
to a Dissolution.

Water of Magnanimity.
. Two handfulls of Ants, Spirit of Wine a quart; digest them in a covered
Vessel until they putrefie into a Liquor, then distill them in B. M. and
aromatize the distilled Liquor with a small quantity of Cinnamon.

This Water raises and quickens the Spirits in dissolving the clammy cold
Humors that clogged and depressed them, increases and ferments the Seed; its
Dose is from one dram to two.

An Apoplectick Water.
. Tops of Marjoram, Tilet or Lime-tree, flowers of Lily of the Valley,
Rosemary, Lavender, Sage, Primrose, of each a handful and a half; let them
macerate eight days in the Sun or in a Stove in a pint and a half of Spirit of
Wine, and an equal quantity of Orange-flower-water, then distill them in a Sand
Bath according to art, and put it up for use.

This Water corrects the Acids that fix the Blood and hinder its due
Rarefaction, and so quickens its Circulation. The Ingredients being of the
number of Cephalicks it is chiefly recommended against Distempers of the Brain,
as to prevent Apoplexies, Lethargies, Palsies, etc.

Charles the Fifth's Cephalic Water differs from this by an addition of
Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, Cardamoms, Cubebs and grains of Paradise, which make
his much hotter and more stomachick.

A famous sweet-scented Water.
. Root of Florence Orrice and Benjamin, of each one ounce and a half, choice
Storax six drachms, lignum Rhodium half an ounce, yellow Saunders two drachms,
Aromatic Reed and Labdanum of each two scruples; flowers of Benjamin one
scruple; all reduc^d into powder and put into a Mattress well stopped, let them
macerate 24 hours in a lukewarm B. M. in a pint of Rose Water, and half a pint
of Orange-flower-water; then draw them off in the same bath somewhat hotter,
and dissolve six grains of Musk and the like quantity of Ambergrease in the
distilled water.

The use of this Water is only external to perfume Linen, Gloves; the Musk and
Amber may be left out by such as are subject to Vapors; what is left at the
bottom of the Cucurbite being dried, may serve to burn upon occasion. Some
content themselves with a Tincture of the Ingredients, without giving
themselves the trouble to distill them.

A Stomachick Water.
. Outward rind of Oranges one ounce, lesser Galengal five drachms, Ginger three
drachms, Aromatic Reed, Enula Campana, of each two drachms; Cardamoms, Cloves,
of each a dram and a half; Spirit of Nitre two drachms; good Brandy twenty
ounces; let them stand in digestion for six days, then separate the clear from
the thick according to art.

This Water strengthens and warms the Stomach, helps Digestion, breaks and
expells Wind in rarifying and attenuating the flatulent viscous matter it meets
with. The Spirit of Nitre is mixed to help to draw off the better Tincture, and
to give the Water a more agreeable smell.

He advises to dissolve a dram and a half of the Salt of Guajacum in Bates's
Aqua Syphilica to make it more efficacious for the end it is designed for.

A Water for a Consumption.
. Snails flesh parted from the shells two pounds, boil it well in rough austere
Wine and Plantain-water, then filter the Liquor with a strong expression, and
having dissolved in it a pound of Conserve of Roses and the like quantity of
Conserve of the greater Comfrey, distill them in an Alembick, then strain the
Water through a woollen Cloth, first having added to it two ounces of Sugar
dissolved in Plantane-water, Saunders and Spicknard of each half a scruple.

This Water is commended in the decay and ulcers of the Lungs; it is given in
Pectoral Decoctions, or may be taken alone, an ounce at a time.

A Water to break or crumble the Stone.
. Juice of Leeks, Onions, Radishes, of each a quart; Juice of Lemons, and
Pelitory of the Wall, of each half a pint; let all the Juices be mixed,
digested and fermented, then distilled.

The fermentation of the Juices loosens and disengages their essential Salts,
which would otherwise hardly rise in the Distillation. This Water by addition
of two drachms of Spirit of Salt will be of greater efficacy against the Gravel
and Stone, and will better cut and attenuate tough roapy Humors, and discharge
them by Urine.

A Diuretic Water drawn from Kernels.
. Peach and Cherry Kernels of each one pound, bitter Almonds and flowers of
Elder of each half a pound, being cut and grossly beaten, let them macerate in
three pints and a half of white Wine for 24 hours, then distilled in B. M.
according to art.

Most of the oily substance of the Ingredients remaining in the Cucurbite after
the Distillation, it would be convenient at the time of using this Water to
beat a few Kernels and some Almonds in a Mortar, and make a sort of Emulsion
with the Water, which though it would not be so opening as the former, would by
washing the Ureters with its slimy mucilaginous parts secure them from sharp
Choleric Urine, smooth and secure the passages from the Gravel.

He distills a Water from the Flowers and Cups of Blue-bottle or Corn-flower,
macerated for some time in Snow Water, which he says is wonderfully effectual,
not only to cure all inflammatory and hot Infirmities of the Eyes, but also to
clear and strengthen the Sight of old people, for which reason it is called,
Eau de casselunettes or Spectacle breaker, because they that use it stand in no
need of those Glasses; the manner of use is only dropping some of it into the
Eyes Morning and Evening.

The Divine water of Fernel.
. Corrosive Sublimate half a dram, Plantane-water half a pint; mix and boil
them over hot Embers in a Glass Viol to the consumption of one half part, then
put up the Water for use.

It drys and deterges powerfully; it is used in Venereal Ulcers, and to resist
Mortification, the Wound or Sore being washed with some Lint soakt in it.

A Water used against Mortification.
. White Sugar eight ounces, roots of round Birthwort four ounces, white Wine
two quarts; mix and let them stand in Infusion for six hours, then boil them in
an Earthen Vessel well covered until a third part is consumed.

This is not only used outwardly to cleanse and deterge as the other, but is
also syring'd into Wounds to resist a Gangrene, and to attenuate gross and
viscous Humors that hinder a kind digestion of the Sore.

He is for leaving out in Bates's Aqua Epidemica the Celandine, Mugwort,
Scabious and Agrimony, with the Liquorice and Tormentil Roots, because they
contain but few if any Volatile Parts, and that the essential and fixed Salt to
which they owe their chief virtue remains in the bottom of the Cucurbit; which
nicety is the more remarkable in our Author, because he often uses the
distilled water of Plantane in his Remedies, which by his own reasonings should
be worthless, as containing as few Volatile Parts as any of the Herbs he finds
fault with in ours; besides, had he consulted the Registers of the French Royal
Academy of Sciences, he would find, that Scabious analyz'd yields some Urinous
Spirit and Concret Volatile Salt, and that it is not only recommended there as
Detersive and Vulnerary, but also as Alexiterial and Sudorifick.

Compound Queen of Hungary's Water.
. Fresh flowers of Rosemary a pound and a half, tops of Rosemary, Time,
Lavender, Cost-mary, Sage of virtues, Marjoram, of each two ounces; let all be
bruised and put into a Glass Cucurbit with half an ounce of Sal Armoniack and
the like quantity of Salt of Tartar powdered apart, being well mixed, pour
upon them two quarts of the best Brandy, and having fixed a Head and Recipient,
and luted the Junctures, macerate and then distill.

This is preferable to the ordinary Queen of Hungary's Water to rarifie and
penetrate gross Humors, and to give a brisker motion to the Blood and Spirits
in Soporiferous Distempers; yet it may be made considerably stronger, by adding
a dram of the Essence of Rosemary to each pint of the Water, and dissolving
three drachms of Camphire in the like quantity will make it more prevalent
against Vapors and Gangrene.

The Women's Aqua Vitae.
. Leaves of Sage of Virtue, crispt Menth, Balm, of each one handful; Cinnamon,
Nutmegs, Mace, Ginger, Cloves, grains of Paradise, Cubebs, Cardamoms, of each
an ounce and a half; Galangale one ounce, long Pepper half an ounce; reduce all
into gross powder, and let them infuse for fourteen days in three quarts of
strong White Wind in a close Vessel; then be distilled in B. M.

The Hysteric Water of the Amsterdamers.
. Dry roots of Briony, ripe and dry Elder-berries, of each two ounces; the
outward peel of Oranges an ounce and a half, leaves of Mugwort, Cretan Dittany,
Feverfew, Cat's Mint, Basil, Pennyroyal, Rue, dry Savine, of each half an
ounce; Myrrh and Castor of each three drachms, Saffron one dram; all being
powdered, let them stand for 8 days in two quarts of very good Spirit of Wine,
then distill them according to art.

This and the foregoing Water are proper in Hysteric Passions and Suppression
of the Menses, which they provoke and render regular; they are also given in
Palsies and Apoplexies; they are given to two drachms.

An Anti-scorbutick Water.
. Roots of Garden and Horse Radish (...) each one pound, Juice of Scurvy Grass,
Watercresses, Brook-lime, Navelwort, Mint Bawm, Fumitory, of each half a
pound* let them macerate together for 24 hour^ then let them be distilled in a
modera^ Sand heat.

This Water is a great opener of a^ Obstructions, not only proper against t^
Scurvy, but also against Gravel, Neph^tick Colic, suppression of Urine, and^*
It is a great purifier of the Blood if taken for some considerable time.

. Roots of Florence Orrice, leaves (...) Cretan Dittany and dry Mint of each
(...) ounce, Seeds of Agnus Castus, Rue a^ Lectuce of each six drachms, Venice
Turpentine and White Wind of each twenty ounces; bruise what is to be bruised
and distill them in B. M.

This Water does cleanse and deterge the Spermatick Vessels, and Urethra; it is
given after the use of Emulsions and necessary Purgations in virulent
Gonorrhaea's.

A Mercurial Water.
. Venice Ceruss two ounces, crude Alum an ounce and a half, Litharge,
corrosive Sublimate, of each one ounce, Salt of Nitre, Armoniack, of each two
drachms; Ginger one dram and a half, Vinegar one pint, Water of Knot-grass
four ounces, Nightshade, Plantain, and Rose Water, of each three ounces; mix
and boil them a little.

This Water kills the Itch, Tettars, scruffy dry Scabs that deform the Skin; it
also cures scald Heads, Venereal and other obstinare Ulcers or Sores; the Parts
are to be fomented with it, but bleeding and purging ought to precede.

A Water of three Ingredients.
. Treacle Water camphorated five ounces, rectified Spirit of Tartar three
ounces, Spirit of Vitriol one ounce; put them to digest until they unite
perfectly.

This hardly differs from our Mixtura simplex. It is an extraordinary Remedy in
Malignant Fevers, it resists the Putrefaction of Humors, and provokes Sweat
given from half a dram to a dram.

Water of Castor.
. Fresh Castor four ounces, green leaves of Lavender one ounce, Cinnamon six
drachms, leaves of Sage and Rosemary of each half an ounce, Mace and Cloves of
each two drachms, rectified Spirit of Wine three quarts; let them stand in
digestion for two days, then distill them in B. M.

This Water suppresses Hysteric Vapors, provokes Women's Menses, gives life
and quickness to the Blood and Spirits in Palsies, Apoplexies, and Lethargies;
it may be given in some Cephalic or Hysteric Julep from half a dram to two
drachms.

A Water to allay Gouty Pains.
. Dry Cows Dung and Frogs Spawn of each equal parts, mix and put them into a
Glass Alembick and distill them with a moderate heat in B. M.

This is used in inflammatory Gouts, a Sponge or Flannel drenched in the Water
is laid upon the painful parts.

A Carminative Water.
. Anise-seeds well pounded four ounces, Cinnamon two ounces, seeds of wild
Carrots one ounce, Nutmegs, Mace, Galangale, Cloves, of each two drachms;
having powdered all grossly infuse them for two or three days in some hot place
in two quarts of Malmsey, then distill them according to art.

This Water attenuates gross viscous Humors, expells Wind, strengthens the
Stomach, and helps Digestion; it is given from one dram to an ounce.

A Water to take away Spots and Freckles of the Face.
. Strawberries a pound and a half, flowers of Lilies and Bean flowerrs of each
half a pound, Roach-Allum half an ounce, Sal Gem, Nitre, Verdigrease, of each
two drachms; let them macerate for ten days in three pints of Malmsey,
White Wind Vinegar, and Narbonne Honey, then distilled in a moderate Sand heat.

This Water smooths and preserves Ladies Complexions, takes off Freckles,
Sun-burns, and other such Deformities of the Skin.

The Elixir of three Ingredients.
. Roots of Enula Campana and Angelica newly dried, Juniper Berries, of each
four ounces, having cut and beaten them grossly put them into a Mattress, and
pour on them a pint and a half of rectified Spirit of Wine, let them stand in
Infusion in a moderate heat until the Spirit is fully tinctured, then filter
and put it up for use.

It is commended against Pestilence, Asthma's, Palsies, Apoplexies and
Lethargies, given from a scruple to two drachms in a convenient Vehicle.

Crollius's Pestilential Elixir.
. Balsam of Sulphur prepared with Juniper and Amber four ounces, Tincture of
Treacle impregnated with Myrrh and Camphire three ounces, a dram and a half
of the Elixir of three Ingredients; put them into a Mattress, and let them stand
in B. M. for 14 days until they are perfectly united.

This proves a preservative in time of Pestilence and other Contagious
Distempers, it is excellent in Asthma's, it deterges and heals inward Ulcers,
is given from a scruple to a dram.

An Epileptick Elixir.
. Spirit of Coral and Tartar of each three ounces and a half, Volatile Spirit of
Man's Skull, human Blood and Amber, of each two scruples; mix and let them
stand to digest fourteen days.

This Elixir is Sudorifick, a great strengthener of the Brain and purifier of
the Mass of Blood; it is given in Epilepsies, Palsies and Apoplexies, from
tendrops to thirty.

An Elixir used against the Stone and Gravel.
. Strawberries one pound, Sugar Candy half a pound, seeds of Gromel bruis^d
three ounces, Alkekengi Berries an ounce and a half, tops of Golden-rod, leaves
of Ground Ivy, Saxifrage, of each half a handful; being all cut small and
pounded, put them into a Mattress, and pour on good Brandy until it is the
breadth of four fingers over the Ingredients, then stop the Vessel close and
put it to digest in a Sand Bath or other moderate heat for four or five days,
stirring it every day, which done, filter it with expression, and when it has
settled, pour it from the subsiding dregs, and having strained it a second
time, put it up in a Glass Vessel well stopped.

This Elixir, or Tincture, is much used in Languedock against Gravel and
difficulty of Urine, also in windy and nephritick Colicks, suppression of the
Menses, Hysteric Passions, etc. it may be taken to two ounces.

An Elixir of Garlic.
. Twenty heads of Garlic washed very clean, and having beaten them in a Mortar
put them into an Alembeck, pour on Spirit of Wine to the height of four
fingers, then distill in B. M. pour the Spirit upon fresh Garlic, and add in
the last Distillation a scruple of Camphire tied in a knot.

The Elixir of Garlic recovers Appetite decayed by viscid crude Phlegm
clogging the Stomachical Ferment, attenuates and incides the gross Phlegm
impacted on the Bronchiae and streightning the Breath, and is of good use in
time of Pestilence and Sickness.

An extraordinary Anti-epileptick Elixir.
. Opium cut very small half a pound, put it into a Mattress, and pour on Spirit
of Wine to the height of four fingers over the Opium, and having carefully
stopped the Vessel, put it in digestion for three days in some moderate heat,
then distill by a Glass Alembeck in B. M. and you will have a clear Spirit.

. Of this Spirit and of the Spirit of humane Skull of each equal parts; mix and
let them circulate the space of two days, then put up the Liquor for use.

Some call this Elixir by the name of the English Drops but unjustly, if Doctor
Lyster says right; see Notes upon Confectio Alkermes. However this Preparation
is commended much against Convulsions, Vapors, Pains, troublesome Hiccoughs,
etc. It may be taken to 30 drops. The Opium that remains in the Cucurbit after
Distillation may be made into the usual Extract.

An Anti-hysterick Elixir.
. Best Castor, Assa foetida, of each half an ounce, distilled Oil of Amber one
dram, Oil of Savine half a dram, Rue, and Camphire of each one scruple,
well rectified Spirit of Wine ten ounces; leave them to digest together for a
while, then distill and pour again the Spirit that shall come off on the
Ingredients, adding two ounces of rectified Spirit of Hart's Horn, then distill
them again and draw off half,

This Elixir is proper in disaffections of the Womb, it brings down the
Catamenia, hastens Birth, suppresses Vapors, is used in the Falling Sickness,
in Malignant Fevers, and in the Plague; it may be given to two scruples.

Oil of Ants of A. Mynsicht.
. Live Ants and seeds of Rocket of each what quantity you please, mix and beat
them into a kind of Paste, put it into a Glass, expose it to the Sun until an
Oil appears, which is to be separated by expression and kept for use.

This Oil is used in venere languida, the Perinaeum and Reins are anointed with
it, to excite the Spirits and raise a gentle fermentation in Semine.

The Apoplectick Balsam.
. Oil of Nutmegs by expression one ounce and a half, best Syrian Storax three
drachms, Balsam of Peru two drachms, Benzoin, Ambergrease and Civet, of each
half an ounce; Musk one scruple, Chemical Oils of Cloves and Rhodian-wood of
each one dram and a half, Oil of Cinnamon, Citron and Oranges of each two
scruples; mix them into a Balsam.

This Balsam is called Apoplectick because it is of great efficacy against
Apoplexies and other Diseases of the Brain, which it is said to strengthen as
well as the other noble parts. The Temples and Sutures of the Skull are
anointed with it and part put into the Ears with musk'd Cotton: It may be taken
inwardly for the same Distemper and to excite the Seed.

Le Mort's Polychrest Balsam.
. Roots of Sarsaparilla five ounces, Spirit of Wine four pints and a half, let
them infuse in a Glass Vessel until the Spirit of Wine appears of a golden
color, then filter it and add eight ounces of Gum Guajacum, leave them to
digest together, stirring them sometimes, until the Gum is thoroughly dissolved,
which when it is add a spoonful of Balsam of Peru.

This Balsam is Sudorifick, and is of excellent use in the Pox, Leprosy,
Scurvy; and though it was designed for internal use it may be used outwardly in
Palsies, and Sciatica's: It may be taken in Wine to two drachms. Some add an
ounce of Virginian Snake-weed in powder to the Infusion, and two ounces of
Balsam of Peru to this quantity.

The vulnerary Balsam of Mindererus.
. Venice Turpentine one ounce and a half, Oil of St. John's Wort one ounce, Gum
Elami six drachms, distilled Oil of Wax two scruples; mix and make them into a
Balsam.

This is a very good Balsam for Green Wounds, the Pled gits are to be dipped in
it; it is also used in Apoplexies to strengthen the Nerves.

The Samaritan Balsam.
. Common Oil, good strong Wine of each equal parts, let them be boiled in an
earthen glazed Vessel over a gentle Fire to the consumption of the Wine, and
keep the Balsam for use.

This is the Balsam mentioned in the Gospel, and though plain is of excellent use
to cure fresh wounds.

The Balsam of the Florence Physicians.
. Turpentine one pound, powder of new well-bak'd Tiles eight ounces, stale Oil
half a pound, Oil of Laurel, Cinnamon, Spikenard, of each two ounces; distill
them through a Retort.

This Balsam is used outwardly in Palsies and pains of the Joints, and is taken
inwardly against Worms, Stone and Gravel to ten drops.

The Spanish Balsam.
. Whole Wheat, roots of Valerian, blessed Thistle, of each one ounce; White
Wine one pint; put all into an earthen glazed Vessel of a narrow Orifice, and
having stopped it, leave it to macerate 24 hours over hot Embers, then add half a
pound of Oil of St. John's Wort and boil them to the consumption of the Wine,
which done, let them be strained and pressed; dissolve in the filtered mixture
eight ounces of Venice Turpentine and two ounces of Frankensence reduced into
fine powder.

The Spanish Balsam is much esteemed for the cure of all sorts of Wounds;
especially such as happen in the Nervous parts. The Wound is first washed with
warm Wine, then the Balsam is put in or Syring'd if the Wound be deep, then the
sides bound with Ligatures and Bolsters, and a Compress steeped in strong Wine,
and pressed out again, laid on the top.

The Italian Balsam.
. Oil of Olives half a pound, Oil of Laurel five ounces, Turpentine two ounces,
Oil of Juniper, Spike, Petrolaeum, St. John's Wort, of each half-an ounce;
yellow Wax two ounces; mix them into a Balsan according to art.

This also is a good Wound Balsam, and is proper to strengthen the Nerves.

An Ointment to consume Carnosities in the Urethra.
. Red Precipitate one ounce, burnt Alum half an ounce, white Ointment of
Rhasis three ounces; mix them into an Ointment, put a little on the end of a
small Wax Candle and thrust it into the Vrethra.

This Ointment consumes the Carnosities or Excrescences of Flesh that happen in
the Urethra, occasioned by the corrosion of an infectious Gleet.

An Ointment to be used when the Excrescence is eat away.
. Oil of sweet Almonds drawn without Fire two ounces, clear Turpentine and
powdered Ceruss of each half an ounce; mix them with a little white Wax and
make them into an Ointment.

This Ointment asswages the pain caused by the other; deterges and heals
without much trouble; both are to be used upon the extremity of a small Wax
Candle.

An Ointment for Scabs and Tetters.
. Salt of Lead half an ounce, sweet Sublimate one dram, Ointment of Roses
three ounces; mix them into an Ointment.

This Ointment cures the Itch, Tetters, crusted Scabs, and other Deformities of
the Skin, dissolves the viscid saline Phlegm that stuffs the Pores; it will be
proper to purge before its use.

A Linement for the Piles.
. Pulp of Hog's-lice, Ointment of Poplar Buds and Oil of Eggs, of each one
ounce; Extract of Opium half a dram; make a Linement according to art.

This Linement does wonderfully assuage the anguish of the Piles; it is used
after well fomenting the part with lukewarm Wine or some appropriate Decoction.

A Linement to hinder the Small Pox from seaming or marking.
. Ceruse washed in Rose Water, Litharge of Gold prepared, of each one dram;
Oil of the four greater cold Seeds, sweet Almonds and Eggs, of each half an
ounce; Nightshade and Plantain Water what is requisite to make them into a
Linement.

The Face, Hands and Neck are anointed with this Linement when the small Pox
begins to dry, to make them shell off the sooner and hinder the pitting.

Anodine and Soporiferous Ointment.
. Ointment of Roses and Poplar Buds of each one ounce, expressed Oil of Henbane
and the more liquid Extract of Opium of each one dram; make them into a
Linement.

This is proper to quiet Headaches and cause Sleep; it is applied to the
Forehead and Temples.

The Royal Plaster for Ruptures.
. Ship-pitch one pound, yellow Wax, clear Turpentine, of each four ounces; dry
roots of the greater Comfrey, Mastick, of each two ounces; Labdanum an ounce
and a half, under-growth of Cystus, sealed Earth, of each half an ounce,
Cypress Nuts No. 20; make them into a Plaster according to art.

This Plaster was held a secret by the Prior of Cabrieres until the King of
France purchased it and other Remedies which that Clergyman used with great
success in the cure of Ruptures. It is not as Compound as other Plasters ad
herniam are, but yields to none in strengthening the relaxed parts, not without
a Truss.

Dr. Blondel's Plaster called Diabotanum or Plant-plaster.
. Roots and fresh leaves of Bur-dock, Butter-bur, Hemlock, Ground Pine, Lovage,
the greater Valerian, Angelica, Enula Campana, Horseradish, Sowbread, both
Brownworts, Stone-crop, Hedge Hyssop, both Celandines, of each one ounce and a
half; all being picked, well cleans'd and beaten in a Stone Mortar, let them
macerate for four days in nine pints of the Juices of the greater Celandine,
Clary and Hemlock, then let them be boiled to the consumption of a third part,
afterward strained and strongly pressed. Let the expressed Liquor be well
boiled with Oil of Euphorbium, Oil of Earthworms, and Letharge of Gold
prepared, of each two pound, and half a pound of the Juice of Stone-crop,
stirring them continually with a wooden Spatula to the consistence of a
Plaster; then melt and mix with them yellow Wax and Burgundypitch of each nine
ounces, liquid Storax well cleans'd from its Feculencies, clear Turpentine, Gum
Tacamahac, of each two ounces; Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Olibanum, Mastick,
Bdellium, Opopanax, Sagapenum, Oil of Bricks, Laurel-berries, common a
Brimstone of each one ounce and a half; Bitumen of India four ounces, green
leaves of Pistachio's dried in the shade one ounce Camphire dissolved in a
sufficient quantity of Oil of Cloves half an ounce, Pidgeon's Dung, roots of
Florence Orrice, Virgins Seal, Sowbread, round rooted Crowfoot, Asara bacca,
Crown-Imperial, Dragon's-wort, Hellebore, roots of long and round Birthwort,
Periwinkle, Seeds of Male Peony, Angelica, or if that cannot be found,
Stavesacre, Cresses and Cummin seeds, of each a dram and a half; make them
into a Plaster according to art.

This Plaster requires skill and care to be made as it ought, but its goodness
will make amends for the trouble, there being scarce any that does either
digest or dissolve obstinate Tumors like it; such as the King's Evil, Nodes
and Ulcerous Callosities. It may be made of greater efficacy by an addition of
Quicksilver.

The Diabotanum cerate with Mercury.
. Plaster of Diabotanum, Hemlock and Plaster of Tobacco, of each one pound;
yellow Wax half a pound, liquid Storax, clear Turpentine, Oil of Palm and
Laurel, of each four ounces, Quicksilver half a pound.

This Cerate is successfully used to assuage pains in the Shoulders, Arms,
Thighs, Legs, or any other parts of the Body proceeding from Venereal
Infection; it also dissolves Nodes and Venereal Tumors, obstinate cold
Swellings; it may be used alone or mixed with other Plasters tending to the
same effect.

A Plaster of Sperma Ceti.
. White Wax four ounces, Sperma Ceti two ounces, Galbanum dissolved, strained
and boiled in Vinegar one ounce; mix and make them into a Plaster.

This Plaster is applied to Women's Breasts to keep their Milk from curdling,
and to dissolve what may be already coagulated, and may be also put to
Scrophulous Tumors. It is too soft to be made up in Rowls, therefore must be
kept in a gally pot.

A Plaster for the Toothache.
. Gum Tacamahac, Elami and Mastick, of each two ounces; Opium two drachms, mix
and make a Plaster according to art.

This owes its virtue to the Opium, which applied to the Temporal Artery may
impregnate the Blood with some few anodine Particles, or stay in some measure
the Defluxion of a Saline Serosity that irritates the Nerve of the aching Tooth.

A Febrifuge Plaster.
. Cloves of Garlic well cleans'd two ounces, twenty live Spiders, Bitumen of
India, Sal Armoniack, Rosin, Wax, Turpentine, Oil of Spike and Mastick, of each
one ounce; Camphire two drachms; make them into a Plaster according to art.

The subtiler parts of these topic Medicines excited by the heat of the Body
insinuate themselves through the pores, mix with the Blood, and either by
fusing it or raising a gentle Fermentation, sometimes happen to occasion the
secretion of the morbile matter; bleeding and purging ought to precede their
use.

A Plaster of Cinnabar.
. Plaster of Mucilages three ounces, Burgundy Pitch, clean Galbanum, of each
two ounces and a half; Cinnabar one ounce and a half, Ointment called
Aegyptiacum half an ounce, Euphorbium and Orpine of each two drachms and a half.

This Plaster is used to consume proud Flesh, to deterge Venereal Ulcers, and
lay open Cancers: It will be of a better Consistence, if instead of the
Aegyptiacum you use a dram and a half of Verdigrease.

A Plaster to consume Excrescencies in the Urethra.
. Emplastrum Diachalciteos half a pound, Verdigrease, Orpine, burnt Alum, red
Precipitate, of each three drachms; mix them according to art into a plaster.

This Plaster consumes the Callosities and Excrescenties that grow sometimes in
the Urethra. It may be made more or less Corrosive by increasing or diminishing
the powders; after the small Wax Candle armed with this Plaster has been drawn
out of the Urethra you must put in another besmeared with the Ointment of Roses
to assuage the pain caused by the corrosion of the other.

The Plaster of the four Gums.
. Gum Ammoniack, Sagapenum, Galbanum, Opopanax, of each one pound; Colophony
half a pound; make them into a Plaster according to art.

This softens and dissolves Tumors and brings them to due Suppuration.

Plaster of Virtues.
. Common Oil and Fountain Water of each two pound, prepared Litharge one pound,
Ceruss four ounces; boil them according to art to the consistence of a Plaster,
then add eight ounces of yellow Wax and the like weight of Turpentine.

This is called Polychrestum by reason of its general use, but it is more
especially recommended for Ulcerous Burns, Chaps, and Clefts in the Breasts,
Hands, Feet, proceeding from Chilblains, etc. It is applied to Wounds and to
discuss the remaining hardness of Impostumes; if spread thin it may serve for a
Saradrap to lay upon Issues, Setons, etc.

Tinctura Martis Mynsichti being frequently prescribed, and not described in
this nor in our Dispensatories, I will add it here out of the Author.
. Sal Armoniack two part, filing of Steel one part; mix and put them into a
Retort, distill first with a gentle, then with a stronger fire, so the Essence
of Mars will remain in the bottom, which take out and edulcorate very well from
the sharpness of the Sal Armoniack; then put it into a Cucurbit, add Spirit of
Wine, and let them stand until the Spirit ceases to draw a deeper Tincture,
then pour off the Spirit, draw off half in an Alembeck, filter the rest through
Cap paper and keep it for use.

Others use a more expeditious method for drawing this Tincture. Having
powdered the Salt and Filings they throw them into a red hot Crucible, let them
stand until they are very hot, then they cast them into a Mortar, and having
stirred and powdered them a little, pour them into a Cucurbit, add Spirit of
Wine and stop the Vessel; thus they have a Tincture in four and Twenty hours.

This Tincture is esteemed an extraordinary opener, and is therefore used in
Cachexies, Hypochondriack Melancholy, Suppression of the Menses, etc. It is
given from six drops to twelve in Wine, Bath-water, or in appropriate Syrup^
and Decoctions.

FINIS.
Remedies collected out of the History of the Royal Academy of Sciences,
published some Months past by John Baptista du Hamel.
I Need say no more in praise of Mr. du Hamel, than that he had the honor to
be particularly esteemed by our famous Mr. Boil, and that he has been
Secretary to the French Royal Academy of Sciences since its first Institution.
He is Author of the Philosophca vetus and nova ad usum Scholae accomodata, and
of several other excellent Works. He inserted these Remedies in his History in
hopes they might prove of some good to the Public, which is the design of
adding them here.

Monsieur Galloy recommended the Decoction or Broth of Crab-fish in Distem^ers
vulgarly called, Defluxions on the Breast and Lungs; he was advised to it by
the famous Malpighius.

The same also recommended Urine and Salt boiled to the consistence of Honey to
dissolve obstinate Swellings when they do not yield to the best discussing
Plasters.

Dr. Joly a Native of Dijon assured, that in Burgundy and the Confines of
Champaigne, where the King's Evil is very common, they boil two handfulls of
Flower in a quart of Vinegar over a gentle heat to a Gluish Consistence, and
apply it with new Flax-yarn never washed to the swelling, which does discuss it
wonderfully.

Mr. Du Verney recommends Mr. Lemery's Stiptick Water as an extraordinary
Remedy in Wounds, Hemorrhagies, etc. and says, It is used with great success at
Strasbourg.

Others offered the Phlegm of Vitriol cohobated on the Vitriol and distilled
from (...) several times: This may be safely taken inwardly, being not in the
least Corrosive* Some were for the Oil of Vitriol dulc^fy'd by a long digestion
with Spirit (...) Wine, then that Spirit drawn off an^ fresh poured on; this to
be repeated several times.

Mr. Du Clos said, He himself cured the spitting of Blood, by the repeated
exhibition of a grain of Opium in Syrup of Pomgranate.

The following slight Preparation is said to be of great efficacy in Wounds,
Incisions and Contusions.. Rose-buds two handfulls, Sugar half an ounce,
Cinnamon one dram; put them into a pint of good Brandy, expose the Bottle to
the Sun for three Weeks. They give it a mild Astringency to stop the Blood, a
Volatility to dissolve what is extravas'd and become grumous, and say, it Coats
the Wound with a sort of Varnish or gluish clear Liquor that keeps it from the
Injuries of the Air. Others commended the Balsam of Peru.

Upon trial, which was most in the right, Monsieur Redi that placed the Poison
of Vipers in a yellow Juice, or Saliva; or Mr. Charas that affirmed it
consisted in their irritated Spirits; there was discovered a Bagg or Magazine
of the yellow Juice at the Root of their Teeth, and a natural hollow Channel in
the Tooth through which the Liquor was forcibly shot out upon pressure of its
Reservatory; this yellow Juice was found to be a killing Poison. On this
occasion a Discourse was started, how those ought to be helped, who should have
the misfortune to be bit by Vipers. Some quoted Ambrose Parey, Surgeon to
Charles IX. and to Henry the Third of France, who being bit in the Finger by a
Viper at Montpelier, escaped by making a straight Ligature above the Wound.
Monsieur Charas was twice bit; the first time besides a Ligature, he took
twenty four grains of the Volatile Salt of Vipers, which cast him into a good
Sweat; the second time he trusted to the Ligature alone, and did well.

The Inhabitants of Poictou, who are frequently bit by Vipers, that are very
numerous in that Province, use another sort of Remedy. When stung they heat an
Iron red hot with what expedition they can, and hold it as near and as long as
they can bear it, to the Wound. One so dangerously bit, that his Arm swelled up
immediately, heated the Blade of his Knife red hot, held it close to the Sore
for ten or twelve Minutes, and the Swelling and other Symptoms soon disappeared.

Monsieur Blondel offered another Remedy, which he had known to be used with
good success by Huntsmen in America, viz. When bit or stung they immediately
scarify'd the part, filled it with Gunpowder, and set fire to the Powder.

Others fill the Wound with Cotton well soaked in a Dissolution of Treacle in
the best Spirit of Wine.

In Normandy they first press and suck out the Blood, and then fill the Wound
with Salt, and this they do when hurt by mad Dogs.

A trial was made of an Indian Stone given by Father Fontenay to Monsieur
Cassini, a Pigeon being wounded by a Viper the Stone was applied to the Wound
with some success; but a Stone that was said to have been taken out of a
Serpent's Head was found to be of no effect, for the wounded Whelp it was
applied to died in nine Hours time. The Stone was believed to be factitious; it
is commonly called The Stone of Camboja. The Blood of this Whelp and of a
Pigeon that died bitten by a Viper was fluid.

Monsieur Charas upon this Subject told, he had cured his Daughter severely bit
by an Ape, by an Application of pounded Garden Parsley to the Wound. And
another offered, That Bees stings are immediately cured by putting to them
bruised Laurel Leaves, and that the Powder of a Chamois-horn did the same, and
was Alexipharmick.

Upon the Analysis of Wolf's bane, and some discourse of Poisons, Mr. Charas
affirmed, he had formerly found in a Chest that belonged to one of the famous
poisoning Ladies, an insipid clear Liquor, that killed whatever Animal drank
it; that the same Ladies Brother lived a long time by virtue of the Juice of
Citrons; he was of opinion, that drinking Water in a large quantity was a good
Remedy against Corrosive Poisons.

The same Monsieur Charas being some Years before he died, reduced by a
lingering Sickness to a very low state of Health, troubled with continual Sweats
and troublesome itching over all his Body, bethought himself to take a grain of
Opium every day, which recovered his Strength much, and gave him great ease
from his itching, without dosing him in the least, or abating his Appetite to
Meat or Drink; his Sweats continued for some time after he began to do well,
and he believing from the itch that followed them, that they proceeded chiefly
from a turgency of sharp corrosive Humors, thought best to second Nature in
the excretion, took his Opium every day until he was perfectly recovered: This
he observed, that it had the same effect whatever time of the day he took it.
It is also commended in a Tenesmus, and not only put into the hollow of the
Tooth, but also taken inwardly for the painful Tooth-aches.

Discoursing upon Sea water, and the several methods tried to render it sweet,
as Percolation, Distillation, and Precipitation, they seemed to conclude the
latter impracticable, because to precipitate the Sea Salt another Salt must be
used, which will communicate an ungrateful Acrimony or Acidity to the Water.
What Glauber says of his Specular Stone ignited wants the confirmation of
Experience. Percolation requires a close light Earth: Sand calcined and reduced
into Powder would be very proper. Sweetning Water by Distillation has been
performed by some, especially by D. Othon of Caen, who by a serpentine Pipe or
Worm of his own invention has drawn above forty Pints in forty Hours: This
Water thus distilled, mixed in a small quantity with common Water, preserves it
from Corruption, if we believe Fioravanti who delivers it as a considerable
Secret. Seawater drank in a small quantity is no way hurtful: Some take it
against Worms, others to prevent their being Sea-sick. Zacutus tells of a
Dropsical Man, who being at Sea and forced to drink Seawater, having none that
was fresh, fell into a Looseness that cured him of his Dropsy. Another was
known to have been considerably relieved by wearing continually round his Loins
a Linen Girdle stuffed with dry Salt finely powdered; and whereas before he
used it, he seemed to be at death's door through the vast bulk and extension of
his Abdomen, yet he lived two Years. Hereupon some recommended Hemp agrimony in
Dropsies; another told, how two Dropsical Persons found some relief in an
Anasarca by going into an Oven immediately after the Bread was drawn out.

Monsieur Homberb related the History of an Hypochondriack that was cured by
the use of this following Mixture.

. Quick Lime slak'd in the Air two parts, Sal Armoniack one part; mix them well
together. He gave twenty grains of this Mixture at a time. He says, Lime
dissolved per deliquium, deserves to be placed among the best opening Remedies.

The same says, That if you mix equal parts of Salt of Tartar and Sal Armoniack
together, draw off the Spirits or Urinous Flowers, and then dissolve, filter,
and coagulate what remains, you will have Sylvius's Salt so much commended by
the Dutch Physicians. He deprives the Glass of Antimony of its Emetick quality
by an Acid Spirit drawn from the Oak Tree: The method is thus.

. Glass of Antimony two ounces, pour on it a pint of the Spirit of Oak-wood,
leave them to digest for eight days, then change the Spirit for new, and repeat
this till the Spirit draws no more red Tincture from the Glass. In this
Operation not only the Glass of Antimony loses its Emetick Quality, but also
the Spirit is deprived of its natural Acidity; the Spirit first used becomes
sweet and somewhat astringent.

Dr. Merry assured, That he has cured not only superficial but also deep flesh
Wounds with a mixture of an inconsiderable quantity of good rectified Spirit of
Wine with common Water: He keeps the Wound clean, drops in some of this Water,
or anoints the Wound with a Feather dipped in it.

Mr. Turnefort commends. Garlic in the griping of the Guts, and a Gargle of
Olive Pickle called Pinsolina in Provence against Quinsies.

Mr. Du Hamel has a great Opinion of the Powder of Acorns given in Wine in the
Colic pains. He also recommends the Roots of Butter-bur as a powerful
Sudorifick, and the Leaves of the greater Burr dock dried in the Sun and
reduced into Powder, as Alexipharmick and efficacious in Malignant Fevers.

Mr. Bourdelin commends, besides Scurvy Grass, Cresses, Buck-Beans, an Infusion
of Mustard Seed in Scorbutic cases. Others were for a change of Air: a third
sort preferred Remedies that may allay the Heat and Effervescence of the
Humors.

The Duke of Montasaire who was Governor to the Dolphin, used to find a great
relief from the Rheumatick pains he was frequently troubled with, by rubbing
the part well, and then fomenting it with a strong Infusion or Decoction of
Tansey.

Mr. Du Verney has experienced the Efficacy of Camphire, not only in
Rheumatisms and Malignant Fevers, but also in the Kibes and Piles, against
which last he ordered an Ointment of Horse-dung fried with Suet and the Juice
pressed out for use.

Mr. Bouleduc cures the Hemorrhoides with a mixture of the Juices of Henbane
and Toads-flax incorporated with the Grease of an Eel. The same commends a
Conserve of Rue in Malignant Fevers. Mr. Merchant the Tuberose Roots,
Birds-foot, against the Stone and Gravel. Others a Dissolution of Camphire in
Cordial Potions against Cephalalgia's, and Camphir'd Wine in Rheumatick and
Erratick Pains.

Mr. Dodart observes, That most that die of the yellow Jaundice are carried off
with a Flux of Blood; but with us they are more subject to fall out of
incurable Jaundices into deplorable Dropsies.

The Juice of Bugloss is recommended in Pleurisies, and a Panacaea consisting
of Mercury, Sea Salt and Vitriol in Malignant Fevers, but the Process is not
inserted.

Half a pound of Oil of Tartar mixed with two pounds of quick Lime and
distilled six times in a moderate heat, becomes a good Remedy in Palsies and in
Rheumatick pains.

An Extract made of Thea turned Veinous Blood into a darkish black color, but
did not coagulate it in the least; being mixed with Arterial Blood, this cak'd
in the middle, and appeared of a lively vivid color, the rest looked like
common Serum.

Cows and Goats-milk analys'd yielded nothing that was ungrateful either in
Smell or Taste; four pints of both gave three ounces of Oil and thirteen ounces
of a fixed and very lixivial Salt. All that was drawn from the Asses Milk was
either ungrateful or insipid.

A Tincture of Gold may be prepared thus; Dissolve one part of Gold in thirty
parts of Spirit of Salt, and then pour on essential Oil of Rosemary, and shake
together until the Oil becomes of a yellow color, which when you find it is,
separate the Oil by a Funnel, and pour on it a treble quantity of Spirit of
Wine acuated with the Spirit of Sorrel, and leave them in Digestion a
considerable time.

I will conclude with some Remedies recommended by Doctor Turnfort the famous
Botanist, Royal Professor of Plants at Paris.

In Agues accompanied with Obstructions of the Bowels he advises to give the
Kinkina in an Extract of the lesser Centory, or in an Extract made of the
leaves of Smallage.

He gives us a Remedy against the Nephretick or Stone-Colick, which the
Intendant of Languedock having found great Relief by, printed for the good of
the Public.

. Half a dram of the outward Bark of the Root of Star-Thistle or Calcitrapa
gathered about the latter end of September, reduce it into powder and infuse it
in a Glass of White Wine over Night, which filter and drink off the next
Morning early, and neither drink nor eat for three hours after.

The same day prepare the following Remedy to be taken the next Morning.

. A small handful of Pellitory of the Wall, a dram of Sassafras wood, and the
same quantity of Anise-seed, and about half a scruple of Cinnamon; infuse them
all Night in a covered Vessel over hot Embers in six ounces of Water, in the
Morning set it over a clear Eire, and let it hoil for half a quarter of an
hour, then filter, and pour it into a Silver Poringer upon two ounces of
Sugar Candy; when the Sugar is dissolved drink it off as hot as you can bear
it, and abstain from eating or drinking for three hours.

He distills a Water from great Celandine, River-Crabs and Honey, which is very
good in Consumptions, Inflammations and Ulcers of the Eyes, and powerfully
suppresses Hysteric Vapors.

He knows no Remedy that gives more present ease in painful Cancers than to
anoint them with a mixture of Butter and an Oil drawn by a Cornue from common
Flax-weed or Toad-flax; this Oil dissolves the Blood and extravas'd Humors in
the Pores of the Flesh, and so supples the Fibers, whose extraordinary Tension
caused the intolerable pains. He prepares an Ointment which he also commends
much. He infuses Beetles and Hog's-lice in Oil, then puts in some Toad-flax,
and after they have boiled for some time, he strains them through a Linen
Cloth, adds equal parts of hard boiled yolks of Eggs and fresh Beeswax, until
he has brought them to the Consistence of an Ointment.

The Prince of Mirandole's famous powder against the Gout, kept a great secret
by many, consists of equal parts of Germander, Ground Pine, lesser Centory,
roots of the greater Centory, round Birthwort and Gentian reduced into fine
Powder, which may be taken in substance or infused Overnight in half a Glass
of good old Wine: It is to be continued a considerable time, and may prove of
good use in intermittent Fevers, Dropsies, and all such Distempers as are
occasioned by Obstruction of the Viscera. A Fomentation made with the Decoction
of Heath-flowers is also recommended against Gouty and Rheumatick Pains.

The following Partisan is very good in a dry husking Cough.

. Roots of Bugloss and Dogs-grass of each three ounces; boil them in two quarts
of common Water, pour the boiling Decoction upon an ounce of the flowers of
Corn-Poppies and three heads of white Poppies cut small and bruised, and tied
up in a Bag, that they may be pressed and squeezed out the better; let them
stand in Infusion a little, then filter with expression, and sweeten it with
some Pectoral Syrup.

A strong Tincture of the Flowers of Corn-poppies is used with success in
discharges of Humors on the Lungs.

A strong Infusion of Mother-time well sweetened with clarified Honey drank
warm is no unpromising Remedy in old inveterate Coughs, proceeding from tough
viscid Humors impacted on the Bronchiae. An Infusion of the same Herb in
White Wind or pale Claret, with five or six drops of the Essential Oil of
Sassafras to each. Dose taken fasting in a Morning for some time together is
approved in Obstructions; as is also Solanum Scandens, Dulcamara or
Bittersweet, especially if infused in the distilled Water or Decoction of the
common greater Speedwell or Fluellen. It is the middle rind of this Nightshade
that is used in the Infusion.

In Greenland the Natives boil Sorrel and Scurvy Grass in their Broth, and take
large quantities of the Decoction of those Plants, without any other additition
against the Scurvy, and find that Sorrel is a great corrector of the Acrimony
of Humors, and of great benefit to the Scorbutic that are of a dry bileous
Constitution.

Wine wherein the tops of Juniper have been boiled is recommended as a
Diuretic in Dropsies or Suppression of Urine, wherein Pills made of two parts
Aloes, one part of the powder of Juniper Berries are very beneficial; they
purify the Blood by Urine and by Transpiration.

A strong Decoction of the great Burdock is not only commended as a purifier of
the Blood from ordinary Feculencies, but also to carry off the Dregs of the
Venereal Disease. Hollerius often prescribed it with good success in
Pleurisies; and Forestus says, it cured Vastelius Pensioner of Maclin of the
Gout. It made him make a great quantity of Water that was as white as Milk.
Etmuller and many others, are of Opinion, That the Roots of Burr-dock, and of
that called Butter-burr, may be well substituted to China Roots, and to
Sarsaparilla, as Box-wood to Guajacum and Juniper-wood to Sassafras.

Mr. Turnfort affirms upon his own Experience, the efficacy of an Infusion of
the Roots of the great wild Valerian in most violent Hysteric Fits and
Convulsive Asthma's and Coughs. He also says, he has seen Palsies cured in the
Alps by the use of the Leaves of Alder, especially when that Sickness was
occasioned by lying abroad on the Ground or in damp wet Houses. The manner of
use is thus, they fill several Bags with the Leaves, keep them in the Sun, or
put them in Ovens until they are thoroughly hot, then they spread the Leaves on
a Bed, put the Patient in, and cover him well, who will not fail to sweat
abundantly: And this does not only relieve in Palsies, but also in Rheumatisms,
Sciatica's, and old Aches if not Venereal; which are also sometimes much eased
by a Linement of equal parts of Oil of Chamomil, St. John's-wort, and Spirit of
Wine Camphorated; also by the Root of Pepper-wort powdered and mixed with
Butter applied to the part, and the Tincture of the same Root drawn in Spirit
of Wine taken inwardly.

An excellent Mouth water, proper in the Scurvy to cleanse the Mouth and
strengthen loose Gums, may be made of one part of the Tincture of
Columbine-flowers drawn in Spirit of Wine, and two parts of the following
Dissolution.

. Gum Lac, two ounces, tears of Mastick two drachms; dissolve them over a
gentle Fire in a pint of good Brandy.

An Oily Aromatic Volatile Salt, or a Spiritus Volatilis Aromaticus Oleosus,
for both may be had by this method.

. Cinnamon five drachms, Mace and Nutmegs of each two drachms and a half,
Cardamoms one dram, Saffron and Cloves of each two scruples, Citron peel,
Bark of Sassafras, Anise-seeds and Caraway-seeds, of each three drachms; powder
all and put them into a Mattress, pour on a quart of the best dephlegm'd Spirit
of Wine, stop the Mattress close, and leave them to infuse for eight days,
stirring them at least twice every day; when they have stood eight days, press
out the Liquor, and pour it into a Glass Retort upon half a pound of Salt of
Tartar well dried, pulverized, and mixed with four ounces of Sal Armoniack, and
distill them in a mild sand heat, and you will have not only an Aromatic Oily
Spirit, but also a great quantity of Volatile Aromatic Salt that will be very
penetrating, as consisting of the Vrinous part of the Sal Armoniack loosened
and rendered easily separable from its other Principles by mixture of the
Tartar; so that it passed into the Recipient along with the Spirit of Wine,
loaded with the Essential Oil of the Spice.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 21. l. 15. read some Flowers. p. 25. l. 21. Eells. p. 35. l. 9. r. this
Honey. p. 41. l. 6. r. settled. p. 43. l. 18. r. whites. p. 48. l. 20. r. from
the insupportable. p. 49. l. 4. r. of each half an ounce. After the Powder made
of Warts, etc. in p. 58. r. the Remark, p. 62. l. 11. p. 81. l. 18. r.
strengthen. p. 97. l. 15. r. the dry. p. 101. l. 6. r. of the Herb.

BOOKS Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's-head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
A Course of Chemistry; containing an easy Method of preparing those Chemical
Medicines which are used in Physic, with curious Remarks and useful Discourses
upon each Preparation, for the benefit of such as desire to be instructed in
the Knowledge of this Art. By Nicholas Lemery, M. D. the Third Edition,
translated from the Eighth-Edition in the French, which is very much enlarged
beyoud any of the former. Essays of Anatomy, wherein the Formation of the
Organs, and the Mechanic Operations are clearly explained, according to the
new Hypothesis, by Monsieur Beddevole Doctor of Physic. Written originally in
French. The Second Edition.
The INDEX.
A.
FRench Acacia, what it is, Page 25 A purging Ale, 30 An Almond Milk, 11 With
addition called Orgeat des Limonadiers, ibid. An Analysis of Cows, Goats and
Asses Milk 159 Antimony, its Glass deprived of its Emetick Quality, 155 A
Cephalic purging Apozem 10
B.
An Apoplectick Balsam, 131 The Balsam of the Florence Physicians, 134 The
Italian Balsam, 135 Mindererus's vulnerary Balsam, 133 Le Mort's Polychret
Balsam, 132 The Samaritan Balsam, 133 The Spanish Balsam, 134 Bite of an Ape, a
Remedy, 152 For the bite of a Mad Dog, 151 Bodies buried some hundreds of Years
past still entire, 56 A Broth recommended in Distempers of the Breast Page 147
A Broth in Scorbutic Cases 162
C.
Cantharides, the internal use; vid. the two last Leaves of the Preface.
Camphire recommended in Cephalalgia's, Rheumatisms and Palsies, 157, 158 Spice
Caps, 20 Confection of Jacinth, with Remarks, 97 Confectio Alkermes, remarks
upon it, 94 Conserve of the Roots of Enula Campana, the Roots of Althea, and of
the tops of Parsley, 35, 36 Conserve of Rue in malignant Fevers, 157
D.
Decoction, 1 Decoction, how it differs from a Ptisan, 6 A Cephalic Decoction,
4 A Decoction of the great Bur-Dock, 164 A Sudorifick Decoction, 5 Notes upon
the Decoctum Album, and upon the bitter Decoction, ibid. Diabotanum, vid.
Blondel's Plant Plaster, 139 Diabotanum cerate with Mercury, 140 Diagridium
Glycirrhizatum, 39 Sylvius's Diascordium corrected, 102
E.
A Camphir'd Electuary, 102 A Chalybeat Electuary, Page 105 An Electuary of
Garlic, 108 Mr. Lemery's Hydragogue Electuary, 107 Sylvius's Hydragogue
Electuary, ibid. Zwelfer's Hydrotick Electuary, 106 An Electuary of the Juice
of Rue, 103 The Royal Electuary, 104 A Terebinthinate Electuary, 108 An
Anti-epileptick Elixir, 129 An Anti-hysterick Elixir, 130 An Epileptick Elixir,
127 An Elixir of Garlic, 129 An Elixir of three Ingredients, 126 Crollius's
Pestilential Elixir, 127 An Elixir against the Stone, 128 Of Embalming, 56 An
Astringent Emulsion, 11 Errhines, 18 Chemical Essences, Notes upon them, 26
Etmuller his Opinion of the Roots of great Bur-dock, Butter-bur, of Box-wood
and Sassafras-wood, 164 Extract of the lesser Centaury, or of the leaves of
Smallage given with the Kinkina when there are great obstructions in the
Bowels, 159 An Extract of Tea, its effects upon Blood. 158
F.
A Fomentation of Heath flowers in Gouty and Rheumatick pains, Page 162 A
Fumigation to raise a Flux, 21
G.
Ox-Gall, a Preparation of it, 34 A Gargle to stop a Salivation, 14 Gargarisms,
13 Gelly of Currants as made at Blois 26 Gelly of Isinglass, 19 Potable Gold,
95
H.
Honey, 36 Honey of Tobacco, 37
I.
Infusions, An Infusion of Mother-Time, etc. 163 An Infusion of Mustard Seed,
157 The common purging Infusion, 7 Infusion of the Roots of great wild
Valerian, 164 Juice of Liquorish, how prepared at Blois, 26 An Injection to
stop a Gonorrhaea. 16 A vulnerary Injection, ibid. Ipecacuanha, when brought to
Paris; Its Description and Use, 53, 54
L.
Laudanum Tutissimum, 94 A Liniment for old Aches, etc. 165 A Liniment for the
Piles, 137 A Liniment to hinder the Small Pox from seaming, 137 A Lotion
against the Itch, 17 A Lotion to kill Vermin in the Head, ibid. Lozenges; see
Tablets, 89, 90, 91, 92
M.
Masticatories, 13 Mithridate, Remarks upon it, 96 An Anti-epileptick Mixture,
12 A Diuretic Mixture, ibid. A Mixture for Haemorrhoides, 157 A Mixture for
Hypochondrianism, 155 A vulnerary Mixture, 156 The common emollient Mucilage,
18 A Mucilage to stop Haemorrhagies, 19
O.
Oil of Ants of A. Mynsicht, 131 Chemical Oils, Remarks upon them, 26 An
Anodine Soporiferous Ointment, 138 An Ointment to consume Excrescences in the
Vrethra 135 An Ointment to be used when the Excrescence is eaten away, 136 An
Ointment for Scabs and Tetters, 136 An Opiate against Worms, 100 The Cordial
Opiate of Lions, 101 The Toulouse Hydrotick Opiate, 100 Opium, vid. 149, 151
Hoffman's Orvietan preferred to all other Preparations of that name by the
Apothecaries of Paris, 105
P
Panacaea Mercurialis, 92 Pastills to be chewed to discharge Phlegm, 15
Perfumes, 21 Pessaries, 14 Mort's cold Philonium, 96 Mort's hot Philonium, 93
Angelick Pills, 85 Anodine Pills, 88 Anti-epileptick Pills corrected, 83
Anti-hypochondriack Pills, 84 Astringent Pills to stop a Gonorrhaea, 81
Barbarossa's Pills corrected, 74 The greater Pills of Bdellium, 75 The lesser
Pills of Bdellium, 76 Chalybeat Pills, 84 Diuretic Pills of Clossaeus, 80
Pills of Gambogia, 76 Gout Pills, 86 Mynsicht's Hydrogogue Pills reformed, 71
Bontius's Hydropical Pills, 72 Hysteric Pills, 83 Imperial Pills of the
Physicians of Lions, 72 Pills of two Ingredients, 83 Mercurial Pills, 73
Pectoral Pills. 79 Pills Rudii corrected, 77 Pills of Savine 85 Spaw Pills, 77
Mort's sweating Pills, 82 Sweet scented Pills, 88 Quercetans's Tartar Pills
reformed, 75 Schroder's Tartar Pills, 87 Turpentine Pills, 79 An insipid
Poison, 152 A Plaster of Cinnabar, 142 Blondel's Plaster called Diabotanum, 139
A Plaster to consume Excrescences in the Vrethra, 143 A Febrifuge Plaster, 142
A Plaster of the four Gums, 144 The Royal Plaster for Ruptures, 138 A Plaster
of Sperma Ceti, 141 A Plaster for the Toothache, 141 Plaster of Virtues, 144 An
Anti-nephritick Potion, 11 A famous Anti-dysenterick Powder, 52 A famous
Anti-epileptick Powder, 51 Powder of Ashes corrected, 61 Powder to hasten
Birth, 57 Hartman's Cachectick Powder, 55 A Carminative Powder, 62 Powder of
Cinnabar, 65 A Powder to help Digestion, 55 A diuretic Powder, 57 The Duke's
compound Powder, 58 His simple Powder, 59 A Golden Powder, 61 Powder of
Gutteta, 50 A Hand Powder, 63 A Powder burnt in Hysteric Fits, 58 Mynsicht's
Powder of Jalap, 50 The Imperial Powder, 64 The gray Imperial Powder against
the Plague, and the red Powder, 60 A Powder against Pleurisies, 64 Prince of
Mirandola's Powder in Rheumatisms, 161 Powder of Sarsaparilla, 58 An Opthalmick
Powder, 59 Sneezing Powder, 15 Powder for Spice Caps, 20 A Steel Powder used by
the Physicians of Paris, 63 Mort's Sudorifick Powder, 65 Powder of Turbith with
Rhubarb corrected, ibid. A Powder against Worms used at Paris, 49 A Ptisan to
be drank in a dry husky Cough, 162 The ordinary Ptisan, 7 A Restringent Ptisan,
7 One more restringent, ibid.
R.
Ratafia of Cherries, 31 Ratafia of Gilli flowers, 32 Ratafia of Kernels, ibid.
A Remedy that gives ease in Cancers, 161 A Remedy for Wounds, Incisions,
Contusions, etc. 149 One for the King's Evil, 148 A Remedy for the Nephritick
Colic printed by the Intendant of Languedock, 160 For obstinate Swellings, 148
For Palsies and Rhumatisms, 158 Another used frequently in the Alps, 165 Rob of
Speedwel, 25 Rotules of white Poppies, 93
S.
King Charles's Salt, 94 Sylvius's Salt, 155 A Volatile Oily Aromatic Salt,
166 Silk, 94 Sugar, 36 Sugar well clarified, sold for Syrup of Maidenhair at
Paris, ibid. Syrup of Spanish Broom corrected, 40 A Compound Magisterial Syrup,
43 An Emetick Syrup, 41 Syrup of Maidenhair made without Fire, 37 Syrup of
Quina Quinae, 47 Syrup of Scammony, 39 A strengthening Syrup, 45 Syrup of the
Whites of Eggs, 43 Syrup of Wild Saffron, 41 Remarks upon Syrup of Wormwood,
Syrupus Kermesmus, Syrup of Limons and Peach Flowers 49 Upon the Syrup of
Coral, 45 Upon the Syrups of Succory and of dry Roses, 35
T.
Emetick Tablets or Lozenges, 90 Tablets of Manna, 89 Compound Tablets of Marsh
Mallows, 90 Mercurial Tablets, 91 Tablets of white Poppies, vid. Rotules, etc.
93 Mort's purging Tablets, 91 Tartarum Vitriolatum recommended for a general
corrective of Purgers, 38 Tinctura Martis Mynsichti, 145 Tincture of Coral,
what it is, 25 Tincture of Gold, 95, 159 Tincture of Roses, 62 Tincture of
Wormwood, 42 Trochisks of Arsenick, 68 Trochisks to be used in a Diabetes, 69
Trochisks of Enula Campana, 70 Escharotick Trochisks, 68 Trochisks used in a
Gonorrhaea, 67 Trochisks of Orrice, 71 Trochisks of Pomgranate Flowers, 67
Trochisks of Ramech corrected, 66 Turpentine, 25
V.
Vipers, a Discourse upon their Poison, with several Remedies against it, page
148.
W.
A Wash to turn Hair black, 18 An Anti-scorbutick Water, 122 An Apoplectick
Water, 113 A carminative Water, 125 Water of Castor, 124 Compound Claret Water
30 Clossaeus's Cosmetick Water, 111 A Water for Consumptions, 116 A cosmetick
Water, 122 The divine Water of Fernel, 118 A Diuretic Water drawn from
Kernels, 117 A drying Water for external use, 24 D. Brun's Eye-Water, 23 Madam
Fouquet's Eye-water, 23 A Water to preserve the Eyes against the Smallpox, 24
A Water to allay Gout pains, 125 The Hysteric Water of the Amsterdamers, 121 A
Water of three Ingredients, 124 Kernel Water; vid. Ratafia Water of
magnanimity. 113 A Mercurial Water, 123 A Water used against Mortification, 119
An excellent Mouth-Water, 165 The Nephritick Water corrected, page 110
Prophylactick Water of Sylvius, 111 Queen of Hungary's Water-compound, 120
Seawater, several methods tried to sweeten it, 153 A Water for Spots and
Freckles, 126 A Stomachick Water, 115 A Water against the Stone, 116 Strawberry
and Rasberry Water, how made by Limonadiers of Paris, 47 A sweet scented Water,
114 A Water of Verjuice, 43 The Women's Aqua Vitae, 121 A wound Water, 109 For
internal wounds, a Stiptick, 148 A Febrifuge Wine, 28 Wine called Hypocras, 29
A purging Wine. 28 A Steel Wine, 28
FINIS.

