OF THE ART Both of Writing and Judging OF HISTORY, WITH REFLECTIONS UPON
Ancient as well as Modern Historians. Showing Through what Defects there are so
few Good; and that it is Impossible there should be many so much as Tolerable.

By the most Learned and Ingenuous Jesuit Father Le-Moyne.

Licensed October 15. 1694. D. Poplar.

London, Printed for R. Sare at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holbourn, and J. Hindmarsh
against the Exchange in Cornhill, 1695.

TO THE READER.
THE Translating this Incomparable Discourse out of French, is not the Effect
of any Criminal, Correspendence with the Enemies of the Present Government; nor
will the Buying and Reading it make any one Impeachable upon the Statute,
seeing the Importing and Exposing this Rich Cargo to Sale, is only to Benefit
and Enrich us, and not to Aid and Abet them.

And as there is nothing of our English Growth to be compared to it, so I do
not think our Soil or Climate are capable of producing a Commodity of the like
Goodness; nor can France it self, or those more Southern Nations, which pretend
to carry away the Glory of Wit and Judgment from these Northern Kingdoms, Boast
of any Production of this Kind that Approaches, much less Equaleth it. For
while both they and we value our selves upon the Advances which have been
lately made in diverse other Parts of Learning, yet it still continues as a
Misfortune entailed both upon them and us, that we neither know how to Write
nor to Judge of History. And that being one of the most Necessary, as well as
of the most Useful and Pleasant Parts of Learning, whatsoever conduces to the
Reforming, Improving and Perfecting of it, cannot miss being both Welcome and
Grateful to the Ingenuous. And it is only to such that this short Discourse is
recommended, your Pedants, and they whose Upper Rooms are ill furnished, being
altogether Ill Qualified to meddle with it.

THE CONTENTS.
Dissertation I. Of the Merit of History, and Qualities of an Historian. Chap.
I. THAT History and Poetry are allied. The Passage that separates them is not
long. Why no Man has hitherto passed from one to the other. That one must be a
Poet to be an Historian. Page 1 Chap. II. Of the Difficulty of History: The
small Number of True Historians. Reflections upon some Moderns. p. 8 Chap. III.
France has had many Journals* and Memoirs, but not one French History. Judgment
upon Commines, and other Historiographers after him. p. 12 Chap. IV. That
History demands length of Time, and great Qualifications. Whether it be
necessary that an Historian should be a Statesman and a Soldier? p. 16 Chap. V.
Wit is the first Quality of an Historian. Wit is an Universal Disposition. With
Wit every Man may be a Statesman. The Error of Cardinal Bentivoglio. p. 20
Chap. VI. What ought to be the Wit of an Historian: Its Character, Extention,
Faculties and Aids. p. 24 Chap. VII. History is an Universal School. The
Usefulness of this School. A Theater for Good Princes, and a Scaffold for the
Bad. What are the Advantages the Public receives from one and the other. p. 28
Chap. VIII. Of Shows and Representations, Feasts and other Pleasures, which
History affords. p. 33 Chap. IX. Of the Wit, Judgment and Disposition required
for the Reading of History: Whether Young People are Capable? p. 36 Chap. X.
The Particular Regard and Intention must be had in the Reading of History. p. 42
Dissertation II. Of the Nature and Art of History. Chap. I. FRom whence comes
the Name of History, and the Different Kinds. p. 47 Chap. II. The Definition of
History given by Vossius, Examined and Refuted. p. 50 Chap. III. The true
Definition of History, and its Picture drawn with all its Parts. p. 53 Chap.
IV. To what Art History belongs; And what Rank she holds in Learning. The
difference between an Historian, Orator and Poet. p. 58 Chap. V. That History
has need of an Art to govern her: What are the Functions of this Art. Authors
that have writ of it. p. 62
Dissertation III. Of the Parts of History. Chap. I. WHat are the Parts of
History? What Actions ought to be the Matter? The Opinions of the Ancients
concerning the Truth of these Actions. p. 67 Chap. II. That Truth ought to be
the Principal Care of the Historian: How far this Care obliges him; and what
are the Laws. p. 70 Chap. III. The Sources by which Falsities enter History;
and first of Ignorance: Of the Difficulties in discovering Truth. Ways of
Illuding Judgment. An Ancient and Modern Example thereupon. p. 73 Chap. IV.
What Certainty ought to be expected from History. What Faith given her. The
Indulgence to be granted Historians: And the middle way to be held between too
Easy and too Curious a Belief. p. 79 Chap. V. That the Historian, Curious of
Truth, must not trust to Fame. The Character of Fame. Partial Relations less to
be relied on. That he ought to be without Passion, as well as Country and
Party. p. 84 Chap. VI. That nothing ought to enter History but what is great
and Illustrious. That Trifling things ought to have no place there. p. 92 Chap.
VII. That Military Actions are not the Principal Matter of History. The
Historian ought to be oftener in the Closet than Army. That he ought to shun the
Assertation of Marvelous things; and abstain as much from Defect as Excess, in
the Relation of Miracles. p. 96 Chap. VIII. Whether Private Actions may be made
use of in History? And what ought to be those received. p. 104 Chap. 9. Whether
the Law of Truth obliges the Historian to keep nothing to himself? Whether
nothing be owing to the Public Virtue and Good Example? Whether it is not
better to supgress the Vices of the Great, than publish them. p. 106 Chap. X.
That the Right of History permits the Historian all sorts of Truth. The Rules
to be observed in the use of this Right; with Conscience and Honor, and
without Scandal and Prejudice to the Public Virtue. p. 111
Dissertation IV. Chap. I. THat the Historian has right to judge of things and
Actions. Of the Faults he must avoid in the use of this Right. And first of
Rashness. p. 117 Chap. II. Of Malice in Judging the Frailty of all Men. The
Care an Historian ought to take to preserve himself from it. Of the Brevity
required. Reflections upon Philip Commines. p. 123 Chap. III. The Regard an
Historian ought to have to his Birth, Religion and Life. p. 126 Chap. IV. Of
Elogies and Characters of Illustrious Persons; in what places they ought to be
put. p. 130
Dissertation V. Of Sentences. Chap. I. THat History demands Sentences. What
are Sentences and the Kinds. p. 134 Chap. II. Of the Use of Sentences. And the
Rules to be observed. p. 139 Chap. III. Another Important Rule to be observed
in the Use of Sentences, to the Exclusion of Points contrary to the Gravity of
History. Seneca wrongfully censured for that by Quintilian. p. 144 Chap. IV.
That a Point in Thoughts is different from Force. An Example of the Force of
Thoughts, of Instructions and Precepts, and how to be used. p. 147
Dissertation VI. Of Descriptions. Chap. I. OF the Worth of Descriptions. And
some Rules the Historian ought to observe. p. 152 Chap. II. Other Rules for
Descriptions. Ovid censured. And of some Historians that have failed in those
Rules. p. 156 Chap. III. Other Rules necessary in Descriptions. How and to what
Degree they ought to approach Poetry. Apuleius censured and his Style. p. 160
Chap. IV. The last Rule in Descriptions, and its Importance. p. 163
Dissertation VII. Of Harangues and Digressions. Chap. I. WHether Harangues are
Superfluous in History. And whether contrary to the Rule of Truth. p. 166 Chap.
II. That Harangues are necessary in History, not contrary to Truth nor
Probability. Historians and Poets justified thereupon. p. 169 Chap. III. What
Persons ought to Harangue. What ought to be the Subject, Matter and Measure of
Harangues. Thucydides and Salust reprehended for having failed in this Rule. p.
176 Chap. IV. Of the Kinds, Use and End of Digressions. p. 183
Dissertation VIII. Of Order. Chap. I. OF the Preface. Rules to be observed,
and Faults ^o be avoided. Reflections upon the Prefaces of Salust. p. 187 Chap.
II. The Historick Narration requires Order. What is this Order, and how it
differs from that of Poetry. p. 194
Dissertation IX. Of the Style of History. Chap. I. THE Style of History
demands Ornament. p. 200 Chap. II. What ought to be the Ornament of the Style
of History, and in what it consists. p. 203 Chap. III. That the Sublime
Character is the most proper for the Style of History. p 205 Chap. IV. That the
Style of History ought to approach that of Poetry, and to what Degree. p. 209
Chap. V. The Historick Style demands Pureness and Clearness. p. 213 Chap. V.
That the Style of History demands Brevity, and in what it ought to consist. p.
219

OF HISTORY.
Dissertation I. Of the Merit of History, and Qualities of an Historian.
CHAP. I. That History and Poetry are allied; The Passage that separates them
is not long. Why no Man has hitherto passed from one to the other. That one
must be a Poet to be an Historian.
I Know not but this Enterprise I have undertaken, of passing from Poetry to
History, may be accused of Presumption or Infidelity to the Muses. They may say
I have done enough to follow Homer and Virgil, without endeavoring after
Thucydides and Livy: And that Heroic Poetry being the greatest Effort of Wit,
and the just Measure of Humane Life, I might have spared my self the Fatigue of
a second Carreer, and reposed where the two greatest Men of the World have sat
down. They may yet add, That having been hitherto well treated by the Muses, I
ought to have been Faithful to the end* and not occasioned them the Grief of
seeing themselves abandoned by me, after so many Graces received from them.

I confess the Race of Poets and that of Historians are different; an^ that not
one having ever yet attempted to change, I ought to fear hazarding my self
first in the Journey. Nevertheless having with Care discovered the Passage, I
have neither found it so Long, nor so Painful, as many imagine not knowing the
Country, but by ill Maps, and false Representations made of it. There are no
Forts to take, no Rocks nor Precipices to go over; the descent is almost
Insensible by which you may pass from one to the other.

It Is true no body has hitherto udertaken it; and to speak Poetically when we
are treating of Prose, Homer, Virgil and Tasso, satisfied with the first Rank
they hold on this side of Parnassus, either had not leisure, or would not give
themselves the trouble of crossing over to that of the Historians. And what I
say of those, may be said of Thucydides, Tacitus and Livy, etc. who have
abstained through Weariness, or other Considerations.

I find enough of leisure to venture upon it, and I owe this leisure partly to
my Condition, that places me in an equal distance from doing nothing, or
nothing to the purpose; and partly to my Constitution, that Nourishes it self
by Labor, and is Enlightened by Motion, as the Fire and Stars. And what I say
of Leisure arising from Labor is not strange, seeing those that work
continually lengthen and multiply their Days; and by the same reason, according
to Seneca, the Idle shorten and diminish their Number. And it happens to me in
this, as to those that make of a well managed Mediocrity, an undecaying Fund;
in the place that the bad employ of Abundance, is a cause of Perpetual Want to
the Rich Prodigals.

As to my Infidelity to the Muses* it is not so great as those may imagine that
are Ignorant. History is one of them, the most Noble, and I believe the oldest
of all the Troop. Not only because Fable succeeded Truth, and Music Speech;
but because the World was acquainted with Histories before Poems; and Homer's
Iliads, as every Body knows, are only a Copy in Verse, made of what Datis and
Dictis have written in Prose of the Wars of Troy. I may add, That Antiquity
having given the Names of the Nine Muses to the Books of Herodotus, History was
willing by that to make the World understand, that History was of the same
Family; or that the Muses labor not less with the Historians than the Poets.
And Dion. Halicar. says, That of all the Muses, there is not one that resembles
that of Homer's, and approaches nearer than that of Herodotus. A great deal
more may be said for my change. History, if we believe Cicero, is but a Poem
without the Slavery of Dress, without Ceremony and Constraint. The Poetic Muse
has therefore no reason to complain of my Inconstancy, or to esteem me
Disloyal, if I serve her in her days of Liberty, after having served her in her
days of Confinement.

It may likewise be said with Confidence, upon the resemblance remarked by the
Critics between History and Poetry, that a Man must be a Poet to be an
Historian. I do not say Historian after the manner of the Makers of Legends and
Chronicles; the Remassers o^ Journals and Gazettes; nor of thos^ Gentlemen
Historiographers who ar^ perpetual Compilers, and think to have well deserved a
Pension, when they have joined together a parce^ of Scraps stolen from
Froissard Nicholas Gill, du Hallin, etc. and exposed them with a little
Disguisement for their own. I say Historians of the Rank of Salust Livy and
Tacitus, that have bee^ Poets, free and disingaged from the Constraint of
Numbers and Measure as Pontin has made appear, by confronting their Figures and
manne^ of Speech with those of Virgil. Upon which we must not forget the
Testimony of Lucian a great Master i^ the Art of History, who says, the Vessel
would be Sluggish, and without Movement, if the Wind of Poetry did not fill the
Sails.

Upon this and the Faith of Quintilian and Cicero, who have often affirmed,
that History is a Poem free from the Servitude of Verse; thought if I have had
any Fancy in Poetry, I could not better employ what remains of my time, than in
the Composition of a History. And as when I began my Heroic Poem, not to work
Tumultuously and at all Adventures; I made to my self a Model, where I abridged
all the Rules belonging to that Art, till that time a Stranger to France: So
now undertaking to compile a History, which is one of the greatest and most
useful Productions of Humane Wit, I ought to renew my Acquaintance with the
Historians, and instruct my self more particularly with the Nature, Parts and
Quality of History; That having both Patrons and Rules before my Eyes, it may
not happen to me as to an Ignorant Architect, who regarding neither Proportion
nor Symmetry, in lieu of a Palace raises only Irregular Heaps of Stone and
Marble. To this end I have reduced into this Work all I could learn of the
Economy of History, whether by my own Observations, or those of others, either
better enlightened, or less employed than my self. It may happen Improvement may
be made upon what I have done, yet this will still be my Glory; to have first
taught France the Art of Poem, the Art of Device, and the Art of History.

CHAP. II. Of the Difficulty of History: The Small Number of True Historians:
Reflections upon some Moderns.
IT is no easy Burden to undertake compiling a History: The Ancient Greeks,
and after them the Latins, that have known the Weight, have called it the great
Work. And all, that a desire of present Fame, and of leaving some Remembrance
to Posterity, has pressed on to this Labor, would have done wisely to have
taken the Council of Horace to the Poets, First to have tried their Strength.

The Difficulty of the Work appears enough, in the small Number of those that
have set their Hands to it with Success. Greece that prided it self as the
Mother of Arts, cannot reckon above two or three, and those lived together in
the same Age. After those this Fertile Mother produced great Bodies indeed, but
rude and unformed. Ancient Rome had but four, she began with Salust, and ended
with Tacitus or Quintus Curtius. Luceus, who was so much esteemed by Cicero,
not being known by us, it may be said for his own Unhappiness, and that of the
Republic of Learning, that he died twice, once Naturally, and again in his
Work. I mention not Caesar, his Commentaries contain excellent Matter, but half
wrought, and that never raises an Edifice. There is no less to be said for
Paterculus and Florus, the most Polite and Gallant Writers of their Age; but
Polite and Gallant Abbreviators, whose Works, full of Wit, cannot be better
compared than to a Plain, in which the Architects describe a Building by Lines
and Points.

Italy since that time becoming Gothic by the Fall of the Empire, and
Banishment of the Muses, has produced no regular Historian till Guicciardin;
who may be readily likened to such Bodies as have much Flesh and few Nerves,
and seem animated in some parts, and at some certain times. Davila that
succeeded a great while after him, and Bentivoglio since, exceedingly precede
him, and are Superior in every thing. If I may be permitted to add our Maffeus
and Strada, who have writ in Latin, and in the Style of the Ancient Republic;
the first the History of the Indies, the later that of the Civil Wars of
Flanders. 'Twas their Misfortune to be born Fifteen hundred Years after Tacitus
and Livy, otherwise they had been esteemed with them, and had had together
their Commentators and Commentaries. I may make the same Complaint for our
Mariana, who is the only regular Historian that Spain can boast of: Had he
lived in the time of Augustus, he had lodged in his Palace, and had had the
same Treatment at his Table, as Timagenes that Satirical and Biting Historian.
Grotius, to join a Hollander with a Spaniard, is the only Historian of this
Method we have had in the North; but this Method is much spoiled by an affected
and embarrassed Shortness, by which he would appear more Salust, and more
Tacitus, than themselves. His Style, that imitates first one, then the other,
keeps an equal distance from both; and not approaching near enough to
comprehend their Virtues, falls into their Vices.

CHAP. III. France has had many Journals and Memoirs, but not one French
History. Judgment upon Commines, and other Historiographers after him.
IF we may credit St. Jerome, France has always been renowned for its Eloquence:
And notwithstanding the Shame, it must be said, That amongst so much Eloquence,
and so many Learned Men, it cannot to this time boast of one regular Historian:
I don't say in Latin, but in the French Language. And I make this distinction,
because the French that have written in Latin, have in some manner estranged
themselves from their own Country. This without Prejudice to the Memory of
Monsieur de Thou, whose Reputation is rather founded upon the Bulk, than Merit
of his Work. And since we are like to have suddenly a Latin History of Monsieur
de la Barda, our Salust or Tacitus, it will be lawful for him to adapt himself
to which he pleases, perhaps both may be desirous of him, and no doubt but he
will do Honor to the one or the other. But I return to my Proposition, That to
this time we have not had one Historian in our Language, that could be esteemed
perfect. We have been very Prolifick in Journals, Gazettes and Memoirs: We are
stored with enough to make an Illustrious Library, where you will see nothing
but Dukes, Peers, Mareschals of France, and Generals of Armies, bound in
Spanish Skins, and ranged upon Shelves of Cedar.

But if the Commentaries of Caesar, which are so Polite, so Advised, so Modest,
cannot obtain for him the name of an Historian, can we believe that
Beleagnangis, Montluc, the Duke de Nevers, the Sieurs Castelneau, de Tavannes,
or Suille, have any Right to pretend to it, under the Title of their Memoirs. I
would willingly place by themselves those attributed to the Duke of Guise, and
Monsieur the Duke of Rochefoucault, because few Essentials are wanting to the
Form of a Regular History. But notwithstanding they have writ with so much
Judgment, and so good Language, with those Defects they cannot take it ill we
do not violate a Rule that we have not yet entrenched upon to serve the first
Caesar, who was at least as gallant a Man as themselves.

There remains but Philip Commines, and it may be said I ought not to treat him
with greater Rigor than Justus Lipsius has done, who has given him so
honorable a place amongst the Historians very near Polybius. It Is very true
that Commines has great Dispositions toward an Historian of the first Rank: He
is Sincere, Judicious, and Instructive: His Reflections, Sentences,
Instructions, and Digressions, come from a finished Wisdom, and perfect
Politic; but having had no other Master than his own Genius; no other Rule, no
other Models than his own Judgment; he could mount no higher at most, than an
Essay or rough Draught of History. But yet this Essay receives Admission into
the Cabinets of wife Princes, above all that Art and Nature has there amassed
of Rich and Curious.

Upon this Retrenchment of Historians, what will become of our
Historiographers; And what will be the Rank and Employ given them by Boccalin
in his Kingdom of Parnassus? Dupleix will continue to draw up Petitions against
the Innovations in our Language; and at his hours of leisure will correct his
History, from the Remarks made by the Marshall de Bassompiere. Matthieu will
learn to fasten his Conceits, that fall to pieces in every Line. De Serres, and
the other Forgers of Calumnies and Impostures against the Court of Rome, the
Popes, Kings, Ecclesiastics and Jesuits, that they have not known but by the
false Resemblances made at Geneva and Amsterdam, will be tied to a corner with
Diogenes's Dog, where they will have nothing to gnaw upon, but the Stones
thrown by Passengers to teach them no more to bite.

CHAP. IV. That History demands length of Time, and great Qualifications.
Whether it be necessary an Historian should be a Statesman and a Soldier?
THis Rarity then of a True History and Perfect Historian, proceeds either from
length of Time, that so great a Work requires, or from the excellent Qualities
in the Workman to succeed in his Design. A Picture may be made in a Day, a
Figure of Wax in few Hours, and a Gazette in a Morning: But to Paint a Gallery
of the Extension of the Louvre; to Carve a Statue of the Greatness of the
Hercules of Farnese, the Collossus of Rhodes, or that of Stasicrates, to be cut
out of a Mountain; and to compose a Just History, whether of one Reign or more,
the longest Lives are but long enough. As for the Ancients, Paul Emilius spent
Thirty Years in composing what he has left us; and Paulus Jovius Thirty seven
in his; and yet neither one nor the other of any great bulk. And 'twill not be
wondered at by those that know Virgil was Twelve Years in finishing what may be
read in so many Hours. But in such things it is not the Mass, but the Judgment
and Wit that cost the Pains. And three or four drops of that Spirit well
purified, and such as we find in one Line of Salust or Tacitus, are worth more
than those gross Volumes under which we see the Warehouses and Families of
Booksellers to groan.

As to the Qualities necessary for an Historian; Lucian would have him have a
Prudence begun by Study, and finished by some public Ministry; and not only a
Minister of State but a great Commander. If this were true, none but Princes,
Ambassadors, and great Generals, should have dared to set their Hands to the
Work. But Lucian requires too much; for besides that ordinarily, the Action
requires one thing, and the Composition another: That Experience that makes the
Wise, makes them not always Eloquent; and that it is Extraordinary to find a
good Soldier a Man of his Pen, who receives without Caution what his Prince or
General says of himself. It is not true, that ^n Historian must be a Minister
of State and Great Commander. Herodotus, that Cicero calls the Father of
History, notwithstanding the Envy of Plutarch, was never Officer, nor Minister
of State. Salust, that with some has the first place amongst the Latin
Historians, reproved of Luxury in the Senate, and accused of Scandalous
Debauches before the Praetor, employed himself in other Matters than those of
the Republic. And we never read that Livy was ever Counselor to Augustus with
Maecenas, or Captain with Agrippa.

If the Necessity of writing Military Action, obliged an Historian to be a Man
of the Sword, the same Obligation would lie upon the Undertakers of an Heroic
Poem, who are so full of Combats in their Heads, and which they transfer upon
Paper. But you will agree with me, the Laurels of Victory are not the same, nor
do they grow under the same Constellation with those of Poetry; and that to
this time we have not seen them flourish together. To pass by Homer, who could
be no redoubtable Warrior, being blind as he was; it is said of Anacreon he was
both. I know not whether he was so Valiant at his Sword as his Pots; but we
very well know his Muse accustomed to the Debauch, wanted Breath for the
Heroic Trumpet, and afforded him little more than Drinking-Songs, and
Love-Toys.

CHAP. V. Wit is the first Quality of an Historian. Wit is an Universal
Disposition. With Wit every Man may be a Statesman. The Error of Cardinal
Bentivoglio.
BEing a Soldier then is as little necessary for an Historian as for a Poet;
but to be either, it is necessary to be a Man of Wit. Wit is an Universal
Disposition to all Forms; to Philosophy, Poetry, to Civil and Military Science;
makes a Statesman, and makes a Warrior, a Man of his Pen and a Man of his
Sword. With this Lucullus, after he had laid aside the long Robe, became a
great Captain. With Wit, Homer, Virgil and Tasso have represented feigned Wars
and Heroes, that have served as Models and Spurs to the True.

An Historian must then have Wit, but not a Wit of no larger Extension than a
Song or Elegy. I say an unbounded Spirit, that raises it self above Crowns and
Crowned Heads; that comprehends States and Empires; that is Popular in a
Republic, Monarchick in a Monarchy; that has received of Nature, at least in
Disposition and unpolished, all the Forms of Politics. With one Ray of this
Spirit, without having steered the Helm, he is able to represent the Good and
Evil Forms of Government; the Faults and Virtues of Ministers, without having
had part with them; and without being called to the Councils of Princes,
without being found amongst their Troops, although of a Profession estranged
from Courts and Armies, he is able to instruct Princes and Generals for the
time to come, by the Examples of times past.

All this is said with Submission to Cardinal Bentivoglio, and with respect to
his Purple and Merit. He finds Objections against the Reflections and Politics
in the History of Father Strada, and maintains, That a Man brought up a
Stranger to the Court, and as it were out of the world, cannot with good
Judgment make so public a Profession of the Science of both. Some think it not
strange the Cardinal Historian meeting the Jesuit in the same Carreer,
Emulation should draw from his Pen some strokes, not altogether so Advantageous
for his Competitor. But I am not of their Opinion, as thinking it enough to
look for Jealousy amongst Artisans and Shopkeepers, without a Supposition of
finding it in the Cabinets of Learned Men. However it was, to say nothing of
Plato and Aristotle who had nothing to do with Government, and yet have writ so
well of a Commonwealth; according to this new Maxim of the Cardinal's, the
Institution of a Prince composed by St. Thomas, so estranged from a Court both
by his Profession and manner of Life, must be then a kind of Madness: And
Justus Lipsius that lived in the World without having to do with it, yet in his
Learned Works has abridg'd all that appertains to the Knowledge of it, has left
us only a lasting Absurdity. Let us know then that a good Wit and good
Judgment, aided by Reading and Meditation, without a Bishopric or Office in
the Court of Rome, of a simple Religious, may make an excellent Politician: And
why not after having made of Cardinal Bentivoglio a Warring Historian,
notwithstanding his long Robe and Priesthood. The distance is not greater
between a Religious and a Politic, than a Cardinal and a Captain. And it is not
to be believed, that the Pen of a Sacred Hand can commit an Irregularity in
expressing the Thoughts and Dogmes of Policy, and be free from it in rehearsing
of Battles and Murders.

CHAP. VI. What ought to be the Wit of an Historian: Its Character, Extension,
Faculties and Aids.
HItherto occasionally of the Spirit requisite for a perfect Historian: But to
finish my Character, This Wit must not be of those Superficials that only
Surprise; make a Flash and away; of those Quintessences that evaporate upon
taking Air; of those Pointillens that bend and break with the least resistance
of Affairs; of those Journalists that are sometimes clear and sometimes
obscure. An Historian being to determine of Things and Persons, requires a
clear Judgment to distinguish the True from the False: Must be equitable to do
every one Justice: Moderate not to carry his Thoughts and Expressions beyond
his Matter. In fine, penetrating and solid, able to enter without losing
himself, into the very Foundations; and discover all the Mysteries of Affairs.

This is a great deal, and yet there is more; the Spirit required for an
Historian (to leave nothing unsaid) must not be of those Wits that one may
compare to the Rich Covetous, that keep all upon their Register and in their
Coffers; or of those hoarse Musicians, that as one of the Ancients says, Sing
only to themselves and their Muse: He must not only be Rich within, with his
Notions and Thoughts; his Riches must appear, and Eloquence give Eclate and
Magnificence to his words.

If History was shut up in a Man's Breast, and consisted, according to the
Opinion of Vossius, but in the simple Memory of things, there would be neither
occasion for Words or Writing: And a Barbarian that had the use of no Language,
might proceed Historian, by the sole Knowledge of Affairs passed in his time.
History, as I have said, is of the Family of the Muses, where there is nothing
Hoarse or Mute: Harmony and Eloquence reign amongst them, as in the Waters of
Fountains and Leaves of Trees. It Is then necessary that an Historian should be
Eloquent either Naturally or by Study, and hereafter I will show what ought to
be the Character of his Eloquence.

These interior Faculties proper to an Historian, must be supported from
without, to the end, in the School-mens Dialect, they may pas^ from Power to
Act: And because his Office is Reporter and Witness, it were to be wished it
might be from his own View; but since Nature cannot permit a Man to live twice,
or more than in one Age, it must at least be prop'd by the Testimony of those
that have seen the things they recount; or have learned them from those People
that have lived in that time; where these Aids are wanting, he must have
recourse to Relations and Memoirs, which hold the place of Witnesses, but those
well chose, Faithful, Authorized, and free from Partiality.

But if History be a Work of so great Weight, and so Difficult? If so many
Qualities are necessary in an Historian, to come off with Success; What shall I
return to those that may demand if I find these Qualifications in my self? To
which first I answer, Till this time I have had no occasion to enquire; and if
I have found any of them, I ought to put them in use. And Secondly, In the
Picture I have drawn, I have not represented my self such as I am, but such as
I ought to be. That this is the Portrait of an Historian that has never yet
been, nor will not arrive but with the perfect Prince, and perfect Captain, the
World has waited for so many Ages. And that the same Respect that obliged me to
undertake composing an Heroic Poem, has now engaged me to that of an History,
where the Hero may be found not in Imaginations and Semblances of Truth, but in
Effects True and Solid.

CHAP. VII. History is an Universal School: The Usefulness of this School. A
Theater for Good Princes, and a Scaffold for the Bad. What are the Advantages
the Public receives from one and the other.
AND since it may be here necessary to declare my self, I protest 'twas the
Public Benefit I considered, when I undertook this Work, as believing I could
not render my Studies more Useful, nor better employ my last Years, than in
setting out an History, which according to the Description of Cicero, Is the
Director of Mann^rs, and the Mistress of Life. A Noble and Excellent Mistress,
that has kept School open to so many Nations for so many Ages; a School of all
Languages, where the Persians, the Greeks, the Romans, have heretofore Studied;
the French, Spaniards, Italians and Germans, Study at present: Where the Living
that would be Wise are the Scholars; where the Dead, as well the Wise as the
Fools, are the Books and Lessons, where we learn not to turn a Verse, measure a
Period, or form a Syllogism; but to do Acts of Justice, Courage and Mercy; and
in the place of Declamators and Sophists, that are made with great Labor and
Charge in other Schools; here without Charge, without Pains, Princes are taught
to be Just and Moderate; Ministers Intelligent and Faithful; Captains Wise
before their time, and Expert without the Assistance of Experience.

In this consists the principal End of History, and ought to be the first
Design of an Historian. He must leave to the Inventors of Romances, those
Paper-Combatants, to Amuse the Idle Youth with Representations of feigned Wars
and imagined Loves. Kings, Princes, Emperors, Ministers of State, and Generals,
are to be his Spectators; and the Scenes must be adapted to the Presence. And
since History is a Philosophy purified from the Pedantry of the Schools, free
from the Embarrasments of Divisions and Arguments, and reduced into Action and
Example; his Office is to represent his Matter founded upon Truth; to conduct
their Will by their Memory; to reform and render perfect the Modern by the
Ancient, the present by the past. And the Happiness of a People consisting in
the good Instructions given those that govern, that ought to be the chief end
of his Labor.

And for that reason it is, that History is called the Philosophy of Princes,
their Governor and Counselor in their mature Age, their Adviser in their
Cabinets and Armies. For that reason the Emperor Basil, in his Book of
Instructions to his Son Leon, recommends History as a way of Traveling without
Fatigue; as an advanced Experience, as an easy way to enrich himself by the
Labors of others; to instruct and form himself by the Examples as well of the
Bad as the Good; to recall back past Ages, and to extend his Life to the
beginning by his Memory.

But let us not esteem History only as a Counselor to Kings and Princes; she
is also their Judge notwithstanding the Sovereignty of which they so much boast
themselves. And as she has Theaters and Thrones, where she Crowns the Virtuous;
she has likewise Scaffolds and Wheels, where the Vicious suffer the Punishment
due to their Crimes in the Eyes of all People to all Posterity. Their Guards
are of no Defense; their Crowns and Purple put them not in Covert; their
Memories exposed, their Ghosts torn in pieces, produce at least this Good after
so many Ills, they make others fear the like Torment, whose evil Genius has
thrown upon the like Conduct.

And here let us not forget the Remark made by Tacitus, that History is of
great use, if it were but for showing the Rod to Tyrants, and advertising them
of the Punishment she prepares. And it is certain, whatever is said of their
Secret Disquietudes, and inward Pangs, their future Fame keeps them more in awe
than their Conscience. The most part of them believing no other Eternity than
that of History; and in the height of their Enjoyments, they cannot but think
with Confusion, what she will one day say, of what they now Act without Shame.

CHAP. VIII. Of Shows and Representation, Feasts and other Pleasures which
History affords.
BEsides these general Advantages the Public receives by History, there are
others less common for Particulars, who know how to profit by them. She there
shows the Turns and Revolutions of this Globe called the World; the Rise and
Fall of States and Empires; the Inequality and Inconstancy of Fortune that
governs it. Sometimes she represents a Comedy, at others a Tragedy, according
to the different Event of things in the several Courts where she makes her
Theater. And from these diverse Representations, they may learn not to rest too
much upon the Favors of Fortune, or expect to be ever able to to clog her
Wheel; to be ready to mount or descend when she pleases; to render their Souls
immovable and always equal amidst these Vicissitudes; and review the several
Portraitures she makes them, as so many Counselors and Guides to the way of
Virtue.

Let us not then persuade our selves, the Advantages that accrue from History,
are Fruits of a bitter or insipid Nature: The most delicious Tables of
Antiquity, whether those of Cleopatra or Apicius, where whole Provinces and
Patrimonies were eaten in Ragousts; or those of Nero, prepared by the most
Ingenious and most finished Debauches, in a Court the most loose and Luxurious
the World ever knew, had nothing so Delicious as the Tables of History. We see
not there the Gladiators Combating and Defiling the Meats with their Blood, for
the Divertisement of the Company; but the Combats of Virtue and Fortune:
Victories obtained by Patience and Prudence, over Sufferings and Dangers. We
see there, without Hazard or engaged Spirit, the Defeats of Armies, wracking of
Fleets, Seditions of Countries, and Ruin of Towns; and if the Pleasure of Shows
have been always so much esteemed, that heretofore the Governing People have
left the Care of Affairs for the Divertisement of the Theater, and rather
consented to the Ruin of Six Provinces than that of the Cirque: What must be
the Pleasure of a Man that Travels in his Chair through all Ages, through all
Countries; That without leaving his Closet, assists in all Reigns at the
Councils of all Kings, finds himself present at their Combats by Sea and Land;
and makes himself by interessing sometimes his Joy and sometimes his Grief,
Assyrian at Babylon, Lacedemonian at Sparta, and Roman at Rome. There are so
many Charms in this Pleasure, the Sad lose their Grief; and oftentimes the Sick
their Maladies: As it happened to Alphonsus King of Arragon, who given over by
Physicians, after having drein'd unsuccessfully the Apothecaries Shops, found
in Quintus Curtius the Health he had in vain searched for in the Schools of
Galen and Hippocrates.

CHAP. IX. Of the Wit, Judgment and Disposition required for the reading of
History: Whether Young People are capable?
AFter so many things of the Merit of History, and Qualities of an Historian;
something must be said of the Disposition required in the Readers. And some
would have them of a Maturity above the Flower of their Age, founded upon what
Aristotle says, Not to admit Youth to the Study of Civil Sciences: But either
they take him in a wrong Sense, or place his words where they don't belong.

It Is true that Civil Science and History tend both equally to Prudence, which
is the common Intention of one and the other: But the ways to arrive at this
end are very different; The one goes through Definitions, Divisions, exalted
Discourses, universal Axioms, and Syllogisms in form, which are every way
abstracted from Sight, and far from the Paths open to Sense and Imagination.
The other, without rising to Universals and Ideas, without leaving Singulars
and Sensibles, proceed plainly by Examples that lead straight and without
by-ways to Use and Practice. I confess, Youth accustomed to things addressed to
their Sense and Imagination, enter but with Difficulty into the ways of
Science; and if some enter through strength of Wit, they find themselves
immediately as it were lost in the Country. The Lines, the Circles, the
Triangles, that sustains and guides them in Geometry fail them there, they know
not where to go, what way to take: But I know nothing can hinder their
following the Method of History, where all is Sensible and Solid; where,
without amazing themselves in the Labyrinth of Speculation, and Chaos of
Idea's, they may learn by what has been done, what to avoid; in which consists
the principal Function of Prudence.

This in answer to those who do Violence to old Aristotle, and force him to
their side against his Will. What he has said of Dogmatical Methods that are
long oblique and embarrassed, cannot be affirmed of Examples that are short,
straight and clear. And although we grant History may not be so good a Mistress
of Prudence to Young People in general; and that they are not capable of making
so good Profit in addressing her as to Philosophy; Polybius and Livy would
teach them more and lead them further in one day, than the Expositors of Plato
and Aristotle, and all the Disciples of Zeno and Cleanthes are able to do in a
Month. And three or four such Examples as Joseph in Prison, Victorious Scipio,
and disfigured Spurina, would persuade them more of the Merit and Value of
Continence, than what has ever been said of it in the Academy or Lyceum.

We may see then Youth prevents not the Advantages may be made by History, if
the Maturity of the Judgment supplies the Defect of Years. But the most part of
those that apply themselves to this kind of reading, either want the Judgment
she requires, or make not use of it as they ought; and that in default of
knowing what is the end of History, why she is made public, and of what use in
a Civil Life; from whence arrives that in lieu of regarding her as a School of
Virtue, and Academy of Wisdom, where there are disinterested Masters that teach
without Wages, without Sallary, who give Lessons night and day to all that
understand to read: The one regards her as a Theater, where she represents
sometimes Comical sometimes Tragical Actions: Others as a Cirque, where is seen
the Coursing of Horses and Clashing of Gladiators: Others as a Fair, where all
sorts of Antic Statues and Pictures are exposed. And upon the false Judgment
all these People make of her, one searches Sleep in a quarter of an hours
Discourse with Xenophon; another pleases himself with seeing the Romans bleed
in the Battle of Canae, or that of Trasymene; a third, curious of Rarities
esteemed by Pedants, finds wherewithal to fill his Memory with Observations
upon the Serpent-Father of Alexander, the Wolf-nourisher of Romulus, the
Eternal Fire of the Kings of Persia, and that of the Vestal Virgins; upon the
Head-Dressings of the Grecian Dames, and the Feet of the Romans; upon the Doves
that fed Semiramis, and the Viper that stung Cleopatra; and a hundred such
things that are of no use. And amongst so many that have Libraries full of
Historians, there is scarce one endeavors to improve his Honor, or render
himself more Virtuous.

Let them know then, that History demands another Disposition than such People
bring with them. And since she is (as the Wise say) the Directeress of Manners,
and Mistress of Life, they must be persuaded not to lose time with her, to
bring another Spirit, other regards, and give another sort of Attention than to
a Comedian. The first and principle Intention of those that present themselves,
must be to be governed and conducted by the Examples she proposes. All the
great Men have made this use of her, they regarded her, according to Plutarch,
as a Looking-glass before which they adjusted and embellished their Lives by
the Virtues of others. And Cicero confesses he studied in History the
Portraitures of Wise Men who had been before him, to imprint in himself their
Resemblance as much as 'twas possible.

CHAP. X. The particular Regard and Intention must be had in the reading of
History.
FRom this general Intention of History, we must descend to particular
Applications. And since History is as a Palace or Temple enriched with all
sorts of Pictures, the Sight must not be cast here and there at random and
without design; every one must make choice of Models that he finds proper for
his Quality, Age, Temperament, Fortune and Affairs.

A Prince that makes the Lives of Princes his Study, may equally advantage
himself by the Bad as the Good: From some that he sees crowned with Glory, and
adored by Nations; he may learn Piety, Justice, Mercy and Love to his People.
From others that he sees Confounded, Ashm'd, accompanied with Infamy, a Vail
upon their Faces, followed with Despair, a Poniard in one Hand, a Cord in the
other; he may learn to fly Impiety, Covetousness, Luxury, Ravage, Cruelty, and
such like Pests that make Tyrannick Reigns, and Tyrants Miserable.

A Statesman likewise, who sees on one side the Portraiture of Joseph and
Moses, opposed to Achitophel and Haman, on the other the Pictures of Agrippa
and Maecenas, opposite to Sejanus and Tigillinus, may draw Lights from the one,
and Shadows from the other, wherewith to imbelish his Ministry with a
disinterested Fidelity, Religion and Probity. A General, a Soldier, may there
find Models of Military Prudence, Courage, Moderation and Humanity; by which
they may learn to War as Men and not as Tigers. The Ladies also that will read
History with other Lights than the Fables of Ariosto, and Tales of Amidas, may
furnish themselves with all those Virtues give Grace and Glory to their Sex.

A Greek Sophist caused a Note to be placed over his Door, by which he informed
the Public he had Remedies for all the Troubles of the Mind: The Writing would
have been better placed over the Door of History. She has indeed Medicaments
for all the Griefs and Maladies of the Soul; and when any one approaches with a
real Desire of being cured, and not with the vain Curiosity of seeing only, he
cannot miss, among such a multitude of Examples, of all sorts, finding a
Cenitive or Corrective, be his Ill of what kind soever, let it arise from the
Intemperance of his Passions, or strokes of Fortune.

History performs yet more, she furnishes with Preservatives against all Evils
to come, let them arrive on what side they will. And since, as the Wise Man
says, nothing is new under the Sun, a Learned and Judicious Reader may learn to
foretell the future by the past; and regulate what he has to do, by what has
been done; and so become Diviner without Magic, and Prophet without
Inspiration. There is nothing can arrive, that he will not see afar off; and
against which he will not have time to prepare and arm himself with what is
necessary, Prudence or Courage. Also the Wise, Magnanimous, and all other
Virtuous, may improve themselves by the reading of History; but then it is
necessary this reading, as I have said, be Attentive and Serious, made with
Judgment and Design; and that they bring other Dispositions than to a
Gaming-house, where there is nothing to see but the rolling of Dice, and
counting of Cards.

Dissertation II. Of the Nature and Art of History.
CHAP. I. From whence comes the Name of History, and the Different Kinds.
ALL that I have hitherto said, was necessary for the Honor of History, and to
discover the Merit to those who daily see her without making Acquaintance. It Is
time, that to give you a more distinct Knowledge of her, I should make a more
regular and methodical Picture containing her Matter, Parts and Form. And here
I will not trouble my self with the Wrangling of Pedants, who not knowing how
to employ their Excess of Words and Leisure, Dispute among themselves from what
Root comes the Word History; one drawing it from a Greek Word that signifies to
Recount; and others from another that signifies to stop the Flood; because
History, as they say, stops the Flood of things, and gives them Consistance and
Durance. I will also dispense with my self (under Favor of the Reader) from
entering into the long detail they make of the different sorts of History, and
content my self to reduce them all into three principal Species, Divine,
Natural and Humane. Divine is that immediately inspired by God, as are all
those Histories contained in the Bible. Natural, such as contain the Works of
Nature, as Aristotle of Animals, Theophrastus, Pliny, and many others. Humane
treats of Men's Actions; and that by a second Dissection, divides it self into
five other kinds, True, Fabulous, Universal, Particular and Singular. The True
Treats of things received by the common Belief of Men: The Fabulous, of such
things as are feigned and imagined for the Divertisement of the Reader, as what
we find in Poems and Romances: The Universal has an Extension without Bounds,
embraces all Times and Nations; as that of Diodorus of Sicily, Trogus, Justin,
Cardinal Baronius, and our Father Sallian: The Particular is much more
confined, and contents it self with the Extent of one Nation, as Livy and
Tacitus; or one Reign, as that of Quintus Curtius: The Singular yet more
restrained, treats of certain choice Persons that have merited to live more
than once, to be seen more than in one Age: And we may place in this Rank the
Cesars of Suetonius, the Famous Lives of Plutarch, the Philosophers of
Laertius, and the Sophists of Philostratus: And amongst these, not to stay too
long in the Times so far off our Age, we may give place to the Collections made
by the Sieur de Brantosme of Princes and Captains, Princesses and Ladies, that
have lived since the Reign of Francis the first to his Time.

CHAP. II. The Definition of History given (...) Vossius, Examined and Refuted.
THE Confusion of Species (...) different, ought to be (...) right; and that
cannot be bette^ done than by a Regular Definition that may be as a correct and
ju^^ Portraiture, where true History naturally represented, and accordin^ to
her proper Character, may b^ distinguished from Illegitimates an^ Bastards,
that are only so by Su^ferance.

Vossius, to whom the Age is obliged for the most accomplished Collections of
all that appertains to History, has made a Definition, that, to speak the
Truth, is only a Fantastical Picture of his own Imagination. He cuts off the
Tongue and Fingers, takes away the Voice and Pen, and retrenches the Auditors
and Readers. In a word, He would neither have her speak or write; that is to
say, he has shut her up in the Breast of an Historian, and will only have her a
simple Knowledge of particular things, that ought to be exhibited to the Memory
of Men for Instruction to live well. If this Definition was Just, she would be
no more the great Work, the laborious Enterprise, the Burden that makes the
greatest Wits give way; and with a moderate Memory it would be as easy to be
an Historian as to Play at Picket or Tictack.

Besides, a Man without the least Tincture of Grammar, or any knowledge of
History, by the sole Report that may be made him of what she contains, might
become all the Historians in a Moment. And if Composition be but as Clothes to
the Body, as Vossius says, he may be Thucydides and Tacitus in Body and Mind,
and want nothing of either, but the Greek Mantle or Roman Robe.

Thus (with his Favor whom I should grieve to offend) as he understands the
Laws of Dissertation, he will not be so Angry at, as a Learned Person beyond
the Alps, whose Wit I have a Just Esteem for, and yet he entered Processes
against me in the most gallant Court, and before a Prince the most Spiritual of
all Italy, because I was not of his Opinion in some Points touching the Art of
Emblems in the Tournaments of the Learned, as well as those of the Cavaliers.
It Is permitted to strike when a Man cannot otherwise defend himself; and it is
less a Mark of Esteem than Scorn, not to design to lift the Arm against those
we Rencounter. Learned Princes, the Saints of the Church, are every day treated
in the same manner, and after having refuted them, we celebrate their
Festivals, and recommend our selves to their Prayers.

CHAP. III. The true Definition of History, and its Picture drawn with all its
Parts.
LET us then make a Definition or Picture of History, that may be more Natural
than that Vossius has left us of her: And 'twill not only be more Natural, but
Entire and Complete, if we say, That History is a continued Narration of things
True, Great and Public, writ with Spirit, Eloquence and Judgment; for
Instruction to Particulars and Princes, and Good of Civil Society. The
Definition is not of those Slubber'd pieces, drawn by the Logicians at two
strokes; it is drawn out at length, but has nothing Vain or Superfluous. The
Kind, the Difference, the Form, and the End of History are there expressed.

First, The word History is a Generical Term, that is common to all Relations,
whether Spoke or Writ, in Prose or in Verse, True or False.

Secondly, It Is a continued Relation, that has all its Parts fastened together,
as those of the Body, or regular Edifice. And by that History is distinguished
from Annals, Journals and Gazettes, whose Parts not being joined, without
Correspondence, without Union, are only rude Heaps of Materials.

In the third place, It Is a Narration of Truth, by which it differs from
Heroic Poems and Romances, that are regular Compositions, and demand Unity and
Correspondence in all their parts; but through this Defect, all those Edifices,
where the Architecture appears so Just, and the Furniture so Rich, are only
Imaginary Structures, and Beautiful Castles in the Air.

But History requires not only they should be True, but Great and Politic; and
by that, in the fourth place, raises it self above Memoirs and Journals, that
entertain with Private and Domestic, and sometimes with Trifles, which
Posterity might very well be Ignorant of without Prejudice.

In the fifth place, History (I speak of the perfect) must be writ with Spirit,
Eloquence and Judgment. All true Histories, from whatever Parts they have come,
whether from Greece or Italy, have this Character, and that distinguishes from
Legends and Chronicles that come out of Religious Houses; as likewise from
Memoirs and Commentaries that are happily born in more polished places, but
want the Warmth of Wit, the Lights of Eloquence, with which the Structure of
History must be enlightened; the Ancient Masters have left us this by Tradition:
Cicero says, A good Historian must be a good Orator: Polybius affirms, A
Narration that barely recounts things done, and teaches not why, how, and for
what end, is only fit for Boys that would be amused, and not an History when
Men are to be instructed. Lucian has said the same after them. And History
being a Practical Philosophy, that teaches by Patterns and Examples; and this
Method of Teaching being more fine than that of Arguments in form, it therefore
demands a greater fineness of Wit, and if their Judgments fail, then whence
shall they have the Faculty of discerning Action and Things? Or if they be Dumb
or Mute, How shall they use the words to persuade Princes, Statesmen and
Generals; and of what shall they make Elogies and Crowns for Illustrious
Persons, if they are unprovided of Wit the Composer, and Eloquence the Matter
of them.

The Instruction of Particulars and Princes, and the Benefit of Civil Society
who make Profit by it, properly belongs to History, makes her exterior Form,
gives her a better Rank, and renders her far more considerable, than the
Fabulous Relations, that do but as Chess and Cards, represent the Adventures of
imagined Kings and Queens.

CHAP. IV. To what Art History belongs; And what Rank she holds in Learning.
The difference between an Historian, Orator and Poet.
HE that does not know History by this draught, will never know her by any
other: But let us Paint her as we please, the Masters are not agreed what Rank
she ought to hold in the Family of the Muses: Some place her under Grammar,
much to her Degradation, to draw her from Courts and Armies, and league her
with the Youth and Rubbish of the College. Besides, what Relation is there
between the Structure of Speech, and the Public Happiness, which is the end of
the Art of History. Others do, for a little more Honor, place her next to
Rhetoric; but yet between the end of an Orator, and that of an Historian,
there is such a Difference, that will never permit them to come together in any
one Point. What Agreement is there betwixt Truth, which is the Soul of History,
and ^ feigned Likeness, which is the Form of an Oration; and the great Effort
of an Orator, who never thinks to come off with better Success, than when he
has clothed his Fable in the Habit of Truth.

There are that have not distinguished Poetry from History, but by the Cadence
and Harmony of Versification; as if there has not been Poems in Prose, and
History in Verse. Cicero himself, who calls History a Free Poem, and writ the
Actions of his Consulship in Verse, did he think that Versification was a Chain
to Poetry; or do we find by his being so chained, his Sallies have been less
Frequent, or his Elevations less Bold.

Others have termed her a Poem on Foot, and delighted themselves with the
Expression: Those have never seen her but in the Annals of Popes, where she may
be properly said to go on foot; but had they looked into Livy and Tacitus, they
would have seen her march like a great Lady, with an Equipage to give her
Respect; though not altogether so great and Pompous, as that of Poetry that
goes always with four Horses and those winged.

Whatever may be the Equipage of one or the other, to express my self more
plainly, History has certainly much of the Air and Features of Poetry; but with
this Air and Features they are yet different in Matter, Form, Disposition and
Locution. A Poet contents himself with the Actions of a Year, which serves him
for a Foundation; he builds upon this, makes his own Materials, and gives what
Shape what Figure his Fancy pleases; deviates from Truth as much as possible,
and from particulars; and applies himself to make Models, form Likenesses and
Ideas; and as for the placing these Materials so worked, has no regard to the
order of time which is Natural, but endeavors after taking the Imagination and
Sight, and giving them Pleasure by Surprise.

The Historian labors upon other Matter, and after a different Manner: The
Actions of several Years, several Reigns, and many Ages, are his Materials,
which he places carefully as they are brought to him by others or his own
Industry; or if he alters the Truth by adding or diminishing, a Process is
taken out against him with as much Rigor, as against Falsifiers and Clippers
of Money. He avoids all Artifice in placing his Matters, Faithfully observes
Succession of time, and disposes every thing according to Nature. And by all
these differences, without touching the Style that I shall speak of in its due
place, may be seen that Poetry and History are very different, notwithstanding
the resemblance Casteluetro the Italian imagines to have found between them.

CHAP. V. That History has need of an Art to govern her: What are the Functions
of this Art? Authors that have writ of it.
AFter what has been said, who can doubt but that History has a peculiar Art
that directs and governs her, as well as Grammar Poetry and Logic. Syllogism
that is a small Structure of three Terms joined together, and may be compared
to those little Houses Children build with Cards upon Tables, cannot be raised
without the Art singular to it self: And History, that is an Edifice where so
many Ages, so many Reigns, Emperors and Kings must live for ever and be
preserved from perishing, where Fortune that throws down Empires, Policy and
Eloquence, the Science of War and Peace must reign; can she be composed
tumultuously, and at all Adventure raised without Line and Compass.

Nature that constantly keeps her course, and gives the same Forms to all her
Works, has no occasion for Art to assist her; the Chemist is not wanting to
make her Gold, the Painter to draw her Flowers, nor the Statuary to carve her
Men: But those Works that not being necessarily determined to any one Form, are
sometimes Perfect and sometimes Defective, according to the Device and Strokes
they receive from the Fancy or Hand of the Workman, must needs want the
Assistance of some Art, from whence they may take direction. And as by ill
Pictures compared with those of Myniord our French Raphael (not to search for
that in Italy we have in Paris) we may see there is an Art in Designing and
Drawing: So by the ill writ Histories of these times, compared with those of
Antiquity, we may be convinced Historians require some Art, that may conduct
and govern them in a Work so Important and Difficult, the Wit of Man cannot
attempt a greater.

The three Principal Functions of this Art, are choice of Materials that must
raise this Edifice of History; Disposition and Embellishing of them with such
Colors and Figures they are capable of receiving from the Style, of which
hereafter.

As to the rest, we must know this Art is not of that number, where a Man may
be Apprentice and Master in one day, since all the great Masters of Antiquity
have taken care to reduce it into Method and Rules. Cicero has done it several
times, but by occasion only and in passing. Dion Halicar. in his Observations
on the History of Thucydides, where the Censure upon ^his great Man, remains
Example and Lesson to all those that come after. Lucian has likewise done it
excel^ently, and with so pleasant an Air, he at once diverts and instructs his
Reader. And to pass by Pontin, Bodin, Vossius, de Mascordi, and several other
Moderns, our Worthy and Learned Monsieur de la Motte le Vayer, that seemed to
have a Library in his Head, and gave us another in his Works, would not let
this be the sole Matter without a touch of his Wit. And since this Work has
been under my hands, I am told Monsieur l' Abbe de Cassaigne has composed the
Art of History in Verse, of which, if it be permitted to judge by his other
Works, the Art Poetic of Horace will have but the Advantage of Antiquity. He
is no common Poet of Bagatels, his Muses are Noble, and entertain with nothing
but what is great: But what I esteem most is his Modesty, far from the
Presumption of some, who for a Madrigal, or ill contrived Stanza, that cost
them more Pains than Jupiter suffered when he brought forth Minerva, fancy
themselves deserving Incense and Worship from the People.

Dissertation III. Of the Parts of History.
CHAP. I. What are the Parts of History? What Actions ought to be the Matter?
The Opinions of the Ancients concerning the Truth of these Actions.
AND now having explicated in general, the order of Dissertation demands, I
should enter upon and unfold the several Parts of History; and remark to the
Historian, the Constitution and Measure that each requires. History is not so
simple a Composition as some believe, nor so diverse as others: Her Parts are
Narration, Judgment, Harangues and Digressions: The first is Essential, the
last Accidental, the second and third hold the Middle between one and the other.

Actions or things done, are the Matter of Narration; and Judgment and the
Principal Duty of the Historian, is to choose them True, Great, and as much as
he can Public. To begin with Truth, Whatever our Modern Accademist the learned
Monsieur le Vayer may say otherwise; there are no Reasons, no confronting of
Witnesses, that ought to be received against her; he will pardon me if in this
I pay less deference to him than to Cicero, who teaches me that Truth is the
Foundation of History. Polybius that says she is as the Line to the Rule, and
Eyes to an Animal. And to Dion Halicar. that gives her the Office of Priestess
in the Temple of Truth; and it is by that History is distinguished from
Romances. Judgments, Harangues and Digressions are common to both, and if it be
once permitted the Historian to be Faulty on this side, What will become of the
Public Faith? Where will she find another Support? How shall any Man confide
or put Confidence in her?

I am confident our Friend did not intend to shut the Temple of Truth against
History; he would only have understood as a new subject for his Skeptical
Notions, that all she says has not the same force as the Divine Oracles; and
that all Historians have not Sacrificed to her. I may say as much my self, and
yet more, namely, there are some that never entered this Temple, but have turned
their Backs to it as well as to that of Modesty, and yet have made a Revenue by
their fabulous and insipid Relations. Their Histories have been Just Histories,
as the Plummet Rules are Just Rules: And they are Historians of the same
Credit, and of the like Veneration with Lucian's Ass, or that o^ Apuleius.

CHAP. II. That Truth ought to be the Principa^ Care of the Historian: How far
this Care obliges him and what are the Laws.
LET the Historian then make Truth his Principal Care, and not fear that so
engaging himself* he should be overcharged with infinite Observations and
difficult Precepts. Cicero, and all others after him, have reduced them to
three, to say nothing False, not to lessen Truth, and to give every thing its
just Measure, without Elevation or Depressure. Of these three, the first gives
no place to Explications, Dispensations and Privileges; for there is no Falsity
so Innocent, nor of so little Consequence, the Historian can admit of, he is
not only forbid false Pistoles and Crowns, but Pence and Farthings.

By the Second, he must not be found at the foot of the Letter without some
Explication, for then History would be troubled in every Line with useless
Trifles, and sullied with Scandalous Debauches. An Historian must have regard
to the End, which is to Instruct and Profit, and take his Measures from thence,
of what ought to be said of withheld. Posterity might very well have been
without the Knowledge, how often Charles the Fifth drank at every Meal, and how
far his Extravagance run, when the Thoughts of Health and Conscience were laid
aside. If those notable Remarks had remained in the Breast of the Historian,
there had been no Injury done; and what need that future Ages should be made
acquainted, so Religious an Emperor was not always Chaste.

By the Third, Amplifications that are Virtues, and give the Merit to an
Orator, are defended by the Historian. This is not so easily observed, as those
may believe, that know not the Movements of a Pen, conducted by an Imagination
Fertile in Noble Expressions, and Ambitious of gaining Reputation. It may be
said under Favor of Antiquity, her best Authors have been loose in the
Observation of this Precept. Alexander, Hannibal, Scipio, Marius and Caesar,
were great Men, nay Colossos amongst Men; but Quintus Curtius, Titus Livy,
Salust and Plutarch, contented not themselves with their Natural Greatness, but
built them Bases, that make them appear by the half greater than their Natural
Proportion. An Historian must leave to the Orators and Poets, the use of these
Figures that carry their Subjects beyond Measure, even to Monsters, and abstain
from Colors that flaire too much, and change the Face of things by Excess of
Luster.

CHAP. III. The Sources by which Falsities enter History; And first of
Ignorance: Of the Difficulties in discovering Truth: Ways of illuding Judgment:
An Ancient and Modern Example thereupon.
AN Historian Lover of Truth, and Religious Observer of her Precepts, must with
Care avoid the three Springs from whence ordinarily flow by diverse Conduits all
that is false in History, viz. Ignorance, Hatred and Flattery. There is an
Affected Ignorance that is Faulty, and an Ignorance through Infirmity that is
Innocent: Of the first are those that turn their Backs to the Light for fear of
being informed, will have no Guides, at best but ill ones; love rather to
wander about, than follow the straight Path, because it agrees not with the
Obliquity of their Passions. And the Ignorance of these People, being an evil
Disposition in their Will, rather than Understanding, there is nothing wanting
to their Cure, but to show them their way, lend them a Hand, and carry the
Light before them; nothing but to purge their Will from an embued Hatred, Envy
or Animosity: That being done the Film will fall from their Eyes, the Vapors
dissipate, and they be enabled to follow Truth, or at least admit the Conduct
of good Guides. But before this, they must not be suffered to put Pen to Paper,
otherwise in the place of natural well-composed Bodies, they will form but
Specter and Phantoms; they will besmear and cover with Dirt all those that are
not in their liking; Deck trim and Perfume others and with an Insolent Scorn o^
Public Faith, all the Buildings of their Histories will be only a Theater of
Illusions and Impostures.

The Second Source of Ignorance follows the Condition of Mankind, to whom
Nature has not given Eyes behind and before, to see the past and to come: Those
that she has bestowed reach but a short space; and in that space arise so many
Mists, are formed so many Clouds, that either cover or change the Face of
things, that ordinarily they think they see what really they do not. The
Historian need not trouble himself for the Faults he falls into of this Nature,
through the weakness of his Sight: More ^s required than is due, when he is
obliged to warrant all that he says: if he must be Sworn upon all Occasions,
and make Profession of his Faith at the end of every Line, what Spectacles must
he get to see distinctly at the distance of three or four hundred Years, to
perceive yet further things that Antiquity has shut up in the Coverings of a
Time Immemorial. If we know not in the King's Bedchamber to day, what passes
in the Closet; How shall we know in the Reign of Lewis the Fourteenth, what was
consulted by all the Lewis's, Henry's and Charles's, from Clovis to this
present.

Without searching into the lost Times of Antiquity, Do all the Affairs
Contemporary with an Historian fall under his Knowledge? Sees he any thing else
but the Bark and Coverings of things done before his Eyes: And what serves him
the sight of the Watch, without that of the Springs and Movements; or who can
convey them so Pure and Sincere, as the Public Faith and the Truth of History
demands from him?

Letters of Princes, Memoirs o^ Statesmen, Instructions of Ambassadors, are
great Succors: But Prince and Statesmen, do they not sometimes prevaricate in
their Writings; are their Pens of greater Credit than their Lips? And are not
Ambassadors necessitated to deceive, being first deceived themselves? Wars,
Revolts, Battles and Sieges are as public Shows, every one sees the Machines
move, and the changing of the Scene; but the Springs that make these Motions
and Revolutions, are they exposed to every view? Do Princes commit their
Secrets to Gazetteers, and inform them of the Motives for which they take up
Arms? And what account can they give, if they are not well informed themselves;
if they see not their Affairs but in the Lights and Colors with which they are
disguised? If they are at sometimes but Actors of Pieces composed by their
Servants?

Without traveling into Macedonia to that Philip, who by his Contempt of a
Vain and Licentious Woman, brought upon himself a heavy War. In the Descent the
English made upon the Isle of Rhee, the King of England thought he had
undertaken a Religious one, of as great Merit as that of the Holy Land; when
'twas a War of pure Gallantry, made by the amorous Inclinations of his
Favorite. Things of this Nature arrive every day in the Motions of States,
where Men figure to themselves great Engines and Wheels, when there is nothing
but a Plank and end of a Cord; some Resentment, Caprice or Love-Toy that
disturbs these great Bodies, and puts them out of Humor.

CHAP. IV. What Certainty ought to be expected from History. What Faith given
her. The Indulgence to be granted Historians: And the middle way to be held
between too Easy, and too Curious a Belief.
LET Men judge then, whether it is reasonable to exact Infallibility in an
Historian; or that what he writes should be of the same certitude with what the
Evangelists have written? And whether it is not Just to excuse the Weakness of
his Sight, and pardon the Mistakes, when it happens he gives Credit to the
False for the True; amidst so many Obstacles that stop the passage to Truth, so
many Vails that cover, and unfaithful Guides that turn him out of his way.

It Is the part of an Honest Man, as Aristotle says, not to search for more
Certainty than the thing will permit. Let us keep within the bounds of a Just
Commerce; and as we give not a Divine Faith to History, let us not demand a
Divine Certainty; let us not be more Severe than St. Augustine, who absolves the
Historian that lies not of himself and with design; that is unfaithful only in
Relations brought him by others: Neither let us have that idle Credulity of
some People, who fear they have injured their Neighbors in not crediting some
History, it may be that of John of Paris or Melusine.

There is a middle way to be held between the Easiness of those that believe
all, and the Obstinacy of those that believe nothing. The one savours of Folly,
the other of Impudence. For though it has been said all Men are Liers, it does
not infer in all Purposes, and at all times. All Historians have had a weak
Sight, and failed in some things (I except only those conducted by the Holy
Spirit) but for two or three Mistakes let us not be so Rigorous to condemn all
History. The Nine Muses of Herodotus have lived with Reputation hitherto, and
no body thought them deserving the Fire or Extinction; because sometimes they
have turned from the Truth toward the Fable. And though in what relates to the
Jews and Christians, Tacitus has been convicted of many Falsehoods, yet he has
not been drove from Libraries where he governs in chief.

On the other side, we must not be such Flatterers, and so complaisant to
Antiquity, and to those that have failed with design and through Malice, as to
take their part against Justice and Truth. The Athenians erected a Statue to
Berosus with a Golden Tongue: The Romans another to Josephus the Jewish
Historian. But we will not for that Idolize Berosus and his Errors; much less
Josephus for the Heathen Judaism he has framed in his History, in which he has
been more Impious than the Philistians that placed the Ark by Dagon. If they
joined them, 'twas without Confusion; but this Man has made of Judaism and
Paganism mixed together, something more Monstrous than the Fabulous Relations
of Centaurs and Lapithae.

I am not the first nor alone that have complained; I speak but after Baronius,
Melchior-canus, Salmeron, Maldonat, and many others, great Churchmen and
Scholars, upon whose Depositions there is neither Jew nor Infidel but would
condemn this Writer. And to make it appear, that what I say of his Gentile
Judaism is no Chimera of my making, it is but to remember that Text in Exodus,
where God commanding the Jews to respect those that govern, forbids their
speaking Ill of Gods: And according to the ordinary Phrase of Scripture, by the
Name of Gods, is meant the Magisrates and Princes of the People. Josephus
changes this Article of the Law in favor of Dagon and Moloch, as well as
Jupiter and Juno. And where Moses says, Thou shall not detract from the Gods,
nor Blaspheme the Prince of thy Nation: He makes him say, Let no body Curse the
Gods that are owned for such in other Cities. And more to provide for the
Safety of Idols, and to put their Altars and Offerings out of Danger, after
having taken care of their Reputation, he imputes falsely to the Legislator this
Law, so contrary to his other Laws, Let none Pillage the Temples of Strangers,
nor Violate the Offerings made to any God whatsoever. The Sacrificers of
Samaria, the Priests of Baal, Could they have Preached more advantageously for
their Idols, than this Priest of the Tribe of Levi? Is there any thing more
contrary to the words of Moses, who recommends so strictly to the People of God
in Exodus and Deuteronomy, to beat down the False Gods, to break their Statues,
and set Fire to their Woods and Temples. Yet this Man makes such a singular
Profession of the Truth, as if the Pens of Moses, Daniel or Isaiah, had not
been more Sincere and Faithful than his.

CHAP. V. That the Historian, curious of Truth, must not trust to Fame. The
Character of Fame. Partial Relations less to be relied on. That he ought to be
without Passion; as well as Country* and Party.
NOtwithstanding there are Remedies for these Inconveniences; and since the
first degree of doing well, where Perfection is drein'd from all Defects, is
not to be attained by Humane Frailty: Let us endeavor after the Second, where
small Faults are passed over; and according to Horace, Those esteemed Perfect,
who have the least Imperfection. To compass this end, there are three things to
be observed in the choice of Matters the Historian would work upon: The first
is, Not to take them from Fame but very seldom, and with great Discretion. The
Second, To draw them yet more rarely from the Writings of Interested Persons or
Enemies. The Third, To make his Principal Fund, Relations, Memoirs, Letters and
Instructions of those who have been either Movers, or Spectators of Affairs,
that have had them in their Hands, or before their Eyes.

First, He must not trust to Fame, she is a Worker of Impostures and Calumnies
in every Language, every day: She is accused of Falsity every day; stands
convicted without ever Blushing or correcting her Manners: She has a hundred
Mouths ascribed her, and not one of them can repeat the same thing twice, or
any thing like it. In one word, She raises invisible Armies, and with one
Breath defeats others that remain entire; after the Rout she Kills and restores
to Life; takes away and gives Victories to whom she pleases; and in despite of
Fortune, Crowns the Vanquished, and overthrows the Victorious. What Truth can
we expect from such a Courier, who has nothing ordinarily but False News in her
Mouth? Mailes filled with false Relations, and false Letters. And will not that
Historian oblige Posterity, that leaves an Extract of all these Vain and Idle
Things? And what I say of Fame, may be likewise said of Gazetteers, those
Secretaries without Credit, who sell themselves to write a thousand Falsities,
and distribute them every Week, with the loss of their Reputation.

Secondly, Since the labor of an Historian is different from that of a Poet,
who makes his own Materials, as well as the Figure he gives them: He must do as
the Architect, inform himself of the Quarries from whence he must fetch the
Stone and Marble for the Structure of his Edifice. He must remass all the
Memoirs, Relations, Acts public and private, that regard the Time, the Persons
and Actions, of which he would compose his History: But he must have a care
those Pieces be authentic, well esteemed, and purged from Falsifications and
Disguisements, that carry the Passion of Parties; otherwise he will impose upon
the Public Faith, and the Deceit will pass from his own Age to Posterity.
Above all things he must abstain from certain Sources, from whence there is
nothing to draw but Filth and Venom.

Following this Rule, and being to write of Charles the Ninth, he will not
search for Truth in the Memoirs of Colligny: And to make a History of his
Successor, he will as little consult the Relations of his Mynions, though there
remains but that of the Guises. If he is to write of the Popes, and Court of
Rome, he will not do it from the Memoirs come out of Geneva: And if he is to
speak of Jesuits, he will forbear giving Credit to the Holland Gazettes, and
Faith of Heretics, whether known or disguised, Ancient or Modern.

If the President de Thou (otherwise a great Man) had thought of these Rules,
and had distrusted as he ought the Dutch Libels infected with the Poison of
Heresy, he had left us a History more correct and less subject to offend the
Curious in the matter of Belief. And if others that have followed him, had
addressed themselves to Streams more Pure than those that flow from the Lake of
Geneva, the Filth they have sucked up to bespatter the Roman Prelates and
Catholic Princes, had not recoiled upon their own Works, Conscience and
Reputation; but they thought that a heap of Impostures and Calumnies drawn from
the Scandalous Chronicle of Henry the Third, and the Libels of the League and
Hugonots, would raise their Name; and after that Salust, Livy and Tacitus,
darkened with their Eclat, be less esteemed, and give place to them.

But because Ignorance is not the greatest Source of Falsity in History, and
that the most part enter through Malice and Flattery, and the Affections that
cause them: The Care the Historian must have to furnish himself with good
Instructions and Memoirs, will serve him but in little stead, if he does not
Disinterest and Purge himself from all sorts of Passion: Where Interest is
Master, Truth is seldom harkned to, and less where Malice is Mistress; and the
Pen of a Writer must be very steady, this Passion does not turn awry.

From thence comes the Contrarieties are found in Spanish and English
Histories, when they speak of France or Frenchmen: and in those of the French,
when they speak of Spaniards and English. Though of all the Writers, of what
Nation soever, there are none that write with more Sincerity and Truth, defile
their Pens with less Gaul, and do greater Right to the Merit and Valor of
their Enemies than ours. It Is a Sight capable to divert the most Melancholy
and Chagrin, to see in the History of Sandoual the French fly before the
Spaniards, like the Game before the Falcon. When of all People, they can best
witness the French are not accustomed to use their Spurs with their Swords in
their Hands. And it is not less pleasant to see in Guicciardin Charles the
Eighth enter Florence in the Habit of Pacolet; when this little Man he turns
into Ridicule with the Wooden Sword and Spurs he sends him, forced his way
through the Bowels of all the Republic of Italy. Let the Historian then
possess himself he is of all Countries or none; that he is without Father and
Mother; without Genealogy or Race, as the ancient King of Salem: That he is of
no Party but that of Truth, whatever Livery he wears, or whatever Language he
speaks; and that he owes her all his Worship and Devotion, in whatsoever
Climate he is found: And that being Debtor (to use the words of St. Paul) to
the Fools and Wise, Barbarians and Greeks, his Honor, as well as Conscience,
is obliged to do Justice, and render every one their due.

CHAP. VI. That nothing ought to enter History, but what is Great and
Illustrious. That trifling things ought to have no Place there.
I Have been a little long upon this Article of Truth, because she is the Soul
and Form of History: And the Historian, whatever Merit he may otherwise have,
without her, cannot acquit himself of his Duty, nor sustain the Name he bears.
Truth suffices not, the things that enter the Composition of History, they must
have a solid Grandeur, and Eclat arising from their Nature. It Is what Ammianus
would say, when he tells us History moves but in high places, marches but upon
the Pinnacles and Points of great Affairs.

The reason is, History being an Exemplary Philosophy, invented for the
Instruction of the Great, she ought to take from them the Measure of her
Examples, and not give them but their Proportion, esteeming them as they are,
Giants amongst Men; and Giants charged with the Burden of the World, as the
Scripture expresses it, will not like to have Puppets proposed for their
Imitation.

On the other side, The good Form of Government, the Happiness of Civil
Society, the Peace and Repose of Kingdoms, being the principal End of History,
is it to be thought she can arrive at this end, by the relation of Drunken
Bouts, and the Extravagance of Carnavals. Another Intention is to eternise the
Glory of Illustrious Persons, and preserve them from the Ruin of Age, and
Obliquity of Time. And who but knows, Glory is a Light that reflects not, but
such Qualities as render Kings and Princes greater than their Fortunes, with
all the Grandeur of their Train, Equipage and Riches: For if that is all they
are, we may say they are only Dwarfs upon gilded Pillars.

A Fourth End of History, Is to quicken Noble Minds, and press them forward
with an Emulation of the great things she recounts. And a Fifth, To instruct
the present and to come, by the past, and by that to profit the Public. Can
she attain these Ends so high and great, by the Relation of Bagatells? Was it
the Lance of Achilles, or his Lyre, that stung the Heart of Alexander with
Jealousy? Was it the Bacchanals and Debauches of Alexander, that disquieted
the Mind of Caesar, and troubled his Repose? And will not Posterity be much
obliged by that Historian, that leaves her a Lift of all those Danced in the
Mask at the Marriage of such a Prince or Princess? That leaves an Account of
the Expense there made in Meats and Comfitures? The Italians, though accustomed
to Contemn all that is not of Italy, deside their Corio where the Army of John
Galeass Lord of Milan most engages his Pen, he abruptly breaks off, and takes
occasion, from the Marriage of Valentine with a Son of France, to enter into
the Closet of the new married Lady, search her Cabinet, and make a long
Inventory of all the Trifles he there finds, to the number of her Chess-men,
Knives and Clocks. Did he not believe these rare things carried into France,
would there be Demonstrations of the Riches and Magnificence of Italy? You may
see others make a reckoning of all the Habits and Linen in the Wardrobe of a
Prince, and the Furniture of his Chambers; that will teach you the Names of his
Dogs and Horses; tell you how many Trumpets he has in his Troops, how many
Chariots, and Ovenforks in his Equipage, and of what Stuff are the Coverings of
his Mules. I should like as well one that was to make me the Description of a
Palace, should leave out the Courts, the Portico's, Galleries, Halls and
Chambers, and entertain me with the Number, Form and Painting of Weathercocks.

CHAP. VII. That Military Actions are not the Principal Matter of History. The
Historian ought to be oftener in the Closet than Army. That he ought to shun the
Affectation of Mavelous things; and abstain as much from Defect as Excess, in
the Relation of Miracles.
OThers again on the contrary esteeming nothing great but the Actions of War,
are always in some besieged Town, or Army besieging; speak of nothing but
Combats and Attacks, Ovens and Mines; nothing to be heard but Bombs and Cannon;
as if they had no body to instruct but the Court of Guards and Musketeers.

War is not, as these believe, the best Theater for History; Sieges, Assaults
and Battles, are not her most useful Lessons; otherwise Statesmen, Magistrates,
and the Long Robe, would learn nothing from her; and all her Informations would
but reduce Fire and Blood into Method; and serve only for Ravage and
Destruction.

Let the Historian know then the Closet is his proper place; that he ought to
be there longer and oftener than in the Army: That the explaining of Councils,
unfolding Intrigues, and discovering Cabals, are more his Business, than
Desolations, Burnings and Massacres: That he did not take Pen in Hand to learn
a private Sentinel to manage his Sword, but to teach Princes the Art of
Reigning, and Statesmen the Art of Serving: To unfold Reasons of State, and the
Secrets of Government: And this he does by disintangling the Motives and
Pretexts of Affairs; by following their Movements and Evasions to the
Fountainhead. And as the greatest Advantages of History are attained by this
Means, it is to that he owes his greatest Application, and all the force of his
Wit.

In this Article that regards the Grandeur of things, there is another Defect
that ought not to be forgotten: Some, whether through a vain Affectation of
things Great and Mavelous, that must not be so much sought after in History,
nor are not of that value as in a Poem, or by a disordered desire to nourish
the Curiosity of Readers, and fasten their Attention, fill their Histories with
Miracles and Prodigies they bring in from all Parts. And rather than want,
assist at the Assemblies of Demons and Magicians, to gather what may fill the
Vacancies of certain People, with whom the False and Monstrous have better
Reception than Truth and Right.

Others more bold in Heroic Prose, divide Elephants in two at one blow with a
Sword, strike down Dragons of twenty Fathoms long with a little Wand. And for
that it is in Scripture, that Sampson defeated an Army with the Jaw Bone of an
Ass; Procopius, not to be behind-hand, tells you of a Thracian Soldier, that
with one single Arrow put to flight an Army of Goths. Paul Venetian, a greater
Architect than the Undertakers of Towers and Pyramids, if I am not mistaken,
has built a Town of fifty Leagues in compass, and in it placed 10000 Bridges of
so monstrous a height, the greatest Vessels under Sail might pass commodiously
under the Arches. A Town so Great and Magnifick, better Merits to be placed in
that fine World, Lucian, more Happy than Columbus, first discovered in the
Globe of the Moon.

You may see others follow a Method very different from this, that have so much
Care their Works should not savor the Air of a Cloister, or touch upon the
Legend for all the World, they will not mention any Miracle whatsoever. The
Heathen Authors have been more Religious and more Faithful, and have had more
Zeal for their False Gods, far from suppressing the Events by which their Power
and Might is made known, they repeat them till they are rendered disagreeable.
In Livy and Tacitus you will find nothing at the beginning and end of every
Year, but Prodigies and Expiations of them. And shall a Christian Writer, to
preserve the Reputation of a great Wit, or avoid the Railery of a few
Libertines, leave out the Relations that are as Witnesses of his Faith, and
Proofs of the Power and Providence of that God he adores? As if it were more
the Mark of Sense, and for the Interest of Mankind, to recite the Cruelties of
one Prince, and the Debauches of another, than the Wonderful Works by which God
is pleased from time to time to awaken our Faith.

Josephus the Jew has given the first Example of this sort of Infidelity, to
make his Court to the Roman Princes in whose Reigns he writ, as Leon Castrius
has remarked. He has suppressed, disguised or weakened the Wonders done in the
time of his Forefathers, as if he feared the God of Sion should appear more
Puissant and Great in the Eyes of the Gentiles, than the Gods of the Capitol.
That Miraculous Meteor that was during so many Years Conductor of the Jews,
sometimes a Cloud, sometimes a Pillar of Fire, appears not in his History;
where his evil Faith has dissipated it, for fear it should give Offense to the
sight of the Gentiles. It Is true, he has not suppressed the passage of the Red
Sea; but in the manner he speaks of it, he leaves a Doubt, whether the strange
Road by which the People passed, was made by some natural cause, or by virtue
of some Power Superior to Nature. And after comparing this Miraculous Event,
with what arrived to the Great Alexander when marching into Persia, he passed
the Sea of Pamphilia, he leaves every one to believe what they please of one
and the other; showing enough by this Profane Ambiguity, they were of equal
weight, or none at all in his belief. His Prevarication is yet more bold, and
his evil Faith more open, in what regards the passage of Jourdan. The Holy
Scripture tells us in express terms, That as soon as the Priests that carried
the Ark had set their feet in the Water, one part of the River returned toward
the Spring, the other toward the Sea, and the People passed over dryshod.
Josephus finds the Miracle so strong, and yet of so little Credit, that to
reduce it to an Appearance that better pleases his Palate than the Truth, he
tells you that three days after God made the Promise, the Waters of Jourdan
being abated, the People passed over the Shallow. And because from the words of
the Scripture one cannot figure any thing more Mavelous, he adds the Troop of
Women and Children were ranged in the midst of the People to prevent their
being carried away by the Rapidity of the Current. What has he done with the
Burning Mountain that made the Waters return to their Source? Where has he
placed the twelve Stones set upon the Shore in Memory of so great a Miracle? He
Suppresses all that, to conserve the Reputation of a Judicious Historian; and
had rather be esteemed Prevaricator amongst the Jews, than Fabulous with the
Romans. In all this it may be said, he has made as many Apostasies as Falsities
against the Holy Scripture. He ceases not nevertheless to continue in Esteem,
because of those that value him, some are ignorant of his Unfaithfulness; and
others trouble not themselves, loving rather a Falsity well disguised, than a
plain Truth.

CHAP. VIII. Whether Private Actions may be made use of in History? And what
ought to be those received.
IT may be here demanded, whether Private Actions may not have place in
History, without derogating from her Dignity? It Is answered, Instructing the
Readers, and Profit of the Public, being the Rule by which an Historian ought
to judge of things that are used in the Structure of his Edifice, without
Scruple he may admit of Private Actions, where he remarks some strong and
lively Character of Justice, Valor, Moderation, or Continence Extraordinary.
Because such Actions are the Pictures with which the Temple of History ought to
be imbellished; and those that enter this Temple, make Rules and Lessons from
the sight of these Pictures.

As for Actions that have nothing of noble, but are of low and mean Nature,
what should they do in History? Of what use would they be? Let Gaming, Hunting
and Dancing be far from her: 'Twould be more seemly to see in a Temple or
Palace, the Signs of Shops in the room of Hangings and Pictures. Not but that
Princes may sometimes permit such things; but there is difference between what
may and what ought to be done; between Indulgence and Obligation. And it must
be remembered, it is Obligation, and not Indulgence, distinguishes a Prince from
a Particular. Alexander loved the Pleasure of a good Table, and Julius Caesar
hated not the Ladies; but it was not at Table Alexander acquired the Surname
of Great; nor did the first Caesar make himself Master of the Empire in the
Closet of Cleopatra.

CHAP. IX. Whether the Law of Truth obliges the Historian to keep nothing to
himself? Whether nothing be owing to the public Virtue and good Example?
Whether it is not better to Suppress the Vices of the Great, than publish them.
THere remains to examine, whether an Historian can in Conscience, and without
Scandal, bloody and defile his Paper with infinite Cruelties and Filth, to
which he will be obliged, in case he observes the second Rule, To hold nothing
from the Truth. If I may be credited, all these things ought to be Sacrificed
to the Innocence of History, and the public Virtue.

First, History that ought to be the Governess of Life, and Guide of our
Actions, becomes a Scandalous Governess, a Dissolute Guide, by the ill Examples
she exposes; that have so much more weight the higher they descend. Is there a
more Infamous School of Vice, a more Villainous place of Scandal, and more
Dangerous, than the History of the Twelve Cesars writ by Suetonius? And without
mounting so high, have we not lately seen with what Boldness the public Virtue
has been violated by a Scandalous Detracting History, that was introduced into
all the Closets and Stre^ts, and sullied with its Filth, even the Spouse of
Jesus Christ? How many Maids and Women, by the reading of this Petronius
Travesty, have ceased to be what they were before, and said after the Example
of the young Debauchee in the Comedy mentioned by St. Austin, Why should not I
do as such a Duchess, What such a Princess has done? Owe I more to my
Conscience, more to my Reputation, than they owe to theirs? And by what right
shall Virtue, so free in a Palace, be constrained in a Private House?

Secondly, The Pen gives no right to meddle with the Reputation of others. If
Detraction of one Person from another, be a Sin against the Laws of Charity and
Justice, what will be that of an Historian, that is a public Person, made in
the sight and hearing of all People and all Ages?

On the other side, Truth being to History as Form to Matter, if the half be
taken away, if Liberty be not given him to unfold all that he finds true under
his Hands, she will be but half formed, the Historian half mute, half lame, and
not able to acquit but one half of his Duty.

Besides, History, as has been said, is a Philosophy free from the Difficulty
and Perplexity of Arguments, but rich in Examples, that concludes with more
Right, and persuades with more Force. And this Force of Persuasion is not only
from good Examples; the ill exposed and well employed, have the same Effect;
nay, work sometimes more quick, whether because an evil Action is more lively
and penetrating than a good; or that Man being more sensible of Shame than
Honor, wants greater speed to Glory, than to help him fly Infamy. Who has not
heard the Custom amongst the Spartans, to make the Extravagant Actions of their
Drunken Servants, Lessons of Temperance to their Children. And how many Princes
have been kept within the bounds of Duty, by the Eternal Chastisement they have
seen the Evil suffer upon the Theater of History.

There is a third Reason, that proves it the Duty of an Historian, to be as
free in declaring the Vices as Virtues of great Persons: He is Judge, and
Judgment reaches the Bad as well as the Good; His Function is a public
Witness, and it is the part of a Witness to conceal nothing. And in fine, It Is
the public Interest, that great Men and Princes, to whom the Laws are but
Cobwebs, should have some Bridle to stop them. And to a People that take
Religion for a Fantasm, and Hell for a Bugbear to frighten Children, we cannot
propose any thing stronger, than the Eternal Infamy is prepared for them in
History.

CHAP. X. That the Right of History permits the Historian all sorts of Truth.
The Rules to be observed in the use of this Right; with Conscience and Honor,
and without Scandal and Prejudice to the Public Virtue.
IT is my Opinion upon these Reasons, An Historian, as Public Witness and
Judge, has the right of Evidencing the Bad as the Good, and to judge of one and
the other. But he must be careful not to make his Sovereign Right a Sovereign
Injustice; to make of it a Right of Calumny and Detraction. And to the end he
may use it with Innocence and Desert, he must above all things, particularly
apply himself to distinguish the False from the True; the Certain from the
Uncertain; and the Private from the Public. This Distinction presupposed,
First he must reject all sorts of Falsities, and guard himself from imposing
any thing, whether he himself speaks, or another for him. An ordinary Artifice
in Calumniating Writers, who to distribute more boldly their Impostures, lend
them to others they introduce in the Scene. He that does after this manner,
deserves to have the Mask taken off, and be paid in the same false Coin he pays
others.

Secondly, He must not deliver any thing that is Doubtful or Uncertain, but
impose this Retention upon himself by the Christian Law, forbidding such a
Distribution upon severe Damage, whether it be upon the Reputation of those he
rashly Censures, or the Conscience of those to whom he gives reason of Scandal,
and to judge indiscreetly. Let him Praise as much as he pleases the Doubtful
and Uncertain; what mistake he may make on this side, being to the Injury of no
body, none will reproach him, no Process be entered against him, and the Wise
will be of his Opinion: If finding himself in these Circumstances, he chooses
the more favorable for his Neighbor, and hazards a doubtful Truth for an
assured Charity; but when he falls upon Censure, he must remember Uncertainty
dispences not with the Respect he owes his Neighbors Reputation; and that he
cannot sully it, though agreeable to Fame, without violating the common right,
and doing a public Injustice.

By the same reason, Let him know he is prohibited from looking too curiously
into other Peoples Concerns, to enter the Closets, lift up the Vails, and draw
the Curtains that cover the Secrets of Families, and search wherewithal to
entertain the Curiosity of some always covetous of Novelties, and ready for
Detraction. His Prerogative reaches not Secret things, that are in regard to
him as if they were not; and Detraction calls for Reparation, and Subjects to
Punishments, as well as Calumny. And if the Church her self, to whom the Son of
God committed the Keys, assumes not the Authority of opening what is shut, and
judging of hidden things, much less ought it to be allowed History. To
attribute to her self any thing like it, the Consequence would be dangerous: No
place safe where this Evil would not penetrate, followed with ill Presaging
Birds, no Reputation free from their Venomous Bills.

In the Fourth place, Since the Perfection of a Civil Life is the end where his
Labors tends, he must expose nothing to the public View that has not regard
to it, must therefore abstain from all sorts of Scandalous Relations, as are
those that serve but to make People lose the Respect they owe their Prelates
and Princes, the Hierarchy, Church and public Government; and gives way to
Heresies, Revolts and Schisms, both in Church and State.

In the Fifth place, Where the Connection of his Matters, and the Composure of
his Works, obliges him to represent the Vices of any that will make a Figure in
History; he must remember in such Representations, to spare as much as he can
the public Virtue; and not give any Color, let fall any Expression, or leave
any Image, that will offend her sight: It must suffice him to explain himself
in such general Terms that cannot cause a Blush or evil Thought, and to touch
them but in passing, and make have away as from an infected place, where his
own and others Modesty are in danger. Salust, Titus Livius and Tacitus, have in
this a Retention of great Instruction and Example for Christian Writers: And
it is mavelous to see with what respect those that adored Vicious Gods, have
written of the Vices of Men; they seem to blush for Human Kind, and their words
as a Vail cover their Shame as much as possible.

Suetonius is censured by all the World for the Impurity of his History, which
is made an Accademy of Debauchery; but if Suetonius a Heathen is blamed for his
Boldness, what must they say of a Christian that has made a French Copy of all
these Latin Obscenities; introduced into the Streets, and Closets of great
Ladies, those Monsters of Impurity? And how will this Translator cleanse
himself before God, from all the Filth with which he has sullied his
Imagination and Hands, and perhaps the Modesty and Conscience of those that an
evil Curiosity has carried to those Infamous Sights.

Dissertation IV.
CHAP. I. That the Historian has Right to Judge of Things and Actions. Of the
Faults he must avoid in the use of this Right; And first Rashness.
JUdgment that follows the Narration of things, is the second part of History;
and this though the less in Mass, ought not to be the least in Wit. It Is here
the Knowledge of Good and Evil must be unfolded; the Politic and Moral have
their place; that Virtue is crowned and Vice punished; that the Historian
(hardly otherwise more than a Tale-teller) becomes a Statesman and a Soldier;
makes himself Judge of Princes and their Ministers; and Arbitrator of their
good and evil Actions: It Is here he gives Instructions and Counsels, Degrees of
Honor and Infamy, establishes a School for the time to come, and a Tribunal
for the past.

The Reason, Opinion and Example, of great Men, of right belong to the
Historian, contrary to those would reduce him to the simple Function of a
Gazetteer. Because History (as has been said more than once) is a kind of Civil
Philosophy, and her proper Office is to instruct the present by the past: And
how shall she acquit her self of that Office, if the right of Judging, if the
use of Reflection were taken from her. It Is by that she distinguishes Good from
Evil; that she makes Applications of good and evil Actions; and shows the way
ought to be held and ^voided. Without that she is of ^o greater Service than a
Gazette; and Polybius speaks but as a Comedian. Cicero, that has drawn her
Picture more exactly in three Lines* ^han others have done in gross Volumes,
contents not himself the Historian should unfold the Councils and Motives that
precede Actions, he will have him declare what he judges of one and the other.
And have we not Historians that have performed this Duty: Those that oppose the
Commentaries of Caesar, ought to observe this is the Duty but of a True History,
that Commentaries, Journals, Memoirs and Registers, are dispensed with. This
Law so generally observed, ceases not to be difficult to keep; and I know no
part of History ought to be managed more adroitly and with more fineness. That
the Historian may not then act Tumultuously, and without Method, to the end his
Judgments may not be judged, or at least favorably, let him have a care to
secure them free from Rashness, Malice, Importunity and Disagreement. He will
avoid Rashness, if he submit to the Government of Prudence, that will never
permit him to pronounce, but upon an entire Knowledge, whether of the Grounds
and Events of Affairs, or the Motives by which they have moved, and the Rounds
they have been made take. He that ventures to judge by the Outside and Show,
Subjects himself to great Contempt; and if there wants but a false Light or
Color to give another Face, and make another Appearance, what would be the
Imprudence and Rashness of a Writer, that gives definitive Judgments upon one
of these Lights or Colors that first strike his sight.

If there be Rashness in judging Humane things by the outside; what
Indiscretion will that Writer be guilty of, who having not the least Tincture
of Theology, seen but the outside of Schools where she teaches, thinks himself
able to penetrate Secrets the Cherubims cover with their Wings; dare make
Decisions where the Doctors are in Difference, and pronounce boldly for the one
against the other; and turn the Keys of St. Peter, and the Authority of his
Successors; and submit to the Capacity of his weak Head the highest of all
Crowns. At the sight of such an idle Rashness, will they not cry out against
the Profane, that dares put his Hand to the Ark; against the Owl that has the
boldness to enter that Light, where the Eagles themselves are dazzled.

And when any one finds himself enlightened enough to judge the Affairs of the
World, he must not do it in the Nature of a Decree or manner decisive; it will
be well to do it in doubtful Terms, and after the Skeptical way, that having no
defense for the certainty of things, judge but by their Appearances. As long as
he holds within these bounds, no body can reproach him of ill; and his
Judgments will not be subject to disanulling; but in the Affairs of his
Knowledge, and of which he has seen the Springs and Movements; he may leave
Expressions of Doubt and Conscience, and propose his Judgments affirmatively,
provided he does not mingle the Venom of Malice.

CHAP. II. Of Malice in judging the Frailty of all Men. The Care an Historian
ought to take to preserve himself from it. Of the Brevity required. Reflections
upon Philip Commines.
MALICE is a Fault the Historian must avoid with Care, and yet whether
Corrupted Nature renders our Judgments evil by the same means she does our
Wills, or by the Artifices of Self-love we are as easily persuaded to the
Prejudice of another as our own Advantage; or whether yet the Vanity of
Malicious Interpretations, that seem to come from a greater degree of Light
than others, are more pleasing to Humane Wit; it is hard for an Historian to
defend himself from the Flattery of this Malicious Address, to find the
Imperfections of every thing, and incline it to evil. Salust and Tacitus are
particularly accused of this Fault; and Tacitus has yet the Misfortune above
Salust, that Wits the most Fertile in Sinister Interpretations and Malicious
Commentaries, acknowledge him for their Master.

An Historian must not only avoid Malice, the mark of a Spirit as full of Venom
as the Serpent said to Poison all he looked on, but in Affairs where
Uncertainty and Obscurity leave some place for Indulgence; he must rest his
Conjectures upon Colors the most safe, and Appearances the most Virtuous, and
form a Judgment as favorable as the thing will suffer. And by that, besides
that it will get him the Reputation of an Honest Man, which is not less
necessary for an Historian than an Orator, 'twill secure his Person and Work
from public Hatred and private Envy.

But whatever way he judges, he must take care that his Judgments be given in
few words; and remember that a Preaching Historian cannot but be tedious to his
Reader that hasts to a new Subject. Salust, Livy and Tacitus, are mavelous in
this way: Philip Commines, that never saw them, had no care to imitate them:
His Judgments nevertheless are all good Sense, though drawn out too long; and
the Examples he adds, though Just enough, are not after the Models of
Antiquity. But that was no part of his Furniture, and as often as he entertains
me, methinks I hear an Honest Gentleman, who after the Cloth is taken away,
falls a reciting the Passages he remembers in his Travels.

CHAP. III. The Regard an Historian ought to have to his Birth, Religion and
Life.
TO these three Advices I add a fourth that is not less necessary, nor of less
Consequence to the Conscience and Reputation of an Historian, that he has
regard to his Birth, Religion and Life. Though the Tribunal of History be
Sovereign, and the greatest Persons are there Sovereignly judged, he must not
forget notwithstanding the Respect due to the Memory of those Princes have
governed his Native Country. And if the Instruction of their Successors, and
the Truth of History, will have him pronounce upon their Conduct, he must not
spare Censure where they have deserved it: But he must abstain, without
Necessity or Profit, making a Scandalous Spectacle in the Eyes of the People of
their Secret Debauches. Above all, not to condemn them from the Voice of the
Vulgar, always Enemy and Calumniator of their Masters; or from the Voice of
Fame, always Detractor and Liar; or from his own ill Disposition: It may be
with an Illness not unlike the Yellow Jaundice, where they think every thing
Yellow they see. What I say is occasioned by Henry the Third, who more Unhappy,
and more decried from the Vices of his Age than his own, has been unworthily
blackned by the Historians of the League and Hugonots; and more unworthily yet,
by those that have collected the Impostures of one and the other, and thrown
them upon his Memory.

But if something be due to his Birth, much more to his Religion: This Duty
being the first and most Obliging, when he is to write of the Church, and
Ecclesiastical Princes, the Court of Rome and Popes, Clergy and Religious, he
must not make his Historick Liberty a ground for Licentiousness. I confess
there is always Weakness where there is Humanity; that all those that approach
the Sanctuary, are not Saints; nor all those that are near the Altar,
Cherubims: But does it belong to an Historian to judge his Judges, to condemn
those have a Jurisdiction to which the Angels themselves are Subject. It Is much
the same, as if the Sergeants should cite the Judges of the Court to the Bar,
and pretend to make their Process. And what Conscience has an Historian, that
writes of Popes and Cardinals, as if he writ from the Memoirs of Beza, as if
hired by the Booksellers of Amsterdam and Geneva.

In the third place, He must have regard to his Life. If he would not be
slighted by his Readers, he must make an Agreement between his Judgments and
his Manners, his Reputation and his Pen. Let not a Libertine make himself
Severe, or a Debauche preach Sobriety and Continence, such like Sermons are
turned into Ridicule, and the least they say of the Preacher is, he would do
better at a Table than in the Pulpit. The Disagreement cannot be pardoned in
Salust, what he says against the Corruption and Disorders of his Age, cannot be
better said, but he ought to have left it to Cato, or some other that valued
himself for ancient Discipline. And in my opinion, a Declamation against Luxury
and Profuseness of Life, was not a less Incongruity in the History of Salust,
accused of Debauchery by the Censor in full Senate, and twice of Adultery
before the Praetor, than had been in the Commentaries of Caesar, an Invective
against Ambition and Government.

CHAP. IV. Of Elogies and Characters of Illustrious Persons; in what Places
they ought to be put.
ELogy and Censure are the Principal Parts of Judgment, and the Historian that
forgets them in some Occasions, is accountable to the Public: They are usually
placed either after the Relation of some signal Action of great Fame, or at the
Death of Persons that have most appeared, and made the greatest Figure in the
Theater of History. And this hinders not, but they may also find a place, where
the Historian prepares himself for Relations of great Account. Salust, Livy and
Tacitus often use them after this manner, The first begins his two Histories by
the Characters of Catalin and Jugurth, that were the Principal Actors in these
two Pieces. The Second by Hannibal, before he placed him at the Head of the
Carthaginians, and let him loose as a Torrent descending from the Alps upon
Italy. The Third being, To introduce Vespasian and Mutius, that were to be the
Authors of a new Revolution in the Empire, gave the Character of one and the
other in such a manner, the most Faithful and most exact Pencil could not have
arrived to. But these Pictures ought not to be in great, two or three Colors
and as many touches are enough; and less must they be made at Fancy, and drawn
Beautiful when Ugly, or on the contrary. And as Truth permits not the Historian
should do more for any Person, than Virtue and Nature have done; neither does
she allow him to rob any one of the Advantages they have received from them; an
Historian is usually the Drawer of this fort of Picture, and sometimes contents
himself with designing only, and commits the Finishing to other Persons, to
whom he lends his Colors, and makes speak in his place. And this Prudence is
principally used when he has nothing to represent but Faults and Censure to put
into his Representations. I ought not to forget telling you in this place, that
our Strada in his History of the Wars of Flanders, has drawn Figures of greater
Proportion than the ancient Models: In these Figures (the Abridgments of Life)
he recites many things Curious and Singular, that gives a perfect Knowledge of
the Man, leaves no particular in the Dark, of his Birth, Education, Conduct or
Fortune. The Portraitures he has made of John d' Austria, Margret of Parma,
Cardinal Granvill, Duke of Alva, Prince of Orange, and some others, are after
this manner: And the Approbation they find amongst the most polished Wits make
me believe it will not be disagreeable to France, to see the like in the
History I have undertaken.

Dissertation V. Of Sentences.
CHAP. I. That History demands Sentences: What are Sentences; and the Kinds.
I Cannot think to finish my purpose without treating of Sentences, or if only
in passing with a stroke of my Pen. In History and in Poetry, throughout which
they are found, they make so great an Eclat, and pierce too lively, not to make
themselves regarded. I know they offend some chagrin People, and are censured
by the Severe. But is there any thing so good, against which some ill Nature
will not bring an Objection? There are that Fancy the Poppy and hate the Rose:
Nay, the Graces themselves have their Enemies; and somebody, finding nothing
to blame in the Person of Venus, reprehended her Dress. We will not then reject
Sentences, upon the Condemnation the Chagrin and Severe pass upon them: Their
ill Nature ought not to prevail above the Reason, Example and Authority of the
Fathers of History; who often make use of them: Nor must we abandon our selves
to the Excess and Liberty of some that abuse them.

But because many take for Sentences certain little playing with words, either
ambiguous, opposite or sharp, which seem to comprehend much and have nothing in
them; it is here necessary to disabuse those People, and teach those that may be
Ignorant, A Sentence after Aristotle, is a general Proposition that declares
what there is of Good to be followed, or Ill to be avoided. According to this
Definition received by all the Masters, as on the one hand, all that they say
of a particular, though never so well pointed, with never so much Wit, cannot
be called a Sentence; so on the other, They must not place in the Rank of
Sentences, General Maxims, and Universal Axioms of Sciences, out of the reach
of Morality.

There are then (to take the Matter after this Definition) but two Kinds of
true Sentences, The one Simple, and made of one Proposition; the other
Composed, and made of two; the first of which is supported by the second; and
both together, according to Aristotle, make an Enthymeme or half Syllogism. For
Example, If I say it is hard to detain Fortune and get the Mastery of her: This
Universal and Moral Proposition, but alone and without a Second, makes but a
Simple Sentence; but if I add a Second that supports it, and say Fortune, naked
and slippery as she is, remains a Prize to none, but easily escapes the Hands
of all that would retain her: A Sentence composed after this sort will be
double; and such Sentences Aristotle call Enthymemes, because the second
Proposition being placed before the first, and joined by the Particle then
which they call Illative, is made a Regular Argument and rightly formed.

It Is fit notwithstanding we should know, that Sentences, which are evident,
and have a Clearness in themselves, have no need of a second Proposition to
explain them; that would be to light the day, and read before the Sun with a
Candle. But those that are not very clear nor certain, that lean to the
Equivocal and Paradox, carry some apparent Contradiction, and enter the
Understanding with Difficulty, must not be left without the help of a Second,
that may make their entrance more easy, by giving them a Clearness and
Support. That old Sentence, A Covetous Man wants as much the things he
possesses, as those he possesses not, is very true; but because, in the Terms
that compose it, there is an Opposition that obscures the Truth, there must be
a second Proposition that may unfold and make it understood; The Covetous
enjoying as little what they have, as what they have not; it is true to say they
want one as much as the other.

CHAP. II. Of the Use of Sentences; And the Rules to be observed.
THIS Knowledge presupposed, we may proceed to the use of Sentences; in which
there are four Principal Rules to be observed, Sobriety, Discretion, Justice
and Gravity. They must be used Soberly and seldom, not with the Intemperance of
those are Angry if any thing falls from their Mouths or Pen but what is
Picquant and Sententious. A Poem, Discourse or History, with such a Style,
could not be better compared than to a Garden, where all the Trees were
Hollies, and Herbs Thistles.

A Sentence has been called the Seasoning of a Style, it must be used then but
by Grains, not made a Feast of. And since the Composure and easy fullness, by
which she enters so agreeably the Ears and Sense, is broken by this fall of
Sentences, without Connection one upon the other. It Is like the style a Roman
Prince reproached Seneca with, An Amass of Materials without Cement. To which
may be added, Nature suffers not Precious things to grow in heaps, nor
Excellence to be found in a Multitude. And the greatest number of these
perpetual Retailers of them, expose for the most part Doublets for Diamonds,
and Venetian Pearls for those of the East.

Sobriety fuffices not; but to the right use of Sentences, there must be in the
second place a great Discretion to chose the Persons to whom they are lent, and
Places where they are to be employed. In the Choice of the Persons, the
Historian must have regard to the Age, Sex, Quality and Rank they have held:
And as he must not lend them to Young People, nor the Vulgar, so not to Women
unless to a Livia, Zenobia, Mamilla, Pulcheria, Eudoxia, and others suchlike,
who have wherewithal to sustain the Grandeur of their words, their Actions,
and that of their Dignity. Those that are not of this Rank, ought to hold their
Peace, and the Historian must not permit them to speak much, if it be not on
occasions where some singular Event or Violence forces a sensible Resentment.
The Critics are displeased with those Euripides sends a Nurse; and those spoke
by a Servant in Plautus, are paid with Injuries. Let the Historian reserve them
then for Men, whose Authority, Experience and Quality, have the weight they
demand. A Sentence is a Dogme of Morality or Policy, a Precept shortened into
three words; and we expect not such things from a Page or Follower, from the
Pen of a Young Gallant, or old Debauchee. Grave Persons, whether with the
weight of Years, Office or Dignity, have only right to Dogmatise, give Lessons
and Precepts. And do not we see in the Book of Job, that one of his Friends, a
great Speaker of Axioms, is reprehended by God, that being Ignorant, and ill
instructed, he affected to wrap up a heap of undigested Sentences in a flux of
words without Art or Order.

The Discretion of an Historian ought to extend to the Choice of Persons and
Places where they are to be put. They are Ornaments I confess, but cease to
adorn where they are in Confusion. Gold, Precious Stones and Pearls have their
places upon the Body and Clothes; Freizes, Cornishes and Sculptures in Palaces
and Temples; and out of those places they would be Monstrous and offend the
Sight. And I dare say, Quintilian that said Sentences were to Eloquence as Eyes
to the Body, did not intend a Body all Eyes from Head to Foot. Their Ordinary
places are Harangues, where they may be displayed with greater Liberty and
Judgment; where they serve to confirm what they pronouce or decide. Elogies
upon Eminent Persons, Reflections made, and Instructions given after the
Relation of some great Action or extraordinary Event.

But it must be remembered, they ought not to be introduced by force and as
fixed in those places; they must be found as it were by chance, without Force,
Affectation or looking for, in such a manner, that in the Composure of the
style, they may appear rather as Shadows arising from the Dye, than Laces sewed
upon the Stuff: And in this consists the Justice which in the third Rule the
Historian must observe in the Use of Sentences.

CHAP. III. Another Important Rule to be observed in the Use of Sentences, to
the Exclusion of Points contrary to the Gravity of History. Seneca wrongfully
censured for that by Quintilian.
THE last Rule is Gravity, which permits not the Historian to retail himself,
or lend to whomsoever he makes speak, any Sentence that has not Weight and
Substance, is not Solid and Serious. By this Rule he must abstain from playing
with Antitheses, Equivocals, Allusions, and certain Periods, that are, as
Petronius calls them, but as shinings of broken Glass, they prick and shine,
and withal, that there is nothing weaker nor less solid. Quintilian compares
them sometimes to the Sparks that twincle in the Smoke; and sometimes to little
Flowers, that being of no consistence, fall so soon as touched: And it is that,
it may be, a worthy Man means, when he calls them the Emmonies of words.

The Controversies of old Seneca, Declamations falsely attributed to Quintilian,
the Panegyricks of the latter Empire are stiffened throughout with these
Points; and if the Expressions of Tertullian are said to be Iron and Stone, one
may well say these are Nettles and Briars. Bertaud the most Pointilleux of all
the Poets, was called the Thistle: He affected not to make a Stanza that was
not sharp as an Epigram. Longinus, Hermogenes, Quintilian, and other Masters of
Rhetoric have always protested against this Corruption; and particularly
Quintilian is every where out of Humor with Seneca, and accuses him as an
Empirick in Eloquence. But if we should take his Opinion, Process would be
taken out against him, as a Corrupter of Youth, and he banished the Schools and
Libraries with as much Ignominy, as the Poets are banished the Republic of
Plato.

But I cannot avoid saying (what Respect I may otherwise have for Quintilian)
he makes himself in this too much a Schoolmaster; whether his Criticisms
proceed from Jealousy, or a Peevish Temper, he declaims against Seneca's to
ill Purpose, and without reason, and follows the Humor of Pedant Philosophers,
always opposing those of the Court. But whatever was the cause with Seneca,
Serious and Grave throughout; it is certain there is nothing more contrary to
the Dignity of History, and Importance of Matters she handles, than this
Madness of playing with little words. The Historian is an Interpreter of Truth,
Teacher of Civil Life, Director and Counselor of Princes, an Instructor and
Guide to Posterity; and if he should amuse himself with such Trifles, that are
only to be bore with in Children, Declamators and Scholars of Sophists, it
would be as seemly to see a Feather in the Cap of a Senator: And since it is
Princes, Statesmen, Generals and Ambassadors he makes speak, what he lends must
be Richer and more Substantial.

CHAP. IV. That a Point in Thoughts is different from Force. An Example of the
Force of Thoughts. Of Instructions and Precepts, and how to be used.
THere is yet a Distinction to be made between the Point and the Force, whether
in Thoughts or Expressions. There are certain Bold Thoughts effectually
explained, certain Expressions flowing from bright Conceptions, yet with a
restrained Light, as in a Point, by which are represented in little things of
the greatest Grandeur without Diminution. These Thoughts, these Expressions,
these Images, belong to Wits of the first Rank. And far from rejecting them
with ill Points, we ought to respect them as the Lights of Stars, whether they
come from their Nature, or the Intelligences that inhabit them. As we respect
those Precious Stones, in which Pliny tells you the Majesty and Riches of
Nature are abridg'd; Seneca (notwithstanding Quintilian) the old Pliny, and
Tacitus, are rich throughout with this sort of Riches; and a few Lines taken
out of Tacitus may serve for Example of this remassed Force, this contracted
Grandeur, of which we speak. In the Life of his Father Agnicola, which in my
Judgment is the greatest Effort of his Wit, he introduces a British Captain
speaking against the Romans in these words. These Robbers of all the World, now
the Exhausted Lands can no more furnish their Rapine, think to Rifle the Seas:
Where they meet with Opulent Enemies, they are Cruel through Covetousness:
Where with Poor, through Ambition. The East and West, vast as they are, cannot
satisfy; they alone with like greediness throw themselves upon the Poverty and
Riches of Nations. All they aim at is but to Ravage and Destroy, to Ravish the
Empire under false Pretensions: Yet they Vaunt to have established Peace in
Provinces they themselves have rendered Desolate, If the Modesty of our Wives
and Sisters saved them from Violence, when they were our Enemies: It cannot now
they are become our Guests from their Lascivious Friendship. Slaves, that
Nature and Fortune destined to Servitude, having once sold themselves, are
nourished by their Masters. It Is Britain only buys her Slavery, Supports and
Nourishes her Oppressors. These are Lightnings that dazzle the Sight, Thunders
that Astonish; and if Nature had given the use of Reason to Lions, they would
thus have expressed their Anger and Indignation.

Here I should speak of Instructions and Precepts, that are not less the Office
of an Historian than Sentences; but having the same End and Form, and being
under the same Definition, what I have said of Sentences, may comprehend them
also. The use of them must be as Sober, Moderate and Restrained, and the
Historian that would not leave his Instructions subject to the Censure of the
Grave and Wise, must have the same Discretion and Regard in the Management of
them.

I shall only say in the Matter of Precepts, the best and least Pedantick way
is the Oblique. When the Historian, not willing to make himself a Tutor in the
Eyes of the World, lends them to another: By this Innocent Artifice,
accommodated to Men's Fancy, that value more things at a distance, than near at
hand, the Reader, that perhaps may pass by what the Historian says in his own
Person, will receive with Esteem by the Mediation, and as from the Hand of some
Prince, Statesman, or others he sees hold some considerable Rank in History.

Dissertation VI. Of Descriptions.
CHAP. I. Of the Worth of Description; And some Rules the Historian ought to
observe.
DEscriptions will here have their place after Sentences, and it would not be
Just (they doing so much Honor to History as sometimes they do) if they had
not a part in this Treatise. As they are Representations and Paintings made by
Words, it may be said they are in Poetry and History, as Hangings and Pictures
in a Palace.

But we must not persuade our selves, they being upon Paper and without Color,
the Representation is less perfect: It Is quite another sight, to see a Combat
or Wrack drawn by the Pen and Style of Virgil and Livy, than to see it done by
the Pencil of Raphael himself or Titian. The Pen represents not only the Colous
and Features of the Body, it represents the Thoughts and Passions of the Mind,
gives Life and Action, Speech and Understanding to her Figures, and as those
made by the Pencil, how Beautiful soever, are all without Spirit and Life,
without Movements; those that are made by the Pen, although Invisible, move and
stir themselves, War by Sea and Land, are Eloquent or Courageous, as the
Workman pleases to Inspire them.

This in favor of Descriptions, that certain Critics would take from History:
But those are People that are pleased with nothing that is Pleasant; and were
they let alone with their Chagrin, they would pull the Stars from Heaven, and
Eyes from our Heads. But Descriptions, how Beautiful soever we make them, must
have their Rules, as all other beautiful things that cease to be so, when they
cease to be governed. Let Wariness then be the first Rule in the use of
Descriptions, and the Historian, though never so ready in this way of Drawing,
must not pride himself to multiply them in History, and show his Wit to the
Prejudice of his Judgment. That which pleases in one season and place, pleases
not always nor every where; and Rarity gives value to many things. We seldom
admire the Sun, because she shows her self every day; when the Comets, that
have nothing taking, but denounce what is Ill and Ungrateful, because they
appear not every Year, draw the Eyes and Admiration of all the World.

And after all, Descriptions being but Resting-places as well for the Historian
as the Reader, it would be very Ungenteel for the one, and unuseful for the
other, to search Repose at every step. Besides a multitude of Descriptions
would be a Confusion and Obstacle to the course of History; and the Reader
being desirous of coming to an end, would suffer with Impatience these delays,
notwithstanding the Care taken to embellish them. Let the Historian remember
then, Instructions being the principal end of his Labor, to which Descriptions
serve but little, and only by way of Ornament, he ought not to use them but
when Prudence and Occasion require.

CHAP. II. Other Rules for Descriptions. Ovid censured: And of some Historians
that have failed in these Rules.
BUT let him take care in this, he does not as the Rich Covetous, who do
profusely, and without measure, what is done but once a Year; it is not enough
Descriptions are seldom, they must be short. The same Reasons of Confusion,
Obstacle and Interruption, that forbid a Heap and Crowding, forbids also Length
and Extension; chiefly when this Length runs upon things that make neither
Substance nor Shadows; serve neither the Essence nor Accidents of Affairs.

And in this consists the third Rule, that forbids in any Description which is
not to the purpose, works not some great Effect, and is not worthy the Grandeur
and Majesty of History. The Ancient Critics despised Ovid, for that in a
Description of the Deluge, where the Towns and People had equally suffered
Wrack, when Forests, Mountains and Earth, were drowned, he mentions Wolves
that Swam with the Sheep without biting them. How would they then have decried
Livy or Tacitus, obliged by the Dignity of History to a more composed Gravity,
if the like had escaped their Pens.

The less Severe Critics of Italy would not pardon one of their Historians,
who in a long and troublesome Description of a Feast made at Rome for the King
of Navar's Daughter, in her passage to Marry the Duke of Ferrara, leaving the
Duty of an Historian, and taking upon him that of Maistre d'Hostel, obliges his
Reader against his Will, to see the Account he gives of all the Services and
Expense made at that Feast.

And shall we forgive an Historian, that having but a word to say, of the
Magnificence with which the Late King was received at Paris in his return from
Rochel; makes all the Wards march in Arms; counts the Ranks and Files of
Companies; represents the Habits and Liveries of their Captains; their Colors
and Feathers; and from thence enters by force the Town Hall, takes upon him to
cover the Tables, to range the Dishes and Plates; after this goes to the Greve,
describes the Machines and all the Fireworks, distributes the Wine, and lets
off the Fusees. This unuseful Diligence could hardly be endured in a
Gazette-maker who writes for Shops and Alehouses.

By the same reason in describing of Battles, after ranging the Troops of one
side and the other, he must not amuse himself to represent the Horses, Arms,
Devices and Banners; to tell all the Thrusts made with Pikes and Swords, the
Wounded and Killed, as the Poets do by the Rules of their Profession; this were
to confound the things ought to be distinguished, and mingle Poetry and History
together. Homer is very large in describing the Buckler of Achilles; Virgil has
outgone him in Wit, Judgment and Fame, by the Description of Aeneas his Arms,
where is abridged all the Roman History: And to do yet more than Homer, he
represents too the Symbols, the Chiefs of the Latin Army carried in their
Bucklers and Helmets. Ariosto and Tasso, who followed their Method, have done
the same; and my self, by their Example, in my St. Lovis, not only in the
Tournament spoke of in the fourth Book, but in the Marching of Armies and
Combats, to the end this Diversity of Pictures that are proper to Poetry, might
enliven that matter, a Composure of the same Color, and equal throughout, had
rendered disagreeable.

These Beauties are not permitted the Historian, who serves Muses either more
Serious or more Severe; and we know no body that has not in some measure
abstained from it, if it be not that worthy Person that Lucian tells employed a
whole Book in describing the Bridles and Trappings of Vologezes Horse, and
another longer to represent the Figures he saw in the Buckler of another
General.

CHAP. III. Other Rules necessary in Descriptions. How and to what Degree they
ought to approach Poetry. Apuleius censured, and his Style.
ALthough these Affected Descriptions of Poetry be forbid the Historian, it is
not to be understood, that in those proper for him and his Right, he is obliged
to confine himself, and avoid all that belongs to a Poetic Fullness and
Elevation: On the contrary, It Is in these places chiefly he ought to take
Liberty, and unfold, as Lucian says, the Sail of History to the Poets Gale.

This Fourth Rule demands Vigor and Force of Spirit, to be observed as it has
been by the Historians, who have had wherewithal to support the length of
their Work, and extent of their Fame. I believe I have already said
Versification excepted, Salust, Livy and Tacitus are not less Poets than Homer
and Virgil. I may add, That if the Poetic Genius has sometimes warmed their
Fancy, it has been chiefly in Descriptions.

But the Force and Vigor this Rule requires, must be accompanied with Judgment
and Discretion, as all others, for fear the Vessel of History (to speak again
in Lucian's Phrase) pressed by the wind of Poetry with too much Violence,
should split against some Rock, or be lost in some Barbarous Gulf. The
Historian must above all shun the Winds that carry to the Florides of Apuleius.
If there be an Antipodes to true Latinism and Eloquence; it is that Country
where good Sense, Reason and Judgment are worse treated, than in that Famous
Isle of Witchcraft, where Men are turned into Beasts. And yet this Writer has
his Imitators, his Golden-Ass-Adorers, as well as the Golden Calf; when there
is not a more Villainous Animal, not fit to be received into any Stables less
foul than those of Augeus. But is there any thing so bad, that pleases not some
depraved Appetite? And though France has for some Years produced no Monsters, she
has had heretofore her Apuleius's, notwithstanding she is at present freed from
such Prodigies. If Modes as well as Seasons have their Revolution, who can
promise the Phoebus of Norvese, and Gothic of Vignere will not return again,
with the Golillos and Ruffs of those Times.

CHAP. IV. The last Rule in Descriptions, and its Importance.
FOR the sixth and last Rule, An Historian must not enter into any Country
where he is Ignorant of the Language, without an Interpreter to assist him. I
mean he must not undertake to describe any thing he does not know, or has not
been informed of. Otherwise he will but form Chimera's, where he thinks to draw
Representations: Speak of War in a Court-Stile; and of Navigation in Terms of
Husbandry: Will take the Country for the Soil; and when he has an Assault or
Battle to describe, will do it in the words of a Proctor, who gives an account
of his Proceedings in the Pursuit of a Process.

In despite of the great and little Atlas, against Nature her self he will
make a New World, and Maps as new; as those lately made for the Globe of the
Moon: Place the Lap. and Fin-landers under the Line, and Ethiopians under the
Pole; bring the Pyramids from Egypt into Italy, and carry the Italian Aqueducts
into Egypt: Not content to take away one side from the Apenins, he will
transport it all into Asia or Africa.

Suchlike Miracles have been done by Historians that were not Saints, if we
believe Lucian, who says, That in his time there were that carried whole Towns
out of one Country into another, with as much ease as a Gardener Transplants
his Flowers; and further make as Prodigious Transformations as those in Ovid's
Metamorphosis, turn Towns into Captains, and Captains into Towns; for which the
Marshall de Bassompierre accuses one of our Historiographers; make Mountains
Rivers, and Rivers Forests; and without a Miracle or Witchcraft, without the
help of Heaven or Hell, there is nothing in Nature he will not change from one
Kind to another, by the sole Virtue of his Ignorance aided by his Fancy.

Dissertation VII. Of Harangues and Digressions.
CHAP. I. Whether Harangues are Superfluous in History? And whether contrary to
the Rule of Truth?
HArangues hold the Third place in Composition of History; and if it belongs
only to an Orator to be an Historian, as all the Masters say after Cicero, it is
here chiefly the Orator-Historian ought to display his Rhetoric. I know all
the World is not of his Opinion, but what is Raymund Lully, and others that
embrace the contrary, but Pigmies opposed to this Achilles of the long Robe.
Diodorus of Sicily produced against Harangues, condemns but those that entangle
and dismember a Narration, put things out of their Method by their unreasonable
length, or number yet more tedious. And as this Greek, that ought to love Wine
as all other Greeks do, would not have burnt down all the Vineyards to free the
Ground from some bad Vines; so he never designed to cleanse History from some
ill Harangues, all sorts should be taken from her.

It Is opposed to this, That the Law which permits nothing false in History, is
violated by these Harangues, that are all false, and framed by the Historian:
That Probability alleged to maintain them, is an Usurpation upon the Poets,
and she shamefully abused. What is there of Scythian or Barbarous; nay, what is
there not of Delicate and Polite in the Harangues the Ambassador of Scythia
made by the Favor of Quintus Curtius to the Great Alexander. And who can
believe Galgacus, that Tacitus places at the head of a People separated from
others, and as it were out of the World, Harangued with such Figures and
Expressions as he lends him. The same may be said of his Arminius and Civilis,
which he makes speak as if Disciples to Longinus and Hermogenes. In like
manner, the Romans, covered with the Dust of their Cabins, and smelling of
Garlic, as says a Modern Author, are produced by Titus Livius with as much
fineness of Wit, and Grace of Language, as was used a long time after by the
most Curious in the Court of Augustus.

CHAP. II. That Harangues are necessary in History, not contrary to Truth nor
Probability. Historians and Poets justified thereupon.
ALL these Reasons conclude nothing against Harangues. The Law of Truth ought
not to be understood, but of things that receiving some consistence either by
Tradition or Writing, might come entire and without Alteration to the Knowledge
of the Historian; he is obliged to take them as they come to him by these ways,
and the Law of Truth confines him, that without changing any thing either in
Matter or Figure, he should make use of them such as they are. It Is not so with
Words that have Wings, as a Greek Poet says, and after the Arabian Conceit are
the Birds of Carriage, no Nets can take them, no Bands hold them; and it would
not be enough the Historian was a Magician, he must yet be a Prophet, if he was
to recite every Syllable (as the Messengers of Homer) of all that was said by
Persons introduced in his History; notwithstanding there are Occasions where
it is necessary they should speak; for a Trader that is Dumb, a Counselor
Silent, an Ambassador without Words, would there make but strange Figures. The
Historian must then make them Speak, and lend them Words, and that is found
better than if they should all express themselves in different Languages, and
renew the Confusion of Babel in every History.

In making Harangues the Historian Vsurps not upon the Poets; there are that
belong to each of them, but with this difference, the one is founded upon Truth
to the Exclusion of Falsehood; the other upon Falsehood* to the Exclusion o^
Truth; because Falsehood colored and disguised, gives all the Honor to Poetry.

Two Famous Examples in History and Poetry, that deserve Observation, will
clear better this Doctrine: The first in the Fourth Book of Virgil's Aeneids,
where Dido, moved by Love, Despite, Despair and Fury, whether she stirs or
speaks, does all so probably, so well composed, so natural, one cannot see her
without Loving, Hating, being in Anger, and Mourning with her. Notwithstanding
this resemblance of Truth is grounded upon as great a Falsehood as ever was. And
it was not enough for Virgil to raise the Winds and Seas, employ all the Gods
that preside over Tempests, to bring his Aeneas to Carthage in the time of
Dido, he was further obliged to force Chronology, and do Violence to two Ages.

The other in the First Book of Livy, where the Fair and Chaste Lucretia, Mad
with the Outrage offered to her Honor, expresses her self in so becoming a
manner, and in Terms so Natural, no body but would believe the words her own.
And that happens, because the Truth of the thing drawing with it the
Probability of Words founded upon it, gives them part of those colors that
then must pass for true. Are Ambassadors accused of Falsehood, that express
themselves more elegantly than their Instructions: And the Letters of a
Secretary of State, do they cease to be true, and the Prince's, because they
are more enlarged, and in better Terms, than in the Original?

It Is then a Calumny, to say the Truth of History is violated by the
Resemblance in Harangues. And the Injury goes yet further, for this
Retrenchment must be likewise made in Judgments, Reflections and Conjectures,
that are Parts so Essential to History, she ceases to be when they are taken
from her.

Livy, Tacitus and Quintus Curtius, are not only accused for having laid aside
Truth, but Probability, in lending more Wit, Politeness and Eloquence, to those
they make speak, than the Genius of their Country and Manners of their Age will
bear. It must be answered, That Sense and good Wit are the Growth of every
Country, and all Ages: That Scythia has had her Philosophers as well as Greece:
And at this time the Canadins, notwithstanding the Barrenness of their Soil,
are born Eloquent and Haranguers, and have a Natural Rhetoric, as figured and
Sententious, as that we are taught in Schools and Books.

Besides, The Poets, so great Observers of Resemblance and Probability, never
thought it advisable to change the Style as they change the Persons. There is
but Plautus that pleases himself with playing the Trivelin, as one may say, in
affecting such an odd unusual Method. But if we believe Horace, Plautus was, in
the time of Augustus, what Clopinell is now. All others are equal and uniform
throughout, the Servants in Terence speak as good Latin as their Masters; the
Shepherds and Shepherdesses in Theocritus, express themselves agreeably and
with Wit: Nay, his Polypheme, Monstrous as he is, has something Gallant. And if
the Critics in the time of Virgil, reproached his Corridon for a rustic word;
what had they done his Dido, Anna and Jarbas, if he had lent them the Barbarous
Thoughts and Language of Africa. Let this be said, not only to justify the
Eloquence of the Scythians in Quintus Curtius, but the Politeness of the
Shepherds in Virgil, Sannazara, Tasso, Guarinus and the Marquess d'Vrfe, and
the fine Thoughts, generous and tender Passions, I have attributed to the
Saracens, that make the principal Figures in my St. Lovis.

But for what end so long a Discourse, The Example of all the Historians, leave
no place for Excuse: We have in Greek and Latin Collections of their Harangues,
as the most Pure and Fine Part of their Wit. And to take the Opinion of Raymund
Lully, and others, upon the Practice of these Great Men, would be to take the
Judgment of a Colour-seller upon the Pictures of Fountain-bleau, and the Roof
of Val de Grace. Harangues must then remain in History, but in the place and
form they ought, not to embarrass, burden, and be troublesome.

CHAP. III. What Persons ought to Harangue? What ought to be the Subject Matter
and Measure of Harangues? Thucydides and Salust reprehended for having failed
in this Rule.
THE Historian that will be Curious in the Fitness and Regularity of his
Harangues, must above all have regard to the Age, Quality, Credit, and Desert,
of those he makes speak. It must be otherwise here than in a Comedy, where the
Vallet has his turn as well as the Master. And it is not much, Princes,
Statesmen, Captains or Ambassadors, have right to be heard, because the most
Subtle Extracts of Policy are ordinarily in Harangues: And an Officer of the
Wardrobe, a Life Guard-Man, or a Clerk of the Palace, that would appear Men of
Importance, would make in History as base an Incongruity, as could be made in
Grammar.

Secondly, He must not employ his Rhetoric throughout, but only upon
Occasions, and Matters that have wherewithal to sustain it. Times of Battle
were heretofore proper for Harangues, but now that Fashion is almost out of
Date; and the Forwardness of the Soldiers Courage, leaves little room for the
Captains Eloquence.

Consultations, where are treated of Peace and War, Alliance or League,
Abdication or Election of a Prince, Examples of Justice or Clemency, and the
like Affairs of great Account, are proper places for Harangues; but to use them
upon the Death of a Foot-Captain, Preparation of a Hunting-bout, or the Attack
of a Barn, is to abuse Rhetoric, and spend a great many fine words to no
purpose. Such Harangues would be like those made in the Senate before the
Emperor, about the Seasoning of a Turbut of extraordinary size, if Juvenal may
be credited.

Thucydides and Salust, though so great Men, and both Chiefs of their Order,
are reproached with having failed in this Rule: The one in a long Mournful
Harangue made by Pericles at the Funeral of Fifteen Gentlemen that died in the
Service of the Republic; was not this to expose the second Jupiter of the
Athenians (so Pericles was called) to abuse his Lightnings and Thunders,
employing them in so mean a Matter. But the Historian lending his words to the
Orator, would make it appear he was not less one than the other, and that his
Eloquence was able to make as much noise in Writing, as the other had done with
his Voice. However the Funeral of Fifteen Soldiers might have been made with
less Expense, and the Mournful Oration better employed at the Obsequies of
those Athenians lost in Sicily in greater Numbers and with greater Glory. But
Pericles was then Dead, and there was never another Orator, to whom the
Historian could lend his Eloquence.

The Latins have not been more Regular in this than the Greeks: Salust
Harangues throughout, and almost every where without occasion. In the
Conspiracy of Cataline, the long Harangues Obscure and Contract too much the
Narration; and in his Jugurthin War, the great Discourse made by Memius Tribune
of the People, without any other Reason than the Reputation of the Man for one
of the best Speakers of his Time, makes it plain enough he takes all Occasions,
right or wrong, to make Satisfaction by his Historick Eloquence, for the ill
Success of his Oratorian.

Let the Historian then take for a Third Rule, in Composition of Harangues, to
avoid Multitude and Length; by which the Narration is broken, the Reader
retarded and put out of his way, as by Hedges and Ditches in the Road of a
Traveller that hasts to his Journeys end. There is no Labor more Ungrateful,
nor more Unhappy, no words worse employed, and they are declined by all as
infected places. And if heretofore a Gallant Man chose rather a Prison, than
give his Approbation to an ill Poem; those may be found, that think the Galleys
more Supportable than the reading such Harangues.

Boccalin is very pleasant in his Occurrences of Parnassus, and makes appear
the Pain suffered in this kind of Lecture: He tells you, That an Old Man being
found reading a Madrigal under a Laurel-Tree with his Spectacles on, 'twas
judged by the Senate a Scandalous thing, and he condemned by universal Consent
to the reading an Harangue in Guiccardin. Since they have been made shorter
even in France, where they were altogether as troublesome.

In the Fourth place, He must not forget Aristotle's Rule, that Harangues made
to be read, require more Art and Study in their Composure, than those to be
spoke. And likewise this Study ought not to be that of a Sophist, to beat about
the Bush and smooth a Period; this Art not to be placed in Affectations of
Points, Antitheses, and suchlike Figures, that are but to say the Coequetaries
of Rhetoric: All there ought to be Grave, and accommodated to the Condition of
Persons, and Qualities of Affairs. And if Agreeableness, so much recommended by
the Masters of this Art, demands Application throughout, in this place more
particularly. For a King to speak like a Sophist, a Captain like a Declamator,
an Ambassador to deliver his Credentials in Points, would make strange Figures:
They might as well go to Council, Battle and Audience, in the Habits of
Comedians.

Pathetick Characters and Passionate Movements have also their place in
Historical Haranguers, but they must come naturally, and without Violence. The
Subject and Occasion bring them in, nor are they to enter with the Noise and
Tumult they make in Oratorical Actions, where they are as Thunders and
Lightnings in a Cloud big with Tempests. Historick Eloquence, that speaks but
from the Pen, has no Voice nor Behavior, must be more Calm and Reserved. And
it is not in the Closet, and upon Paper, is expected Thunderbolts and 'Storms,
like those this second Jupiter of the Athenians made in the Assembly of the
People. I will not further enlarge upon the other Riches, that belong to the
Composition of Harangues, 'twould be a return to the College, and Incroachment
upon the Profession of Cicero and Quintilian, that have given long Lessons for
them.

CHAP. IV. Of the Kinds, Use and End of Digressions.
DIgressions have the last place in the Parts of History, but I cannot see for
what Right, or Reason, this last place is given them. Where they are absent,
there is no Want; and where found, many times Troublesome. Livy has avoided
them with Honor; Polybius and Salust abridg'd them to their Reputation. Those
who would have Digression to History, as an Episode to Poetry, know neither one
nor the other. A Poem without an Episode, is but the Carcass of a Poem; Whereas
there is nothing wanting to an History without Digression. To what would they
reduce the Aeneids, if the Sack of Troy, the Loves of Dido and Aeneas, the
Description of Hell, and other Episodes, which are as the Porticoes, Galleries,
and Anti-chambers, to a Palace, were taken from her? And what would the History
of Tacitus lose, if that long and fabulous Digression of the Worship and Temple
of the Goddess of Cyprus; and that other longer of the Original and Religion of
the Jews, filled with Falsity and Malice, were retrenched? Notwithstanding the
Esteem I have for him, and the Pleasure I take in his Entertainment, as often
as he comes to them, I profess my self tired, and all I can obtain of my
Patience, is to attend till he has done.

But since it so pleases the Masters, let us suffer Digressions in History, and
say, for Instruction to those that desire them, they are either Geographical,
Historical, Political or Moral. In Geographical, The Author gives the
Description of some Country he finds in his way: Such, in the Jugurthin War, is
that of Africa. In Historical, is recited some particular Adventure; as that of
the two Friends that Salust speaks of in the same place; or in the Original of
some State, People or Town; the two Digressions of Tacitus, that I have
mentioned, are of this kind. In Political, is given Instruction to Princes,
Statesmen and Officers; there are Examples in Polybius of every sort: And this
may be said without saying too much, That in the Republic of Plato, and
Politics of Aristotle, there are Maxims and Axioms have less of Policy than in
this History. In the Moral, the Historian gives Lessons upon Virtue and Vice, a
Good and Evil Life, and the Consequences of one and the other. Salust gives an
Example in the long Digression he makes in his Cataline, of the Birth, Progress
and Fall of the Republic: And though he is full of Spirit, Rules and
Sentences, he takes up too much space in so little a Work: And it may be said
in that place, the Historian does like a tired Traveller, that having but one
days Journey to go, stays two at the first Inn he meets with. All these Rules,
all these Sentences, received under the name of Fabius and Cato, lose their
Force and Edge under that of Salust.

Let the Historian then remember, not to make unnecessary Digressions, which
serve not to dress, clear, or sustain his Matter; and that those he does make,
are very rare and short. Otherwise, being but Resting-places, as Livy calls
them, or Inns as others, he will be reproached with making more Rests than Way,
and as many Inns as Rests.

Dissertation VIII. Of Order.
CHAP. I. Of the Preface; Rules to be observed, and Faults to be avoided.
Reflections upon the Prefaces of Salust.
IT is not enough the Architect has Marble and Stones, and the Art to work
them, he must yet know the Placing, Building and Connection they require.
Without that, he will put that below that should be above, that behind that
should be before; and in lieu of a Palace, make a Monster of Stone, as the
Italian Architects say. This Knowledge of Order and Placing, is not less
necessary for the Historian, if that be wanting, his richest Materials, ill
joined or ill placed, will be but as Heaps of Stone without Mortar, Connexions,
Symmetry and Form. But as there remains but two Pieces to dispute and place,
the Preface and Narration, the Disposition, so necessary, cannot be difficult.

He will begin then by a Preface, which is to him as a Prelude to those that
play upon the Theorbo or Violin; by that he prepares the Mind and Affection of
the Reader, and disposes him to a continued and favorable Attention. Let him
not follow the Example of Caesar, that has no Preface at the Front of his
Commentaries. History is a more finished Structure, has Body, Parts, Proportion
and Measure, according to Art; and to a Building of this Nature, there must be
other Skill and Order than in Commentaries and Memoirs, that are but as a Mass
of Materials waiting for the Hand of the Workman. The Lovre, though so
Magnificent and Great, offends the Light, and baulks the Imagination, by its
yet want of a Portal: And a History, though composed by Livy or Tacitus, would
not less offend those that see it without a Preface: Lucian says, such Works
are Bodies without a Head.

But whether we take her for a Portal or Head, she is not left to the Fancy of
the Workman: She has her Rules, that must not be violated, without doing
contrary to the Rudiments of History. She must be rightly adapted, of Just
Measure, Modest and Conformable to the rest of the Body. One cannot, says
Horace, without Laughing, see the Head of a Man upon the Neck of a Horse, and
it would be as Extravagant to see a Horses Head upon a Man's Shoulders.
Suchlike Representations, are only fit for Signs to those odd Animals exposed
in a Fair. And there is nothing more resembles those Monsters, than a History
that begins with a common Preface, not immediately relating to the Subject, but
would serve as well a Spanish as a French Narration; as proper to the Wars of
Solomon, as those of Charles the Fifth. Salust, that Roman Antiquity proposes
for one of her most perfect Models, is fallen wilfully, and seeing his Fault,
into this Incongruity. He begins his History of the Conspiracy of Catalin and
the Jugurthin War, by two Moral Declamations, which belong as little to their
Subjects, as a Doctors Cap to a Soldier. It Is possible they were the Remains of
his Oratorical Profession, and he thought it better to place them there,
whatever ill Figure they might make, than to lose them.

Whatever Salust might mean, besides that these two Prefaces have as little to
do in the places they are put, as any other; they are not of right Measure. And
it may be said, That being so long as they are, they make there the same
Figure, to use Lucian's Comparison, as the Head of a Colossus upon the Body of
a Dwarf. The Historian must have a care of this second Fault; his Preface must
be short and close, especially before Histories of little Bulk: And if he does
not prefer the vain Reputation of Eloquence, to the Prejudice of his Judgment,
he must not do as that Architect who made the Entrance of a Chapel large
enough for a Cathedral Church.

Above all, let him avoid Ostentation and Pride, that more becomes a Captain in
a Comedy, than the Wisdom of an Historian, from whom is expected more Modesty
and Gravity than any other Writer. By that he will gain the Good Will of his
Reader, make him more Favorable and Antidate against the Venom Envy carries in
her Eyes and Tongue. And his Modesty will obtain that Indulgence from the
Critics, would never have been allowed to his Quality or Merit. On the
contrary, The softest Natures are exasperated, the Charitable not less than the
Envious, the Doves as well as the Serpents, have their Gaul, and turn their
Beeks and Claws against those that force them. And the Work, whatever Merit it
may otherwise have, will suffer the Chastisement due to the Presumption of the
Workman. It Is yet worse, when the Desert does not support this Presumption;
when in lieu of Marble and Jaspar that was expected, is placed course
unpolished Stuff; and a Country Cottage in the room of a Palace: Such things
are not to be endured, and no body but would Laugh at the Extravagance, to
speak after Lucian, of Armor made with Osier and Bark of Trees, under a
Gilded Headpiece.

The Historian must begin then with Modesty, and double it when he speaks
himself; do it in such a manner, the Ink and Paper, if it were possible, should
blush with him. And this hinders not his speaking Magnificently of his Matter,
if deserved, because it is not his own making. He may praise it with the same
Modesty a Sculptor does his Marble: This will be a Spur to the Curiosity and
Attention of his Reader, and a Preservative against the Trouble and
Wearisomness, as ordinary in long Lectures as long Voyages.

CHAP. II. The Historick Narration requires Order. What is this Order; and how
it differs from that of Poetry.
THE Historian ought not to pass from one Preface to another, as some have
done, that were to build Portal upon Portal, Threshold upon Threshold, and two
Heads upon one Body. He must enter his Relation, and follow it with an equal
Composure, without Interruption, and according to the Order of Events and Time.
This Order is one thing in History, another in Journals and Annals: In Journals
the Method is to follow the Accidents of a Day: In Annals of a Year. History is
not so much confined, though she is obliged to observe Time, and go hand in
hand with it: She is not so tied, that she cannot sometimes free her self, and
follow the Course and Events of Affairs.

This Method of sometimes following, and sometimes leaving Time, presupposes
the Distinction of two Orders founded upon the Doctrine of Aristotle and
Horace. Of these two Orders, says the Masters, the one is Natural, the other
Artificial. By the first, things are conducted equally, and with the same
course, from the beginning to the end: By the second, they go and stop by
Intervals, as the Writer pleases, that one while shows, another hides;
sometimes leads strait, then through by-ways, to raise the Curiosity of the
Reader, and keep up Desire and Attention. This second Order, is that ought to
be kept in Fabulous Structures, as are Poems and Romances. Homer has given the
first Example in Greek, Virgil the second in Latin, Tasso the third in Italian.
And if it be permitted to name my self after these great Artists, I have given
the Fourth in French in my St. Lovis.

An Historian that is the Servant of Truth, and labors to establish her, has
nothing to do with this Art of Disguising and Imposture; the natural Order is
what she demands: And because it may be taken from the Chain of things
together, and their relation to time, the Historian is free to choose which he
thinks most open, least engaged, least subject to embarrass, and most proper to
make entrance for his Matter in the Memory of the Reader.

There is yet some difference to be made between Universal History of many
States and Nations, without Relation, without Dependence one upon the other;
and particular but of one State, Nation or Reign. In the Universal, the Order
of Time must accompany the Order of Places, and the Historian avoid following
Ariosto, and other Architects of Irregular Fables; that without Vessels, or
Wings, and what is worse, Example; without Need or Subject, boldly cross the
Seas, and pass in a Moment from one Pole to the other. And whilst you are most
attentive to something Strange that is done in France or Spain, you are carried
from thence of a sudden into Asia or Africa. He must give himself leisure, as
much as the time will permit, to finish what he has begun in one Country,
before he goes into another. Herodotus, Diodorus of Sicily, Justin, and others
who have undertaken Universal Histories, have held this Method; and their
Example, is a Rule for all those that would after them enter this vast Tract.

Particular History gives no such Fatigues, nor obliges to make such long
Journies: She is shut up in one Country, from whence she is not permitted to
stir, without some Necessity draws her; there she adjusts, as near as possible,
the Course of things to that of time; but without tying her self to the
Calender, without keeping Register of the Days or Years: When Events are so
measured, and go so just, that the Years keep equal pace with them, she follows
regularly this Exactness, that serves much to the Placing, Understanding and
Measure of things; but when it happens they pass from one Year to the
succeeding, the Composure of the Narration broken, and put off till another
time, troubles the Matter, and makes Confusion in the Eyes of the Reader; then
she conducts to the place where the Narration began, and lets time go on till
she finds an Opportunity to overtake and rejoyn him. Livy, Quintus Curtius and
Tacitus have done after this manner; and in this they will be followed by all
Lovers of good Order and Economy; and who would avoid the like Confusion
Thucydides fell into, willing to adjust too scrupulously the Periods of his
History to those of the Sun.

Dissertation IX. Of the Style of History.
CHAP. I. The Style of History demands Ornament.
THere remains but the Style to be treated of, which is to History as Clothes
are to the Body: And to the end a Method may be held in this last Part, I will
remass all that can be said of it in five or six Conclusions, grounded upon
Authority, Reason and Example.

History admits nothing mean in her Style, nothing Negligent or Vulgar: She
must have Politeness, Adjustment and Dress: So says Aristotle, That
Compositions to be read, ought to be wrought with more Curiosity and Study,
than those to be spoke. It Is likewise Cicero's Opinion, who tells us the
Sophist is allied to the Historian, and that the Style of one and the other is
almost the same. Hermogenes also ranks in the same kind the Style of History
and that of a Panegyric. And none that has heard speak of Sophists, and Makers
of Panegyricks, can be Ignorant of the Magnificence of those People, and the
Care they take for Ornament and Dress.

But if Aristotle, Cicero, Hermogenes, and the rest, had not recommended Dress,
and what is proper for History, her Dignity, Employ, and the Quality of Persons
she serves, would demand it. She is one of the noblest Productions of Humane
Wit; and Nobility is every where remarked by it. It Is what distinguishes
Palaces from Private Houses; and Gentlemen from the Vulgar: She is designed to
instruct the Great; and the Governor of a Prince ought to be otherwise
clothed than a Petty Schoolmaster: All her Discourses are with Kings,
Statesmen and Generals: And it is not seemly to appear in slovenly old Clothes
amongst such Company.

I add, A Negligent Use of them without Artifice, has little alluring: They
must be adjusted, and well put on, to cause Observation. In Houses, Gardens and
Garments, a bare Covering does not suffice: And how Profitable soever History
may be, her Life will be but short, if she has not some Agreement to preserve
her from the Outrage of Time. Above sixteen hundred Years Salust, Livy,
Tacitus, Quintus Curtius, and more of the same Age, have lived with Honor, and
been magnificently lodged, and richly clothed; whilst others that knew not the
Art to please, have been eaten by Worms and Rats in the corners they were
thrown into.

CHAP. II. What ought to be the Ornament of the Style of History; and in what
it consists.
THE Style of History must be adorned; but every sort of Ornament is not proper
for her. The Dress must be applied to Ages, Conditions and Employs. A Plume of
Feathers in the Hat of a Captain, has another mien, than in the Cap of a
President: And what would become a Girl, would be very ill placed upon her
Mother. Though Youth be the Spring of Life, and by consequence the time of
Dress, a Young Person must not be seen every day by all in the same Habit: It Is
the same in the Matter we are speaking of, History demands Ornament, but not
that of a Ball or Theater. It must be Ornament of Ceremony, and Holydays,
Serious, Grave and Modest; and she would be as ill decked up in the Locutions
and Figures of Apuleius, as if a Grave Lady should go to Church in the Habit of
a Comedian.

This Ornament then (to say something particular) must not be that of a
Country-Wedding, where the new-married Wife is covered all over with Tinsel;
it is made principally of three things, Elegance of Words, Just Disposition, and
certain Light from Sentences and Figures, that shine and give Eclat to the
Composure of the Style. Words are Elegant, that are not of too old or too new a
Fabric; that are received by Men of Worth, and breath not the common Air.
Disposition contributes to their Elegancy, when they have Number and Measure,
that make a Harmony the Ignorant are not capable of. As to Sentences, having
already discoursed of them, it will be enough to say here, they require
Management, where there appears more Economy than Want. But to show them to
the Reader by certain Marks placed in the Margent, as if afraid they should not
be taken notice of, besides the Affectation and Pedantry, is to give Value to
ill Wine by the Sign.

CHAP. III. That the Sublime Character is most proper for the Style of History.
THE Sublime Character, that is to say, the most elivated way of Writing, is of
all the most proper for the Historick Style: It Is the Opinion of all the
Masters, and amongst others Hermogenes, as Severe as Judicious a Critic, would
have an Historian approach as near as possible to that of Plato's, that Greece
acknowledged for the most Lofty of any; the M^ses also presided in his Academy,
and were there adored. And if Verse and Fable were taken from Homer, he would
not be found more a Poet than this Philosopher. Thucydides the Patron of Greek
History, formed himself after this Model: All the Latins of Reputation have
followed him; and this Proposition is not less founded upon Reason, than
Authority and Example.

Every one knows the Style is as the Clothes, and Representation as well of
Things as Thoughts; and that there ought to be Proportion and Agreement between
the Clothes and the Body, the Representation and Thing represented; That a
Child's Coat is not made for a Man, nor Colossus's and Giants represented by
Children. We have said, and it is agreed, that nothing ought to enter History
but great Things, noble Actions, and high Enterprises: The Rule of Proportions
then and Agreements, will have the Style with which these Things, Actions and
Enterprises are to be clothed or represented, should accord with their
Grandeur and Exaltation. An Historian that is to represent (for Example) the
Batteries raised against Rochel, and the English embarked to Succor it; that
has to describe the Weather, Alps and Savoy, overcome by the late King to the
Walls of Susa, would be very Ridiculous to express himself as if he were
speaking of a Building made with Cards, or the Attack of a Paper Castle.

Let us therefore advise the Writer t^ try his Strength, and see if he is in
the Number of those exalted Spirits, for whom Nature has made nothing too high,
nor of too great an Extent: Whether he has a Fund, from whence he can draw
wherewithal to carve Images of the greatest Grandeur. If he has nothing of all
this, can but crawl upon the Earth, and work in little, let him leave to others
History, that is to be the Instruction of Kings and Princes, and satisfy
himself as much as he pleases with writing Chronicles and Legends. It was said
by a great Cardinal, rich in Expressions, That it belonged not to Barbers to
play upon the Lute, Beggars to eat Melons, nor Pedants to read Virgil: It may
be added, Nor those that want the Quill of an Eagle to write History.

CHAP. IV. That the Style of History ought to approach that of Poetry; and to
what Degree.
THE Style of History ought to approach that of Poetry, as much as possible for
Prose, without exceeding the Bounds that separate them. This Conclusion is
founded upon what has been said of their Alliance, and confirmed by all the
Masters, who will have History (as I have said before) a Poem free from the
Confinement of Versification, a Poem on foot: And if I am permitted to repeat a
word worth all has been said, A Poem in full Song without Music. Now the
resemblance between History and Poetry, that Agathias calls Sisters, not
arising from the Matter feigned in one, and true in the other, nor from
Disposition Natural in the one, and Artificial in the other, it must
necessarily arise from the Style.

It Is for that Dion. Halicar. believes he Honors Thucydides and Herodotus,
where he gives their Histories the name of Excellent and Delicate Poems. And in
another place, expressing himself like a Master upon this Doctrine, he condemns
in History a Slovenly ill-comb'd Style: These are his words, And would have her
have one studied, approaching the Poetic. All the Latins of the first Rank,
have not been less Curious in this than the Greeks. And Pontin, a worthy and
ingenious Writer, has taken great Pleasure in comparing many places of Virgil,
with the like in Salust and Livy, where Verse excepted, the Poet is not more
so, than these two Historians. And there are places enough, where Tacitus
otherwise so Serious, and sometimes so Chagrin, forgets the Gravity of his
Office, and takes upon him the Enthusiasm of an Heroic Poet.

But the Historian must have a care of deceiving himself, and know the
Permission given History of coming near to Poetry, is not a bold License
without reserve. There are Locutions and Figures he must avoid with as much
care, as a Virtuous Woman abstains all things that offend her Modesty. What
would be thought of a History beginning in these Terms, The Hours that attend
upon the Sun, had not as yet opened the Gates of Heaven: Or thus, Aurora had
not as yet appeared in the Balcony of Laque and Azure, placed upon the Portico
of the Palace of Day: Or by these words, The Fiery-footed Coursers that draw
the Chariot of the Sun, were still in the Ocean, and the Beautiful Driver had
not as yet put on their Harnass of Gold and Rubies: And all this to express it
was not yet day: People would laugh at such a Luxury of Speech, such a
Magnificence of words ill placed: And what would be an Ornament and Rich in
Poetry, would pass but for a Turlupinade in History. There is here then a
Distinction to be made between Defect and Excess, a Draght and a Flood: Some
would have the Composure of History low and mean like Legends; others would
have her have the Theban and Pharsalian Heat and Enthusiasm: But the one allows
not enough, the other too much; the middle way must be held, and Lucian's Rule
observed.

In the Historick Character, he distinguishes a Sentence from the Style; and
this presupposed, he permits a Sentence (chiefly in certain Descriptions that
have something great) to make use of this Heat, to follow the Gale of Poetry,
and ride on Horseback, so he expresses himself: But to the Style he gives no
such Liberty, recommends Reservedness and Modesty, and forbids Words and
Expressions that look like Possession. He will have her go after a Sentence,
not on Horseback behind her but on Foot, and holding her Stirrups: These are
yet his Words; and by these, according to his manner, always great and figured,
he represents the Medium ought to be held by the Historian between the Orator
and Poet.

CHAP. V. The Historick Style demands Pureness and Clearness.
LET the Ornament be what it will, with which the Style of History is adorned,
she will not have all the Grace she ought, if she has not three Qualities,
Purity, Clarity and Brevity, in every thing. What is free from Mixture is
called Pure; and the Style of History will be such, when it has nothing Strange
or Barbarous; of another Time or Place, Usage or Mode; and that all the Rules
of Grammar are observed. This Purity, whether writ or spoke, expresses a Person
of Quality, and it cannot be wanted, without being taxed with lowness of Birth
or ill Breeding.

It Is of this Pureness our French Theophrast Monsieur de la Chamber must be
understood, when he would have (as he has often told me) History writ in the
Style of certain little Romances, that have lately appeared under the Title of
Novels. As he has not less Esteem for Thucydides and Livy, than Aristotle and
Hippocrates; I am well assured he would not be the first to accuse them for
having ill employed the Treasure of their Wit, and it would be without doubt to
accuse them to rob History of the Ornaments they have given her, and reduce her
to I know not what sort of Purity, without Color, Relish and Force.

He cannot be Ignorant (who is of the first Rank of Philosophers) that the
Forms must differ according to the difference of the Matter. That the Materials
of a lofty History, being different from that of a little Love-Story, the way
of working them must also be diverse. It Is with the Purity of the Style, as
with the Property of the Habit, it may be comely throughout, but requires the
same Adjustment and Care in all places. That that would be too much for Sylvia
or Amarillis; would be too little for Semiramis or Cleopatra. And who dares
maintain, the Style that suffices a Letter, Love-Declaration, or other Trifle
of that nature, can admit, the Harangue of a General encouraging his Soldiers
to Fight; or the Head of a Faction inciting a Mutiny; a Statesman giving his
Opinion of the Consequence of War or Peace; or the Description of a Battle,
Sedition, Sack of a Town, Burning or Shipwreck of a whole Fleet: Such things
must be expressed in other Terms, than the Despair of Celadon, or Complaints of
Astrea.

I will give you an Example, The great Doctor in the Art of Loving, who said
every Lover was a Soldier, and Love, as well as Mars, had his Camps and Armies;
yet knew the Trumpet was as little proper for the one, as the Flagalet for the
other. Besides he never spoke of War, but in Terms High and Magnifick; nor of
Love, but in Words Soft and Smooth to the last Degree of Delicacy. And though
his Style be every where Pure, and his Locution Roman throughout, yet when he
has in his Metamorphose, the Chaos or Deluge under his Hand, when he is to
describe the Birth of the World, the Combats of Giants, the Universal Shipwreck
of Mankind, he expresses himself with quite another Force; without leaving his
Purity, speaks in quite another Tone, than he does in his Elegies and
Love-Epistles.

This, to Interpret our Dear and Knowing Friend, who as a great Lover and
Artist in the Pureness of a Style, would be but understood, that of all
Ornaments he most esteemed Purity. We esteem it as much as he, and I am sure he
intends with us it ought to be accompanied with the Force, Dignity and
Elevation the Nobleness of History demands.

Let us proceed to Clearness, which is the second Quality required in the Style
of History. It may be made by the neatness of Words, that ought to be all
Intellible, and placed in so good Order, as not to evade, hinder or trouble the
Understanding of the Reader, from joining with that of the Writer, and taking
all the Fineness of his Thoughts. It may be made in the second place more
Advantagiously, and in a more Noble Manner, by certain Lights that pass from
the Intellect of the Author to his Imagination, and penetrating the Images they
there find, carry them bright as they are into his Style; from whence they
easily reflect by the Sight or Hearing into the Understanding, according to the
Capacity of those that Hear or Read. This sort of Clearness is the most
Graceful and Esteemed, but very Rare, and comes but from some Illuminated Wits
of the first Rate, that enlighten their Works by their own proper Luster, and
hold the same Order and Rank as the Planets amongst the Stars.

CHAP. VI. That the Style of History demands Brevity: And in what it ought to
consist.
THere remains but Brevity, that is a great Agreement to History, and a great
Charm to the Reader: But how few know in what this agreeable Shortness
consists; many place it in the Management and Sparing of words, and persuade
themselves, than to write in few, is to be short. Not knowing there are
Madrigals of six Verses, longer than Poems of twelve thousand. Harangues of a
quarter of an Hour, shorter than some Complements of four Lines. Others
establish it in a cut or broken Style, that is, without Band or Connection, that
falls and rises, begins and finishes in every Line. Father Matthew has given
the first Example of this manner of Writing and Speaking by Bits; and as ill
Examples are usually most followed, this Jargon was in Mode during the Minority
of the late King. And a certain Soldier of Rovergue or Perygort was made
Public with the Language of a Frantic; and put himself at the Head of a Band
of such who thought to give themselves Honor by a Madness like his. When the
Hercules of Seneca, and Orlando of Ariosto* as Furious as they are represented,
speak better Sense than those People. And the Corribantes of the Ancients, when
the Wine had turned their Heads, played the Extravagants more reasonably and
with more Followers. But my Wonder is, Malvezzi, otherwise so Worthy a Man, and
others of his Country, should pass the Alps and come into France, on purpose to
take this Infection.

This Brevity then we search after, is not made by Hashing of Sentences, and
maiming of Words. And those that take Salust and Tacitus for Patrons, are
mistaken, and chose those that condemn them. For though in some Descriptions,
where these great Men affecting to make haste, they serve themselves with some
Infinitives without Conjunctive Particles, a Privilege their Language gives
them; yet in all the rest their Style is conformable to the Masters Rules, that
will have it go roundly and with an equal Course; like that of a River, without
stop or turning by the Declention of the Canal. On the other side, As History
is a Structure, she demands Order and Connection as all other Buildings; and her
Materials without that, would make but a tumultuous Heap of Sand without Lime.

There are others that place Brevity in Constraint, and think they are short
whenever they pinch themselves in; when they have remass'd many things in few
Words. These deceive themselves, if they would have the Shoe less than the
Foot, and the Habit too strait for the Body; for thereby the Foot becomes not
more Noble, nor the Body better shaped. But from being better made, or more at
their Ease, they find themselves lamed, and suffer the Torture. Everything has
its Measure, and whether above, or below this Measure, as there is neither
Agreement nor Harmony, so no Beauty nor Pleasure must be sought after, but what
arises from it.

This Brevity, where the Matter is shortened, as Hangings folded up, and Beds
piled one upon another in a Wardrobe; is not the Shortness History requires;
she permits not things to be hid, and shown by pieces; will neither have them
too much extended, nor too closely pressed, without being lamed or dislocated;
that spoils the Figure, and offends the Sight. And it is in this properly
consists the Historick Shortness, to expose nothing that may be suppressed
without Injury to the Subject; to Suppress nothing that belongs to the
Integrity or Beauty of it; not to take off the Sight, till every thing has the
Extension it demands; to remember that never so little added, though but a
Line, is a Volume. This is the Opinion of all the Masters, of Cicero, who
allows a Narration its Agreement: And the Sight alone, (without Reason) teaches
us, there is no Beauty where there is want of Extension, and things heaped are
in disorder; of Quintilian, that condemns the Leanness and Dryness of a
Narration, and declares, That what is not of just Measure, is but Confusion; of
Plato that tells us, Shortness and Length have no Merit in themselves; and not
the most short, but what is best must be chosen.

I will finish by these Oracles, not so Equivocal or Deceitful as those of
Delph: Nor can I add any thing will give greater Value, or end this Treatise
with an Authority of greater Weight or better Esteem. However I will not quit
my Pen, till I have again acquainted the Reader, that what I have said of the
Historian, I have said of a Man not yet born, nor will not appear, but in that
Year that discovers the Perpetual Motion, and Philosophers Stone.

FINIS.
Books Sold by R. Sare at Grays-Inn-gate in Holbourn, and J. Hindmarsh against
the Exchange in Cornhill.
FAbles of Aesop and other Eminent Mythologists, with Morals and Reflections. By
Sir Roger L'Estrange. Folio.

The Genuine Epistles of St. Barnabas, St. Ignatius, St. Clement, St. Polycarp,
the Shepherd of Hermas, and the Martyrdoms of St. Ignatius and St. Polycarp.
Translated from the Greek by W. Wake, D. D. Octavo.

Seneca's Morals by way of Abstract. Octavo.

Erasmus Colloquies. Octavo.

Tully's Offices in Enlish. Twelves.

Bonas Guide to Eternity. The four last by Sir Roger L'Estrange.

Complete Setts, consisting of Eight Volumes of Letters Writ by a Turkish Spy,
who lived Forty five Years undiscovered at Paris. Giving an Impartial Account
to the Divan at Constantinople, of the most Remarkable Transactions of Europe
during the said time. Twelves.

Humane Prudence: The Art by which a Man may Raise Himself and Fortune to
Grandeur. The sixth Edition. Twelves.

Moral Maxims and Reflections. In Four Parts. Written in French by the Duke of
Rochefoucault, now made English. Twelves.

Epictetus's Morals with Simplicius's Commentaries. Made English from the
Greek, by George Stanhope late Fellow of Kings-College in Cambridge. Octavo.

The Parson's Counselor, or the Law of Tithes. The Fifth Edition, very much
enlarged by Sir Simon Degge. Octavo.

The History, Choice and Method of Studies. By Mons. Fleury some time Preceptor
to the Princes of Conty, Mons. de Vermandois, and to the Dukes of Bourgoyn and
Anjou. Octavo.

Reason: An Essay. By Sir George Machenzie. Twelves.

The Moral History of Frugality. By Sir George Machenzie. Octavo.

A Discourse of Providence. By Tho. Gregory M. A. late of Wodham College in
Oxford, and Lecturer of Fulham. Octavo.

FINIS.

