AN ANSWER To the BISHOP of CONDOM's BOOK; Entitled, An Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church, upon Matters of Controversy.

Written Originally in French.

DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the KING's most Excellent
Majesty; And are to be Sold by Joseph Wild in Castlestreet. 1676.

SI quis existimet in hoc Libello (cui Titulus, An Answer to the Bishop of
Condom, etc.) reperiri quid Doctrinae aut Institutis Ecclesiae Anglicanae non
admodum conform, id donandum est peculiari Reformatarum in Gallia Ecclesiarum
statui. Certe responsi corpus vere aureumcenseo, and dignum quod

Imprimatur.

Edw. VVetenhall S. T. P. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino, D.
Michaeli Archiepiscopo Dublin, etc. a Sacris Domesticis.

The Epistle Dedicatory. To his Grace, MICHAEL, By Divine Providence Archbishop
of DUBLIN, And Lord Chancellor of IRELAND.
IT is well known to the World, that those accomplishments which have at all
times been most esteemed by the wisest men, as Prudence, Temperance, Justice
and Fortitude, have even in the worst of times, most eminently appeared in your
Grace. Which virtues have shined with greater luster, by the light derived from
His Sacred Majesty, whose Princely wisdom has thought fit to choose such an
Instrument, to bear so considerable a part of Government, in a Kingdom so
lately retrieved from almost total ruin; and to distribute the highest
Justice, where so many several Interests interfere; which nevertheless is done
with so much moderation, that nothing but Envy can repine at your Graces
eminent degree in Church and State.

It is sufficiently known, how blind Tradition and custom in matters of
Religion, have inthralled the minds of most of the Natives of Ireland, which
certainly makes them the more unfit in all respects for the service of their
Prince. This consideration moved me to expose the following Treatise unto
public view in that Kingdom. It was lately written by a Reu. Divine of the
Reformed Church, in answer to the Bishop of Condom a person that upon mature
deliberation, with all the Art imaginable, undertook an Exposition of the
Belief of the Roman Church: wherein it is evident to the World, how contrary
this Prelate's success is unto our Jewell's against Cole, Harding, and other
Roman Champions; whereby the decay of that Politic Religion in one Century may
be perceived, and the excellent nature of Truth, which prevails over all
opposers, may be discovered; which (if any thing) should invite men to submit
unto it. Some it may be will censure me, for dediecating things of this
natur-unto your Grace, being therein so perfectly verst already. To such I
shall only say, that good things are not the worse for being often heard; and
knowing that your Grace has at all times earnestly contended for the Faith and
been a zealous promoter of it, these matters being in their Original dressed
after the exquisitest manner, I have presumed to send them into the World under
your Graces Patronage: beseeching Almighty God long to preserve your Grace for
His Majesty and these Nations good: which shall ever be the earnest prayer of

Your GRACES Most obedient and most humble Servitour, Jos. Walker.

To Monsieur CONRART.
SInce it is you, Sir, who inspired me with the thought of undertaking the
defense of our common cause, against a Prelate of the reputation of the Bishop
of Condom, be pleased also to become responsible to the public, for the manner
in which I have acquitted my self herein. I am persuaded a man could not set
here a better name than yours, to do no wrong to himself, or to give more
weight to the Answer, he had made. It is notorious that you are known through
all parts where desert is known: You are equally loved and esteemed by all
worthy persons, both of one and the other Communion, and by the Bishop of
Condom himself. And as all the world agrees, that none can wear a spirit or an
heart more upright, than that which you own, so it will be easily presumed,
that those sentiments which you shall have approved are no less sincere and
faithful. Nor can any say, that this is an Anonymous Work, in that they see not
my Name here, if you will be pleased it be known, that he, who writ it, has the
honor to be one of the friends of Monsieur Conrart.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Bishop of Condom's Treatise has appeared three several times, and at each
time in a very different condition: The first in a Manuscript about four years
ago, at that time only containing the Articles of worshipping Saints, of Images
and Relics, the matter of Justification, and that of the Sacraments,
excepting only the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which was not as yet therein.
The second about nine or ten months past, of the first Impression, which was
recalled. The Bishop of Condom had thereunto joined at that time, not only the
Articles of the Eucharist, of Tradition, of the authority of the Church, of the
authority of the Pope, all which do make the amplest and most considerable part
of his Treatise, but he had also changed several places of the Manuscript Copy.
The third, as it does now appear in this second Edition, which the Printer
calls the first, because the first was not published; and it is in this second
Edition chiefly, that it is to be found that the Bishop of Condom has changed
several places, as well of the first Edition, as of the Manuscript that was
dispersed amongst us; whether he did it of his own inclination, or to
accommodate himself the better unto the Opinions of those of his own communion,
with whom he had conferred

It ought not to be thought strange, that those who in these days publish
Books in the matter of Religion, should with all circumspection consider them
over again and again, and especially when it is upon points of Controversy,
because then a man's business is not only to establish his own belief, but also
to engage the contrary, which requires an exact knowledge of all the principles
and opinions of one and the other. But if it be true that the Church of Rome
has a plain form of Doctrine, as the Bishop of Condome would have us believe;
if the Bishop of Condom's Treatise be only a bare Exposition of Faith, as the
Title does import, and as he himself does declare in the beginning ( page 2.)
one would think there were not necessary for that, either subtlety, vizour, or
contrivance: it would be only needful to tell us at once, with an entire
opening of heart, what is believed, and the manner how it is believed; and for
so doing, the most natural, and least artificial manner is always best.

I will not here set down the alterations which the Bishop of Condom has made,
unto what was contained in the Manuscript that was before mentioned; but I
cannot pass by with silence, the difference that is to be found in the first,
and second Edition, because nothing does more clearly show the ground of their
opinions, who write, than the different manner, wherein it is seen that they
conceive the same things, at several times. They may to much purpose lay down
principles, and draw conclusions, form Grave Debates, maintained by sprightly
figures of speech, adapt terms, employ those at certain times, that are of a
suspended and indeterminate sense: One word naturally escaped does say or
gainsay more, than a whole Book can establish; the very care taken in recalling
such a word, does speak it much the more.

The greatest part of these differences should have been touched in the very
Body of the Answer, in the places to which they relate, as we have touched some
upon the Articles of Transubstantiation, and the authority of the Pope: but it
fell out when we begun to examine this Treatise, we had not then the first
Edition in our hands to compare it with the second. Howsoever though we are
constrained to report these passages altered, without any connection of one,
with the other, or with the matters whereon they depend, and without making
such reflection, as otherwise might have been made, that hinders not, but that
by the simple comparison of these two Editions, it may be sufficiently seen,
how that the Romish Church has but few of these worships and doctrines which
separate us from her, which do not aggrieve or create trouble unto the ablest
of her communion, at such time as they engage to express a little clearly, what
they think of them.

This same thing may also work this other effect, how little soever equity
there be in the world, that our Masters of the Roman Church must more and more
acknowledge, that they ought not to have a disesteem or aversion for us, by
reason of some difference in opinion touching things, of which the most eminent
amongst them have themselves so great difficulty to satisfy themselves; and
the rather, because they well know that they are born and bred in their belief,
and with the principles, upon which their Belief is founded: whereas we are
born and bred up in a Belief opposite, and with principles contrary unto
theirs, which is the cause that we do feel the same difficulties more to the
quick, than they can do.

Page 1. of the 1. Edition.
In the first place, at the beginning of the first Edition, the Bishop of Condom
does declare, that he will propose unto us simply the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome, separating the Questions that she has decided, from those which do not
appertain to Faith, etc. This does speak plainly enough, that all those
Questions that are not proposed in the Bishop of Condom's Treatise, do not at
all appertain to Faith; and this being granted, we are freed from a great
number of doctrines and practices of the Romish Church, which the Bishop of
Condom does not propose unto us, or that he does separate from those which he
does propose. In the last Edition the Bishop of Condom recals this Declaration,
and says quite another thing, though as to the rest he changes nothing in
this regard in the whole model, nor in the continuance of his Treatise: He
says, that he will propose simply the opinions of the Romish Church, Page 2.
of the 2. Edition Page 7, and 8, of the 1. Edition.
and distinguish them from those that have been falsely imputed unto her

2. In the first, speaking of the worship of Saints, he says, That the honor
that the Roman Church gives unto Saints is religious, or that it is not
religious, but because she gives this honor with relation unto God. He proves
the same, That this honor should be so far from being blamed, because it is
religious, that on the contrary it were to be blamed, if it were not religious.

In the last Edition he perceives that he has said, Page 13.
and proved too much, and not knowing how to recall all that he had said, he
turns the thing into a form of doubt, or into a suspended sense: if the honor
(says he) that the Church gives unto the holy Virgin, and the Saints can be
called religious, it is because it necessarily refers unto God.

3. In the first, whereas we allege, P. 9.
as matter of fact, that there is no footstep of any worshipping of Saints in
the three first Ages or Centuries; or whereas the Bishop of Condom himself
says, that Mr. Daille does confine himself within those Ages. He adds, The
reason is, because it is certain that in those three Ages, the Church being
more busied in suffering, than writing, left many things to be cleared in her
doctrines and practices, etc. In the last, he altogether expunges these words,
whatever fair evasion they had: he thought this was to confess something too
advantageous for us, that not only the worshipping of Saints, but also several
other doctrines and practices of the Church of Rome, are not at all to be found
in the Writings of the three First Ages, though it is known that the Bishop of
Condom is not the only person of his communion that has not been able to
restrain himself from making this confession. And he is sensible also without
doubt, that the reason that he would give for this silence, was in effect but a
weak color, that is, that the Church was more employed in suffering than in
writing, because that the sufferings of the Church in those First Ages did not
at all hinder, but that besides the sacred Writings of Evangelists and
Apostles, which are infinitely above the Writings of all other Ages, we have
also sufficient large Volumes of many great persons of the three First
Centuries; as of Justin Martyr, S. Iren, Clement Priest of Alexandria etc.
of Tertullian, St. Cyprian, of Origin, and many others before and after them;
for although Tertullian and Origin held some erroneous Opinions, that hinders
not, but that one or the other, might have made mention of the worship of
Saints, if it were true, that they had seen it practiced in their days.

4. In the First, having laid down the several means, whereby it can be
supposed that the Saints do hear our Prayers, whether it be by the ministry of
Angels, or whether that God himself makes them know our desires by a particular
revelation, or that he discovers unto them this secret in his infinite essence,
he adds, or whether that by any other way more impenetrable, and yet more
unknown, that God makes us receive the fruit of those Prayers that we address
unto those blessed Souls; which does import in that place, that whether the
Saints do hear our Prayers, or whether they hear them not, God does not fail to
recompense the devotion that men have for the Saints: Annot, Elucid: Quaest:
228, in Epist. ad Rom: Sanctos pro nobis interpellare, non est aliud quam pro
meritis eorum bonos affectus quos habemus in eos propter Deum remunerare, and
ideo nihil interest sive nos audiant, sive non audiant.
and this is also the Doctrine of Hugh of St. Victor, an Author of the Twelfth
Century. In the last, the Bishop of Condom does expunge this Opinion, which
does not only show too much uncertainty touching the ground of such a religious
Worship, but a kind of incompatibility to address Prayers to Saints, if it may
be supposed that those Prayers be not at all understood.

5. In the First Edition, speaking of Images, he drops these words, that the
Church of Rome does not so much honor the image of an Apostle, or Martyr, as
she does honor the Apostle or Martyr in presence of the image. This imports,
that properly there is no honor rendered unto the Image it self, or that there
is but very little given unto it, as they usually tell us in common discourse;
but this does not speakfull enough according to the Roman Pontifical, and
according to the Council of Trent, and much less according to the general
practice of the Romish Church: Therefore it is that in the second Edition the
Bishop of Condom expresses himself more strongly, When we do honor the image
of an Apostle, or Martyr, Page 32.
our intention is not so much to honor the image, as to honor the Apostle, or
Martyr, in presence of the image.

6. In the First Edition, concluding the Article of the worship of Saints, Page
33.
There is nothing (says he) more unjust, than to say that the Church does make
all devotion to consist in worshipping Saints, because on the contrary she does
not impose any obligation on particular persons, to apply themselves to that
practice. He adds, We have already observed the words of the Council of Trent,
which is content to term it good and useful, without teaching that it is
necessary, or that it is commanded. So that it plainly enough appears, that the
Church condemns none, but such as separate through disrespect, or a spirit of
dissension and revolving. This does intimate plainly, that a man may very well
omit the worship of Saints, because the Church does not impose any obligation
(...) practice i^, and that the only condemns such as reject it through a
spirit of scorn and dissension.

In the Last Edition, the Bishop of Condom reforms all this Article; on the one
hand he strikes out these two Propositions, that the Church does not impose any
obligation to practice the worship of Saints, and that the worship of Saints is
not a practice necessary nor commanded, as if he no more intended to speak the
same thing, or at least that he would not speak it so plainly or absolutely as
he had done, but leave it more undetermined: and on the other hand, whereas he
had said the Church condemns only those, that reject this practice through
disrespect, or a spirit of dissension, he puts, by disrespect or by error. By
which means, supposing that we are in an error, as the Church of Rome does
suppose, this Last Edition returns us under the curse, from which we were freed
by the First.

Page 47.
7. In the First, concluding what he had said of Justification, he adds, that it
was needless to know more to be a sound Christian; which does ease and free
Religion from a great many nice distinctions, from Decisions, Canons, and
Anathema's of the Council, in regard the Bishop of Condom lays aside all these
Doctrines, thinking those he has touched to be sufficient; In the Last he
changes this opinion into another quite different; he only says, that this
Doctrine is enough to show Christians, that they ought to refer unto God,
through Jesus Christ, the glory of their salvation; so it is, that the Bishop
of Condom does often charge what follows, without regarding what went before:
from whence one may judge, what can be the sincerity of his arguing; or, to be
plain, from the same propositions, he draws very different conclusions.

8. In the First he says, Page 5^.
that the Church has always acknowledged the two different ways of obtaining
remission of sins, which he proceeds to explain, and the First by the pardon
which God gives us of them; the other by another grace, and another absolution,
which the Church grants in form of judgment, by imposing upon us works of
penance.

In the second he finds, that it is not in his power to show, that the Church
has at all times taught this Last manner of applying the remission of sins,
which makes him to curtail this proposition.

Page 56.
9. In the First, being about to finish the Article of Indulgences, he concludes
that this matter relates principally unto Discipline; which words are very
remarkable, because both parties do agree, that matters of Discipline may be
taken away or changed, according to the circumstances of times and places: In
the Last, he says not any more, that it is the matter of indulgences which
relates unto Discipline, but only the manner of dispensing them.

^2, 63,
10. In the First he says, upon the Sacraments, that they confer grace by
virtue of the external action done upon us. In the Last, he joins unto the
action, the words that are pronounced.

^e 65:
11. In the First, speaking of confirmation, he says, that all Christian
Churches have retained this custom ever since the Apostles days, accompanying
the imposition of hands with the holy Chrisme. In the Last, he has suppressed
these words, since the Apostles days, as if they had been said through
inadvertency, Page 74:
in the First Edition; but in stead of this expression, accompanying the
imposition of hands with holy Chrisme, which gave to understand, that the use
of Chrisme was joined unto the imposition of hands from the time of the
Apostles; he has put, making use also of holy Chrisme, having very well
perceived without doubt, that at the least the use of Chrisme was not brought
in, till a long time after the imposition of hands, and that it is not near of
so ancient a date as the Apostles days.

12. In the First, P. 76, 85, 92, 96, and 30.
upon the Eucharist, he speaks of our Belief in several places, as if we
believed a real presence of the Body of Christ in the Sacrament, and this under
the pretext that we say, that we really partake of the Body of Jesus Christ.
All his consequences are grounded upon this supposition. In the Last he plainly
does perceive, that this supposition was easily destroyed by a bare disavowing
it on our parts, because never any of us have said, that we believed the real
presence of the Body of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament. This is the reason, that
in the Last Edition, speaking of what we believe, he uses every where the
terms participation, or of real communion, in stead of that of real presence,
which he used every where in the First, which is very different, because the
one does give way to suppose, that the Body of Jesus Christ must come down from
Heaven into the Sacrament, to be present therein: and we say only, that by
Faith we lift our hearts to Heaven, where he is, and that it is so, that we
partake of Jesus Christ, very really indeed, but spiritually: nevertheless the
Bishop of Condom correcting the term of real presence, which he imputed unto
us, leaves the same consequences which he had seemed upon this Idea, prejudging
that the belief of the real participation ought to have the same effect, as if
we believed the presence it self. This is called, to take away the Foundation
and leave the Building in the air, or at best, but to underprop it, by putting
in some other support in the place of the Foundation.

13. In the First, among the many consequences that he draws from our believing
a real participation, after having said, that it must needs be, that besides
the spiritual communion of the Body of Christ, etc. we must admit of a real
communion of the Body of the same Savior; Page 100.
he concludes that the Church of Rome would be satisfied, would we make this
confession; which is of very great consequence, because that this conclusion
does free us from Transubstantiation, and shelter the Lutherans that believe
the reality. In the latter, some other consideration made the Bishop of Condom
stifle this opinion, pa. 112.
and put another altogether different in the place; they will never (says he)
explain this truth in any the least solid manner, if they do not return unto
the opinion of the Church.

page 109:
14. In the First, the word Transubstantiation is seen in the Margin, in form of
a title, or article, as well as in the Last, to mark out the matter of
Controversy treated of in that place; but throughout the Exposition there is
nothing in any place of the Article, nor the term of Transubstantiation, nor
this Proposition, that the Bread and Wine are changed into the Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ. In the latter, page, 124,
after these words, the true Body, and the true Blood of Jesus Christ, he has
added, into which the Bread and the Wine are changed, which is that, that is
called Transubstantiation.

page 115.
15. In the First, speaking of the Mass, he concludes only, that it may
reasonably be called a Sacrifice, which implies also, that one may safely
forbear giving it that name. In the latter, he changes this conclusion into
another far different; for he affirms strongly, that there is nothing wanting
in the Mass to be a true Sacrifice, which yet are two consequences very
different to be drawn from one Doctrine: that is to say, that what the Bishop
of Condom proposes in this place for the proving that the Mass is a true
Sacrifice, does prove no more, than that it may reasonably be called by this
name.

16. In the First, p, 132,
treating of the belief of them who are called Lutherans, the Bishop of Condom
speaks generally of the whole Party, that they reject the adoration of the
Sacrament, which is true. In the latter, page 148.
he reduces this general Proposition unto a particular one, which destroys the
former; for he only says, that some Lutherans reject the adoration, without
the appearance of any ground, which should oblige him to the making such
restriction.

17. In the First, page 113.
he draws this consequence from the Doctrine of the real presence, that he that
can endure the reality, which, says he, is the most important and most
difficult point, may easily digest the rest: In the latter he bethought
himself, that this rest comprehends Transubstantiation, Adoration, the
Sacrifice of the Mass, and the taking away the Cup, and that they are not
things so easily believed; wherefore he speaks a little slacker, that enduring
the reality, we ought also to endure the rest.

page 165.
18. In the First, touching the authority of the Holy Chair, he says, that
their profession of Faith does oblige them to acknowledge the Church of Rome as
Mistress, and to tender true obedience unto the Pope as Sovereign. In the
latter, he wraps up this Sovereign power in more general terms, which conclude
nothing positively; we acknowledge, says he, this Sovereignty, speaking of St.
Peter, in his Successors; unto whom, is due, for this reason the submission and
obedience, that the holy Councils and Fathers have always taught.

19. Upon the same point he says in the First Edition, that the rights of
pretensions of the Popes, which the Reformed Ministers are always alleging,
to make that power odious, are not of the Catholic Faith, nor at all set down
in the Profession of Faith. In the latter, he says, in more indefinite terms,
that as to those matters, of which there is dispute in the Schools, etc. it is
not at all necessary to speak thereof, seeing they are not ^f the Catholic
Faith.

20. To conclude, page 518.
in the First Edition, the Bishop of Condom drawing to the conclusion of his
Treatise, says, that the Fundamentals of Salvation are the adoration of one
only God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and a belief in one Savior, etc. In the
Latter, he recalls this so absolute Proposition, plainly seeing, that the
allowing this Maxim is to acknowledge, that it is us properly, who have the
fundamentals of Salvation; for our Doctrine reduces it self unto these two
Heads, and we have nothing contrary unto them, neither in reality, nor in
appearance.

I pass over some other alterations that are less considerable, especially if
looked on each apart, but all together do sufficiently speak the trouble, the
Bishop of Condom had, to put his Treatise into the condition it is now in.

The only thing to be added, in this regard, is, that though it may plainly be
perceived that the Bishop of Condom proposed to himself two principal ends in
his Treatise, the one to insinuate the Doctrine of the Church of Rome,
diminishing as much as he could, what she holds that is most violently
offensive; the other to oppose ours, principally upon two points, in which he
believed he could have put us unto great difficulties, namely, the reality of
the Body of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, and the authority of the Church;
nevertheless it appears, that it is only upon the positive Doctrine of the
Roman Church, that the Bishop of Condom has staggered, that he has touched
and retouched, withdrawn, diminished, or added; and finally, that he has made
all the alterations above mentioned.

Now from whence could proceed this kind of variation in an Exposition of
Faith? (for it is known how well the Bishop of Condom is qualified, and the
great clearness and readiness he has in expressing himself) It cannot be said,
but that he understood perfectly, not only the grounds of the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, but of ours also, four years past, when his Manuscript Copy
was dispersed amongst us; or ten months since, when he caused his Treatise to
be printed the first time, as well as he knows it, at this present.

Therefore it must needs be, that these difficulties do proceed from the very
nature of the Opinions that he lays down, which have no certain foundation,
which are not consequent enough, and which have not that perfect proportion,
that the several parts of a Doctrine ought to have, one to the other. A man
believes as the Church believes, because he believes the Church cannot err.
This is soon said, but when he goes about to explain what the Church of Rome
believes, by what motives, and upon what grounds she believes, the mind
unsatisfied knows not upon what to fix.

The light of reason draws one way, authority draws the other; a man speaks
more or less than he would, or otherwise than the Council of Trent, or the
Doctors, or the general practice of the people would have him speak: He writes,
he blots out, he corrects, endeavoring to satisfy all the world; and after
all, he has much ado to satisfy himself, in what is tendered unto others.

However, it is certain, that there remains not now one word in the Bishop of
Condom's Treatise, which has not been exactly scanned and placed, and therein
it is without doubt, that is comprised, what may be most curiously and
speciously spoken for the Church of Rome, whether we regard the opinions,
whereunto the Bishop of Condom has, as it were, confined himself, or the terms
he made choice of to insinuate his Doctrine, and to wave the difficulties which
created him most trouble. His Treatise being otherwise short enough, it is
credible there could not be assigned a better manner of answering it, than that
which is followed; which is not only to allege his opinions, and the reasons
upon which they are grounded, but almost throughout, the proper terms in which
he conceived the one, and the other. Furthermore, besides that this is a means
to lay his Treatise plainly before the eyes of those that might have forgotten
part of it, or that probably might not yet have read it, the Bishop of Condom
cannot in the least say, that there was any design to conceal or cloak the
sense, and the force of his expressions; and it will also be seen more exactly,
if the answer made unto him, be just, and sufficient.

The Answer explains it self from the beginning, the particular end that is
proposed, and the order that is observed.

The reasons are also touched which may be given, wherefore no enlargement
particularly has been made on the differences, that there might be betwixt the
Bishop of Condom's Expositions, and the common doctrine of the Church of Rome.
It shall only be added in this regard, that besides that this discourse must
ther^ have been of greater length than i^ was intended to be, it is known tha^
there is a certain person of the Church of Rome, which does write against this
very Exposition of the Bishop o^ Condom's, and what those of his communion will
speak of their own belief, will be much of greater weight and less suspected
from their own mouth, than from ours.

Yet it is easy to discern by reading the Bishop of Condom's Treatise, in the
condition wherein he has put it in this second Edition, that excepting what it
may be seen, he extenuates touching the worshipping Saints and Images, touching
the article of Satisfactions, touching that of the Sacrifice of the Mass, and
touching the authority of Popes: The difference there is betwixt his
Exposition, and and the common Doctrine of the Romish Church, does principally
consist, in that the Bishop of Condom does wrap up some of the most difficult
things, in indefinite or general terms, and does suppress a great number of
other Doctrines that are received and believed amongst those of their
Communion, as is taken notice of in the Answer.

But it is no less easy to foresee, by the degree the Bishop of Condom holds
with those of his persuasion, that if there were a necessity that he should
explain himself more particularly upon all these differences, he would not fail
in all likelihood, to give unto his expressions a sense, that right or wrong,
should well agree with that of the Romish Church; and as to those doctrines and
practices, which he seems to abandon, he will say it may be also, if every one
did speak always as he thinks, that his intent was not to abandon them
altogether, but only to withdraw them for a time from our sight, to the end to
engage those amongst us, that would be inclinable, to accommodate themselves to
these first overtures.

Therefore to reduce this Answer unto something that may be less Subject unto
contestation, and of more certain use; the matter chiefly contended for herein
is, to show that the Doctrine of the Romish Church, such as the Bishop of
Condom does represent it in this Second Edition of his Treatise, does
nevertheless always overthrow the foundations of Salvation. Notwithstanding to
the end none may be wholly mistaken, as to the difference there is betwixt the
Bishop of Condom's Exposition and the Common Doctrine of the Romish Church*
besides what has been said of this difference in several places of the answer,
it was thought convenient here to insert Word for Word, the form of Confession
of Faith by the Council, which is as it were the Abridgement of the belief of
the Romish Church, Those that shall read this form with a little reflection,
will easily judge whether the mind and intention of this confession, be conform
in all things unto the mind and intention of the Bishop of Condom's Treatise:
and those of our Communion in particular, when they shall be solicited to
change their Religion, upon considerations like to these, which are offered in
this Treatise, will at last see, whether that which shall be proposed to them
to engage them, is so agreeable in all points unto what they are made to
promise, and solemnly swear, when once they are engaged.

On one side it is told us, that We shall not at all be obliged to call upon
Saints, if we are not willing, provided that we do not condemn these that do
call on them; that what has been hitherto called adoration, or Worshipping of
Images, is nothing properly, but an honor that is rendered unto the Originals,
and an help for instructing the people; that works and satisfactions are but an
application of the merits of Jesus Christ: In like manner the Mass, but an
application of the Sacrifice of his death; Transubstantiation but a word, or
expression, that means nothing after all, but the reality of the body of Jesus
Christ in the Sacrament, which we our selves do also believe (as well as the
Lutherans) in receiving the same Sacrament, although one and the other in a
different manner; that the Cup may be given to the people for the advantage of
Peace; that provided a precedence be allowed in the person of the Pope, for
order and unity's sake, what farther rights he pretends unto, are only things
controverted in the Schools, but do not belong unto Faith, and that that the
Learned in the Gallican Church do yield unto Popes but little more Authority,
than we our selves would be willing they should allow them; that to conclude,
all these other Doctrines and Practices that aggrieve us, are at best but
private opinions that may be laid aside. This is it, they ordinarily discourse
to us, to make us inclinable to themselves, and this is in particular the sense
and Soul of the Bishop of Condoms Treatise, more openly indeed and more
expressly in the Manuscript Copy, and what has been cited of the first Edition,
but yet clearly enough in the second. On the other side the, profession of
Faith declares in so many words, that we must believe and receive all the
traditions, all the institutions, and all the customs of the Roman Church;
which does comprise generally, all that is known, and that is not known. It
says yet more expressly, that we ought to pray unto Saints, to Worship their
relics, have Images of Jesus Christ, of the Virgin, and of all the Saints, and
render them the honor and the Worship due unto them, admit of Seven true
Sacraments, and embrace all the Council of Trent has said and decided touching
justification (and by consequence the merit of Works, satisfactions, Purgatory,
and all the Doctrine of Indulgences) believe the conversion of all the
substance of the Bread into the body of Jesus Christ, and the conversion of all
the substance of the Wine into his blood, which is called Transubstantiation,
and that all Jesus Christ is entirely received, and the true Sacrament, under
the one and the other of the two species: Lastly that we are to believe that
the Church of Rome is the Mistress of all other Churches, to swear entire
obedience unto the Pope of Rome and generally to receive all other things
whatsoever, that are taught by the Councill^ and particularly by the Council of
Tre^^ which does comprise generally wh^^ a man will, and all that is in
dispute. T^^^ is what is formally required of th^^^ that present themselves
before the C^rate, the Bishop, or the great pe^tentiary now let all these
Articles (...) Faith be compared with the style (...) the Bishop of Condoms
Treatise, and afterward, Let it be maturely judged if this be one and the same
Doctrine

For our parts, being very far from aggravating the difference there is betwixt
the one and the other, or from having a mind to make a greater distance betwixt
us and the Church of Rome, than there is indeed, We believe that there is
nothing more to be desired for the good of Christian Religion, and by little
and little to bring men's Spirits mutually nearer, that that all those of the
Roman Church generally, would at least accommodate themselves freely and openly
unto these sort of sweetnings, that the Bishop of Condom does; and that instead
of heightning the differences that there may be between his exposition, and the
Doctrine which they commonly profess, they would Write on the contrary in the
same sense that he does, and clearer and fuller yet than he has Written; that
Lastly, they would all say, at least as he does, that this is alone the true
Doctrine of the Roman Church. Religion at least would find it self discharged
and freed of a great many Doctrines and practices, which do nothing, but
burden consciences, and this would be, in sundry points, as one of those
insensible changes, which have come into the Church; but a change for the
better, and an happy beginning of Reformation, that might have much more happy
consequences.

The BULL of our mo^ Holy Lord, Lord PIU^ by Divine Providenc^ Pope the IV. of
tha^ Name: Touching the Form of the Oath (...) Profession of Faith. Translated
out of Latin. PIUS Bishop, Servant of the Se^vants of God, [ad perpetuam (...)
memoriam] for a perpetual record
THE duty of our Apostoli^ Charge, which lies upon (...) requires, that those
things which the Lord Almighty, for the prudent guidance of his Church, has
vouchsafed from Heaven, to inspire in the Holy Fathers assembled in his Name we
make have to put in execution without delay, for his praise and glory. Where^
therefore according to the Order of the Council of Trent, all, whom it shall
henceforth happen to be set over Cathedral or Superior Churches, or to be
provided for by any dignities, or Canonries of the same, or any other
whatsoever Ecclesiastical benefices having cure of Souls, are bound to make
public profession of the Orthodox Faith, and to engage and swear that they
will continue in obedience to the Roman Church: We willing also that the same
be observed by all, whosoever shall be disposed of, in Monasteries, Convents,
Religious houses, or other places whatsoever, of whatsoever Regular Orders,
even of the Military ones, by whatsoever name or Title, and to this purpose,
that what concerns our care may not be the least wanting to any, that a
profession of one and the same faith may be uniformly exibited by all, and that
one certain form of it may be known unto all, do by power Apostolic strictly
enjoin and command, by the tenor of these presents, that this very form
annexed to these presents be published, and that it be received and observed
all the World over by those, by whom according to the decrees of the said
Council it does belong, and by all other persons aforesaid; and that under the
penalties by the said Council enacted against offenders in this case, the
aforesaid Profession be Solemnly made, according to this and no other form, in
this tenor.

IN. Do with firm Faith believe and profess all and every things and thing
which are contained in the Symbol of Faith which the Holy Roman Church uses,
viz.

Articles of Faith taken out of the Symbols of Nice and Con: stantinople.
I believe in one God the Father Almighty maker of Heaven and Earth, and of all
things visible and invisible: and in one Lord Jesus Christ the only begotten
Son of God, and brought forth of his Father before all Ages; God of God, Light
of Light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, of the same substance with
the Father, by whom all things were made, who for us men and our Salvation came
down from Heaven and was incarnate by the Holy Ghost, of the Virgin Mary, and
made man; was also crucified for us under Pontius Pilat, suffered and was
buried, and rose again the third day according to the Scriptures; and ascended
into Heaven, sits at the right hand of the Father; and shall come again with
Glory to judge both the quick and the dead; of whose Kingdom there shall be no
end: And in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of Life, who proceeds from the
Father and the Son, who together with the Father and the Son is worshipped and
glorified, who spoke by the Prophets: And one Holy Catholic and Apostolic
Church. I confess one Baptism for the remission of sins, and I look for the
Resurrection of the dead, and the Life of the World to come. Amen.

The Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Traditions and the other observations,
Articles of Faith touching the matters in Cotroversie, which the Romish Church
has added to the Ancient
and constitutions of the same Church, I most firmly admit and embrace.

Likewise I admit the Holy Scripture, according to that sense, which our Holy
Mother the Church ever did and does hold, to whom it belongs to judge of the
true sense and interpretation of the Scriptures; neither will I receive or
interpret it, but according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers

I profess also, that there are seven true and proper Sacraments of the new
Law, instituted by our Lord (...) Christ, and necessary (...) Mankind, though
not (...) person; to wit, Baptism, (...), the Eucharist, Penance Extreme
Unction, [Holy] Order, and Matrimony; and that they do confer grace: And of
these, ^^^t Baptism, Confirmation, and Order without Sacrilidge cannot be
repeated.

The received and approved rites also of the Catholic Church, in the Solemn
administration of all the foresaid Sacraments I do receive and admit.

I do embrace and receive all and every points and point touching original sin,
and justification, which have been defined and declared in the Holy Council of
Trent.

I do in like manner profess, that there is in the Mass offered up to God a
true, proper and propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and the dead. And that
in the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, after Consecration, there is
truly, really, and substantially the body and blood, together with the Soul and
Divinity, of our Lord Jesus Christ; and that the whole Substance of bread is
converted into the body of Christ, and the whole substance of the Wine into his
Blood, which conversion the Catholic Church calls Transubstantion.

I acknowledge likewise that under one kind only, all and entire Christ, and a
true Sacrament is taken.

I do constantly hold there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls there detained,
are helped by the suffrages of the faithful.

In Like manner, that the Saints reigning with Christ are to be Venerated and
called upon, and that they offer up Prayers to God for us, and that their
Relics are to be had in veneration.

I do most steadfastly affirm, that the images of Christ, and of the Mother of
God always a Virgin, are to be had and kept, and that due honor and
veneration is to be given to them.

That the Power of Indulgences was left by Christ in the Church, and that the
use of them is most wholesome to Christian People.

I do acknowledge that the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church i^ Mother
and Mistress of all Churches

I do promise and swear true obedience to the Pope of Rome, Successor of St.
Peter the Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ.

I do likewise without doubting receive and profess all other matters, that are
delivered, defined, and declared by the Sacred Canons, and the Ecumenical
Councils, and especially by the Council of Trent: and I do likewise together
condemn, reject and Anathematize all things contrary, and all whatsoever
Heresies condemned, rejected and Anathematized by the Church.

Here they lay their hand on the Gospels
I the same N. do promise vow and swear, that as far as lies in me I will take
care, that this self same true Catholic Faith, out of which no man can be
saved, which at present, of my own accord, I profess and truly hold, by Gods
help, be most constantly held and confessed by me, whole and inviolate, to the
Last breath of my Life; and that the same be held, taught, and Preached by all
that are under me, or those, the care of whom shall in my charge belong to me.
So God help me and these Gods Holy Gospels

We will farther, that these present Letters be read in our Apostolic Chancery
according to the accustomed manner: and, to the end they may be the more easily
known unto all, that they be Registered in the Rolls thereof, and that they be
Printed.

And let no person whatsoever dare to infringe this declaration of our Will and
commandment, or by bold presumption to offend against it. And if any one shall
presume to attempt it, let him know that he incurs the indignation of Almighty
God, and of his Blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul. Dated at Rome at St. Peter's,
the Thirteenth day of November, in the year of the incarnanation of our Lord
1564. And of our Popedom the Fifth.

Fed. Cardinal. Caesius. Cae. Glorierius.

The Stationer has in his hands the Attestation of Messieurs Claude, de
l'Angle, Daille, and Allix, showing that they have seen this Answer, and that
they have not found any thing in it contrary to their Religion.

AN ANSWER UNTO THE BOOK OF MONSIEUR, The Bishop of CONDOM.
Monsieur the Bishop of Condom has too much justice to take ill the answering
his Book; Design of this Trea, tise.
On the contrary he seems rather to invite us to the same in terms
sufficiently express. Page 187
And besides it is well known, that defense is a natural and favorable right,
especially when it concerns a thing so dear as the interest of truth and
Religion ought to be.

Page 187
He only desires, that in case a^ one answer his Treatise, he would not
undertake to refute the Doctrine which (...) contains, Page 188
nor examine the different way that the Catholic Divines have used (...)
establish the Doctrine of the Council (...) Trent, nor the several consequences
the particular Doctors have drawn thence, Page 3.
being things that are not necessaril^ nor universally received; Page 189
but that (...) would chiefly hold himself to three things to prove that the
Faith of the Church of Rome is not faithfully laid down i^ his Book, as he
believes it is; or tha^ he would show that this exposition does Leave all
objections in their force, and all the difficulties whole and entire; or Lastly
that it be made precisely appear, wherein his Doctrine so explained does
overthrow the foundation of Faith.

Of these three things, we will leave the first to be examined by those of his
own communion, because that is more properly their business and right than
ours. It belongs to them principally to consider if they would not be well
contented, and if it would not be very advantageous to them to reduce their
belief in all matters of Controversy, unto what is explained in that Treatise;
and to Lay aside all the consequences which their other Doctors have drawn from
the Council of Trent, and the means they have made use of to establish them, as
things that are not necessary, and which nevertheless do clog Religion, or do
at Least in part hinder a matter which is so desirable, as the uniformity of
Worship, and belief amongst Christians should be.

We will content our selves to observe by the Way, several places where the
Bishop of Condom uses an Art, that is distant not only from the Common belief
of the Doctors of the Church of Rome, and of the general practice of all the
people of his Communion, but also from the terms, and the Doctrine it self of
the very Council, to the end it may be discerned, wherein consist the
sweetnings that the Bishop of Condom does use, and in what he comes near us

But we will throughout perfor^ the two other principal things, which the
Bishop of Condom proposes, which are to show, that in reality his exposition
does Leave all objections (...) their force, and all important dispute entire,
and that his Doctrine, wha^ever Art he uses, or whatsoever m^tigation he
seems to use therein does all along equally overthrow the foundations of true
Christianity.

We will perform both the one an^ the other of these two things, in plain
manner, according to the Bishop of Condoms desire, without it gageing very far
in a new dispute, an^ it shall be done not only with the moderation, which he
himself give us a commendable example of, b^ with all the respect, which we
ough^ to have for a person of so great me^ as his.

We will only reserve the Liberty which the interest of the cause, an^ the
right of defense do necessarily require, so as to say of a thing, that i^ is
not true, when it is not; or of a^ argument it is not right, or that it i^
captious, when it is such indeed; because otherwise it would not be possible to
make known the truth without weakening of it.

We will then here examine with the greatest clearness and brevity that may be,
and in the same order which the Bishop of Condom would have observed, the
several Articles of his Treatise, whereof he makes so many Sections; and to
the end that those who give themselves the trouble of Reading this answer, may
find where to stop, it shall be divided into Six parts, though unequal,
according as matters have more or less extent. The First shall treat concerning
the design of the Bishop of Condom's Treatise, and touching two general
propositions (and as it were preliminaries) which the Bishop of Condom Lays
down; Page 5
the one that we are agreed, that the Church of Rome does believe, Page 12
and embrace all the fundamental points of the Christian Religion; the other,
that all the Religious Worship, which she gives unto Saints, Images, or
Relics, does terminate in God only. The Second part shall treat of the
worship of Saints Images, and Relics; The Third of the matter of
Justification, with all its consequences, the merit of works, Satisfactions,
purgatory, and Indulgences. The Fourth of the Sacraments in general, and
particularly of the Sacraments of Baptism, of Confirmation, of Penance, of
Sacramental Confession, of extreme unction, of Marriage, and of Order. The
Fifth of the Sacrament, of the Eucharist in particular. The Sixth and Last, of
Tradition, of the authority of the Church, of the authority of the Pope, and of
Episcopacy.

The First Part,
1. The design of the Bishop of Condom's Treatise Page 1 2 4. and 4.
As for the Bishop of Condom's design, he declares it himself in the beginning;
he did believe, he says, that the matters, which we made the Subject of our
breach, being now sufficiently cleared, he could do nothing better, nor more
useful for us, than to propose plainly unto us, the opinions of the Church of
Rome, by explaining to us what she has defined in the Council of Trent; hoping
that alone would cause sundry contests wholly to vanish, and that those which
remained, would not appear, according to our own principles, of such weight, as
we would it should be believed they are; and that according to our own
principles, they contain nothing that does wound the foundations of Faith.

We have, in the very entrance this advantage, that the Bishop of Condom going
about to make a plain draught, as he speaks, of the Catholic Doctrine, in
opposition unto ours, lays hold on, for a foundation, a Council which is well
known not to be acknowledged Catholic or Ecumenical, a Council, which, above
all other Councils, is such wherein, according to their own Catholic Authors,
there apeared visibly most of intrigue, and of human interests, a Council, of
which our France it self does not receive all the decisions, in matters of
discipline and Government, a Council to conclude, whose decrees do to this day
want explication.

In sum, if the Bishop of Condom does desire that men should speak what they
think, nothing is more frivolous than his design, unless it be for those
Doctrines and practices that are not very necessary, Whereof he seems to desire
to discharge his Religion; for as to the other, Which he calls the principal
causes of our breach, he says himself, that the matters of controversy are
now cleared: and it is certain that there is nothing but prejudice, the
weakness, and the variety of the mind of man, that does hinder that all the
World does not so Judge. Wherefore then is it, that at this time they propose
plainly the same things, as if men heeded not at all, instead of bringing of
new Lights, to overcome if it might be, those human infirmities which do
occasion diversity of opinions.

It is true that the Doctors and Preachers, of the one side and the other, do
sometimes aggravate the things which they treat of; Whether it be the things
themselves, or the consequences they draw from thence: yet this does not
hinder, but that it is very well known on both sides, what is the substance of
the belief of the one and the other in the principal points. It is properly
nothing but these Doctrines and these practices, which the Bishop of Condom
would have laid aside, which are not so well known by all the World. For
example, we do very well know what the Church of Rome does commonly teach
concerning the Sacrament of the Eucharist, touching the worshipping of Saints,
of the Cross, of Images, and of Relics, the Sovereignty of the Pope, and all
the other principal points, which separate us from her communion: we are
sufficiently informed, of what she does profess to teach, of what She
receives, and practices in all places upon these points: it is only the
excess, and abuse, that are greater happily in some parts, than in others,
wherein all the world does not equally agree. We believe we have solidly
refuted all these principal Doctrines, and all these Worships Universally
received: it behoved him therefore properly, either to submit unto our reasons,
or to show better; and not put us of only with a simple exposition.

It is not here put in question, what power the Bishop of Condom has to
explain What the Church of Rome has defined in the Council of Trent, or to
reduce the Doctrine unto the point, to which he seems to have reduced it. For
our parts we do not in the least make any doubt, but that Pastors may make
probable expositions according to the motions of their conscience, whether it
be for instructing their Flocks, or to bring back unto the truth such as have
forsaken it: for why should they not explain such Writings, seeing they do
every day explain that, which is less clear in the Holy Scripture.

But as for the Gentlemen of the Church of Rome, what will become of the
Authentical Bull of Pius the Fourth, which does contain the confirmation of the
Council of Trent, and gives it all its authority? That Bull expressly forbids
all sorts of persons, of what order, or dignity soever they are in the Church,
the Pope only excepted, to explain the decrees of the Council in whatsoever
manner, or under whatsoever pretext it may be, and does before hand make void
all such explications After this, let any one tell us what foundation may be
had for what the Bishop of Condom has explained of these decrees, how to be
assured that some person of his Communion will not stand up, and think he may
say of him, what he has said of others, that herein he is but a particular
Doctor, that we ought only to rest upon the proper terms of the Council, or at
farthest of the Pope, who has reserved unto himself the explication: and that
in the mean time, they will abate nothing of the decrees of the same Council,
nor of the opinions received in the Chairs and Universities, nor of the general
practice, what abuse soever be pretended in it.

However it be, We may observe as we pass, that the Bishop of Condom does here
silently acknowledge, that the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, all cleared and
all decided (...) it was by the Council of Trent, is no^ for all so clear, but
that it has y^^ need of farther explication: which (...) most true, as to the
very ground (...) it; and they have for this same reason designedly put their
several decrees i^ general and ambiguous terms, to giv^ in appearance the
greater satisfaction to people. It will now be seen by the sequel, if the
Bishop of Condom himself will speak plainer on these doubtf^^^ points, if he
will not contain himself still in general terms, or if he will not wholly pass
over those points here in silence.

In the mean time what will become of us? The Holy Scripture, say they is
obscure; it appertains unto the Church to explain it according to the unanimous
sense of the Fathers: the Fathers have their obscurities, everyone draws them
to their side; it will require many years to examine them, and it will not be
easy to form an unanimous sense. They add, it belongs to the Council to
determine that by their decrees; but in these very decrees there are things very
ambiguous, and that may receive a double, and a triple sense; the Bishop of
Condom does present us an exposition which he says is faithful. In good time:
but another Prelate, or a Doctor of Sorbon, will say that the Bishop of Condom
is not sufficiently authorized for that, or that he has need himself to be
explained, and in the mean while, those who are afraid of offending God, by a
Religious observance of anything which is not God, and who desire nothing but
to Worship the true God purely, according to his Word, shall abide as it were
suspended betwixt all these uncertainties, and shall not be able to yield any
acquiescency unto these Lively beams, where with this Divine Word has
replenished their Souls. This is, what the design of the Bishop of Condom's
Treatise would Lead us unto; But let us proceed unto the Treatise it self, and
let us see if this exposition, such as it is, will produce the two effects it
promises, which are to cause all disputes to vanish, or, to reduce them un^^^
such terms, as according to our ow^ principles have nothing in them which Wound
the foundations of Faith.

II. The general proposition of the Bishop of Condom that they of the P. R. R.
do confess that the Catholic Church do believe all the fundamental Articles of
Chri, stian Reli, gion.
The Bishop of Condom begins wit^ this general proposition, that those (...) the
Pretended reformed Religion (...) avow that the Catholic Church d^^ receive
all the fundamental Articles of (...) Christian Religion: here at first it man
be seen, as also in the Title of the Treatise, that by the Catholic Chur^ the
Bishop of Condom intends the R^mish Church. It is an usage, which the Gentlemen
of the Romish Church very much more affect of Late, th^^ they have been
accustomed, namely, it seems, to cover themselves with more authentic Title,
and to tak^ a kind of advantage in words abo^^ all other Christians: that is to
say, tha^ the name of the Roman Church, an^ the name of the Catholic Church
does not sufficiently to their mind mean the same thing; the one dot^ seem much
more auspicious, than the other. And moreover this same thin^ makes evident,
that the Titles which Parties or Communions assume unto themselves, according
as they have more Luster and Power, are not always a certain proof that they do
possess in reality; what these Titles ascribe to them because it does appear,
that in the midst of the dispute, and in the very place where this Title of
Catholic is in question, one party does claim it for himself in prejudice of
all others. These Gentlemen do herein, like Princes, who always retain the Title
of Countries, which they once possessed, although they have Lost those
Countries several Ages past.

It is true, that we our selves do some time give them the name of Roman
Catholics, or this simply of Catholics, as well therein to accommodate our
selves to the stream of the general use, as for the advantage of peace, being
to Live amongst them: according as also for these very considerations, we give
them the name of Fathers, of Bishops, of Prelates, and others the Titles which
they give unto themselves, although the right by which they pretend to take
them, be yet in question: and it may be the Word Catholic would not have been
so urged here above all other, if it did not in the beginning, cause an
ambiguity in the Bishop of Condom proposition, which is, that we do allow that
the Catholic Church does believe all the fundamental Articles of the Christian
Religion; for who is it that ever doubted a proposition conceived in those
terms? We allow in earnest that the Church truly Catholic and universal,
which we profess in the Apostles Creed, which is the body (...) the Elect of
all Ages, not only always has held, and shall always hold all the fundamental
points, but that she never did, nor ever shall hold any Capital Error, which
does intirel(...) destroy the foundations; and this i(...) what we cannot say
of the Church o(...) Rome. We own that she does receive the fundamental
Articles, as the Bishop of Condom does allege: but we do say, at the same
time, as he himself does instance, that she destroys the foundations, by
contrary Articles; and we prove it, not only by the consequences which we draw
from the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, as the Bishop of Condom avers, only
because it pleases him so to do, P. 8
but directly by the Doctrine it self, which she teaches, and openly practices.

It is true that the Church of Rome does teach, that we ought to Worship one
only God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which is the first, and most
fundamental Article of the Christian Religion: but at the very same instant,
She does teach another Article, which is quite contrary according to us, when
She says, that we ought to Worship, and when she does indeed Worship, that,
which according to us, is not God.

The Church of Rome receives, as we do, the first Commandment of the Law, which
forbids having any other God than the Mighty and Jealous God. Yet at the same
time, She calls upon the Saints, which is a Religious worship by their own
Confession, and according to us, it is a kind, or part of that worship, which
we ought not to give but to God only: not to speak here of the excess, which
is seen in that worship.

The Church of Rome receives the second Commandment, which does particularly
forbid the making Images of any thing that is in Heaven, or in the Earth, to
worship them: but at the same time She does make Images of the very persons of
the Trinity, and of all the Saints; She kneels down before them, and does
serve them Religiously, against the express terms of the Commandment, and it is
also well known, to what excess She has advanced this worship in the practice.

The Church of Rome receives, as we do the Apostles Creed, which is ^n
Abridgment of the fundamental Doctrine of the Gospel, for those who are well
instructed in it, and that do understand it in the full force of its
expressions: But therein it self we do agree no wise touching that, which the
Bishop of Condom does suppose, that the Church of Rome has the pure and true
understanding of the Creed. We pretend that to believe in God the Creator, and
in Jesus Christ does mean so to believe in God as to matter of Religion, as not
to have the Least confidence in any thing else: and we believe that the
Worshipping of Saints, of Relics, of the Cross, and of Images, especially in
the excess, and inevitable abuse which follows, however the matter is sweetened
in disputation, is a degree of a Religious confidence in the creature, which
thereby does become sharer in what we owe only unto the Creator.

The Church of Rome with us believes that Jesus Christ is ascended into Heaven,
that he sits on the right hand of God the Father, and that it is he, who
shall come from thence to judge both the quick and the dead: but she believes
at the same time, that our Lord Jesus Christ, is also every day corporally upon
earth, though in an invisible State, and different from that estate he is in in
Heaven.

Here it might be proved, that in effect all these Doctrines of the Roman
Church, and several others are directly contrary to the fundamental Doctrine of
the Gospel, but that would be useless in this part of the question where it
suffices to intimate, that we do so believe: what follows will show the
reasons which we have to believe so.

p. 9 a. 1
The Bishop of Condom does here make the objection against us, which is usually
made against us touching the Lutherans, that the consequences which we draw
from their Doctrine, do not hinder, but that we admit them into our Communion,
although these consequences do seem to destroy the foundation.

But there is a great deal of difference betwixt the Lutherans and the
Roman Catholics, in reference unto us; in effect we agree, that always heed is
not to be taken of the consequences, which may be drawn from a Doctrine.
Doubtless we ought to distinguish the consequences contested by him that does
teach the Doctrine and which do not produce any effect in the intention nor
Worship, from those which are granted by the very persons which teach the
Doctrine, and which are followed by a sort of Worship which is thought to be
evil. It is true that Mr. Daille says of the Lutherans, as the Bishop of
Condom does instance, that they have an opinion, which according unto us does
infer, as well as that of the Roman Church, the destruction of the humanity of
our Lord Jesus Christ; but it is also very certain, that this consequence, as
Mr. Daille does add, cannot be without great injustice imputed unto them,
because they do formally deny it, and that besides, they have nothing in their
Worship which does establish, or suppose this consequence. This is the reason
of this expression of Monsieur Dailles, which has been so urged of late times,
and which the Bishop of Condom does here again urge, that the opinion of the
Lutherans has no venim in it, which is notwithstanding a natural expressi^n,
and proper to the Subject, for it imports nothing else, but what is said
before, that the Lutherans denying the consequences of their Doctrine, and
believing the humanity of Jesus Christ, as it is certain they do, their error
touching the Eucharist, although it may be gross according unto us, may
nevertheless be charitably born with, for the advantage of Peace and Union.

But as to the Church of Rome, it is not only by consequences, but by a
positive Doctrine, and by a constant practice, as we pretend, whatsoever she
says, that she does not sufficiently acknowledge the Sovereignty, which is due
unto God, nor the quality of Savior and Mediator in our Lord Jesus Christ, nor
the superabundant fullness of his merits; because it appears plainly unto us,
that she gives unto the creature, the Worship which is only due unto the
Creator: and that she does make to concur the satisfactions and merits of men,
with the satisfaction and merit of Jesus Christ. It cannot with justice be said
that the Lutherans do not believe the humanity of Jesus Christ, but it is no
calumny to say that the Church of Rome does Worship the host, and that she does
give a Religious Worship to Saints, and to their relics, to Images, and unto
the Cross, etc. these are not consequences contested, but positive Doctrine
confirmed by practice.

The Bishop of Condom, having a mind to cover the contrariety, we conceive
between the fundamental Articles, which the Church of Rome holds, and those
other Worships that we reject, passes over here in silence, what should have
been spoken touching the adoration of the Host, which point alone most openly
shows this contrariety.

He thinks to reconcile all by his Second proposition, III. Second pro^^ion
general of the Bishop of Condom This the Catho. Church does teach that the
Religious worshipping of Saints and Images etc. terminates it self in God only
Mat. 4.10.
that the Church of Rome does teach, that all Religions worship ought to
terminate it self on God. We say more simply, and more naturally, that all
Religious Worship ought to address it self unto God, because indeed Religion
should regard nothing but God, and should have only him for its object. All
Religious Worship should begin with him, continue in him, and end on him. This
is it, to which only all the Doctrine of the Old and New Testaments does tend:
there cannot be showed in those Holy Originals, neither Commandment nor example
to the contrary. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, an^ him only shall thou
serve, said our Savior to the Devil that tempted him

If Religion were only an arbitrary Worship, St. Aug. lib. 4. contr. Faust.
cap. 11. and de Genes cont. Manich. li be a p. 1.
and that to render it Lawful, it were enough to refer all to God the Manichees
which adored God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, with a Sovereign Worship, and
who also Worshipped the Sun and Moon, by reason of the residence they believed
God made in those glorious bodies might have said that they did terminate all
in God; and in a Word there could be no false Worship, superstion, or evil
action, which may not be justified if it were enough to say that all did
terminate in God.

Besides the Church of Rome does but fairly say that She teaches, that the
Worship of Saints ought to refer it self to, or terminate it self on God: the
people will everlastingly terminate it on the Saints, on their relics, and on
their Images; because the same reason, which causes that grosser minds cannot
form to themselves any Idea of an Infinie and in visible God as he is, does
also make them naturally to stop at Saints and creatures, and that they rely
more on things which they see or know, than on that which they only know
imperfectly. They will have, as the Jews had, Gods to march before them and at
all times, when Relics and Images, are set before the eyes of the people, as
is usual, their eyes and their hearts, far from being lifted up unto God, will
stop not only at the saints themselves, but at their Images and Relics.

The Second Part.
The Bishop of Condom does here descend from the General Proposition touching
the nature of Religious Worship, Of the Invocation of Saints.
to the explication of particular Worships, which do make part of the Articles
of Faith, whereunto he reduces the controversies. He begins with the Invocation
of Saints, endeavoring also to sweeten and extenuate this worship of the
Church of Rome, as well in the Doctrine as in the practice, and only studies
colorable means to insinuate his Doctrine, in stead of following the natural
order of things and of the Doctrine it self, that is to say, instead of
establishing before all things, that the Invocation of Saints is a Lawful
worship instituted by God, and by consequence well pleasing in his eyes, he
endeavors to surprise men's minds by this other general proposition, that those
of the Pretended Reformed Religion, being pressed by the force of the truth, do
begin to acknowledge that the Custom of Praying unto Saints, and to honor
their Relics, was established ever since the fourth Century; he means, that we
do acknowledge that this worship, did begin to be established at that time.
This is but a perverting of words: for the Bishop of Condom knows very well,
that it is not now that we do begin to make this acknowledgement, and that this
acknowledgment is neither new, nor forced, nor particular to Monsieur Daille,
as the Bishop of Condom does seem to take notice. Clemnit. Casaub. ^ossias du
Moulin, etc.
Blonde^, Chamier, Bochard, in a word all those who have treated thoroughly of
this Subject, have agreed upon the time in which Praying unto Saints, begun to
be introduced. This trick of expression from the Bi^hop of Condom, is only a
short w^y to insinuate, that there has been a variation betwixt our authors,
and less sincerity at one time than at another, which nevertheless has not the
least ground: however his proposition shall be explained, that it may not be
mistaken.

It is true that we have always acknowledged, that Praying unto Saints began to
be practiced toward the end of the Fourth Age: but we never acknowledged,
neither do we yet acknowledge, that it was an usage then established in the
public service of the Church: nor is it true, that it was authorized by any
Council.

Only if it be needful, we make appear by convincing proofs, not only that
there is neither command nor example, neither in the Old or New Testament, for
the Invocation of Saints, but also that there is not the least mark in any of
the authors of the fi^^^ three Ages, which are extant in s^ficiently great
numbers.

Mr. D^ille does not accuse any the Fathers, much less St. Augusti^^ to have
changed the Doctrine in the point from the former Ages: for (...) Austin has
declared himself the Le^ of any for these sorts of Prayers (...) Saints; Mr.
Daille does only complai^ of this, that they suffered them inse^sibly to be
brought in upon bad pri^ciples, and does accuse them of hav^ing erred in this,
as the Church (...) Rome does acknowledge, that the^ have all erred in other
things. If the Bishop of Condom pretend, that the is to abandon those great men
under color of acknowledging that the were men subject to error, the
millenaries, which do yet to this day expect a Kingdom for a Thousand year on
earth, under the immediate Government of Christ Jesus, those which believe that
Souls at their departur^ out of this Life, shall sleep until the day of
Judgment, and Generally al^ those that have followed or do ye^ follow any one
of these errors which appeared in the first Ages, may as well say, that we
have abandoned those of the Fathers, who followed or taught those matters, and
by consequence that they are not errors, but Doctrines Lawfully established.

But it will appear very unlikely, says the Bishop of Condom, that Mr. Daille
has better understood the opinions of the Fathers of the three first Ages,
than those who have gathered, as it may be said, the succession of their
Doctrine: and he will be much less believed, that the Fathers of the fourth Age
where far from perceiving that there was any innovation brought in in their
Worship: this Minister on the contrary has produced express texts, by which
they clearly show, that they pretend, in praying to the Saints, to have
followed the example of those who went before them.

These kinds of discourses are very uncertain, and are properly but Colors. If
the Bishop of Condom had taken the pains to have mentioned the texts he speaks
of, it would have been seen that there is not the least in any of them which
shows clearly, as he would have men believe, that the Fathers of the fourth
Age, did preten^ that the invocation of Saints was it use in the three
precedent Ages. It is known to be the custom of those who have no good ground,
not Lawful right for what they do, to seek to authorize themselves at leas^ by
examples, as the Gentlemen of the Roman Church do at this present, by the
greatest part of their traditions But if it were true, that some Author of the
Fourth Age had written i^ General terms, that in Praying unto Saints in that
Age, they followed the example of those that had gone before them, not showing
the time when these examples appeared, who see^ not that this might be referred
unto the time immediately going before in the same Age, and would conclude
nothing for the three first, if nothing were ^o be found in those Ages?
Howsoeve^ i^ be, we believe shall we be abl^ to ^a^e appear, that never any
author of the Fourth Age, has alleged any text of the three former, the makes
out, that in those times they prayed unto Saints.

The Cardinal Du Perron, In the reply unto the King of Great Britain: answer,
187^. Impress. P^a^
whose art in turning all to his advantage is sufficiently known, has been
forced to confess in proper terms, that there is not to be found any footstep
of the invocation of Saints in the Authors next to the Apostles Age; seeking
vain sl^ights and evasions upon this matter.

Perez a Spanish Bishop, Os Tradi. pa 197^
more sincere, goes farther, confessing that he found not that any Prayed unto
Saints before the year 360. See then more than three Ages and a^ half, exempted
from the pretensions of the Gentlemen of the Church o^ Rom, by their own
confession: and what can there be more convincing on the side of Tradition,
unto those which make if the rule of their Faith, against such a worship as
this, which maks so great a part of the Roman Religion, than not to find at all
the least step of it, in the whole course of 360 years, the purest time of
Christianity.

As to what the Bishop of Condom says, that it is not at all likely, that Mr.
Daille had better understood the opinion of the Fathers of the three first
Ages, then those of the fourth Age did understand them; first it is not here
the business to understand, or not to understand the opinion of the Fathers of
the three first Ages: for none of their writings can be alleged, which those
of the fourth Age have understood i^ one sense, and Mr. Daille in another.

The only business is to know, i^ there be any thing in those writings which
shows that they Prayed unto Saints: Mr. Daille affirms that he finds nothing
at all. Du Perr^^ and Perez speaking to the same effect as is already said, and
the authors of the Fourth Age, say nothing contrary.

But if there were occasion to explain any of the Fathers of the three first
Ages, it would not possibly be so great a Paradox as the Bishop of Condom
imagins, to suppose that Mr. Daille has been able to understand them as well as
most of the Fathers of the fourth age did understand them. Those who amongst
all his other works have read his books of the use of the fathers of the
Novelty of Roman Traditions, of the object of the worship of the Latins, and
upon the Epistles attributed to St. Ignatius, where he had occasion to speak
thoroughly of the Doctring of the three first Ages, will acknowledge, if they
are in the least just and sincere, that happily scarce any before him, has
either more studied, or better understood the Fathers than he: and I may
credible say here, that if the veneration which is to be had for ancient
things, be one day joined unto the proper excellency of his works, and unto the
clear reputation, in which he lived and preached, even unto a great age, he
will be esteemed in after times, for one of the greatest and most excellent
Doctors which the Church ever had.

The Fathers of the Fourth age lived some in Europe, others in Asia, and some
in Africa: Printing not being then in use, there was not the same facility to
see all the Manuscripts of Foreign parts. The Fathers had each their proper
Lights, and peculiar study of some of the writings of the preceding ages, and
of their own: at this day, those, who have the time, Wisdom, Judgment, and the
knowledge of tongues which are necessary for the well understanding the Fathers
may collect not only all the Fathers works of the three first Ages, but also
the several Lights of the Fourth, and also join unto those Lights, those of all
the following ages unto that wherein we Live: day unto day utters Speech, and
right unto night shows knowledge. Who questions but at this time several
places of the Holy Scriptures, are better understood, than they were in the
First ages; This dispute it self has served to clear many truths, which were
not known until these Last times; for instance, several passages misunderstood
by the Fathers, which are now better understood, in the one, and in the other
Communion, than they were formerly; and sundry errors whereinto it is agreed
they were fallen, from which, praised be God, we are now delivered.

Here it is, that the Bishop of Condom comes at length to explain the belief of
the Roman Church touching the invocation of Saints in particular: what he says
may be reduced to this, that the Church of Rome teaches that it is useful to
pray unto Saints, and that she teaches to pray unto them in a Spirit of
Charity, and Brotherly fellowship, as we pray to our Brethren, that are living
upon earth: that this Prayer unto Saints does not any more derogate from the
mediation of Jesus Christ, than that which we make unto our Living Brethren,
that the Church of Rome makes a great deal of difference betwixt the Prayers
which she addres^^^ unto God, and those which she makes unto Saints, that unto
God she says have mercy upon us, and to the Saints only, Pray for us, and that
this is the sense, unto which the Church reduces all the Prayers unto Saints
in whatsoever terms they be conceived; that the Council teaching that it is
good and useful to call upon the Saints in an humble manner, and to fly unto
their aid for obtaining benefits of God by his Son Jesus Christ, the Bishop of
Condom conceives not how we can say that this is to depart from our Lord Jesus
Christ. Afterward he adds that the Church does not offer unto God (...) Holy
Sacrifice of the Mass in the honor of Saints, but only so as to name them (...)
the faithful servants of God, to render his thanks for their victory, and to
pray hi^ to be inclined by their intercessions; mo^^ over that this is not to
advance the creature above its condition, to attribute (...) them a knowledge
of the desires and necessities of which we make s^cret ^^quests unto them, in
as much as the God has not refused to reveal things (...) come unto the
Prophets, though they seem to be more particularly reserved un^^ his own
knowledge: that, Lastly, the Church does not decide any thing, upon the
different means, which God make use of in imparting this knowledge un^^ the
Saints, whether he does it by the Ministry of Angels, or by a particul^^
revelation, or whether he discover all unto them in his infinite essence, where
a truth is comprised.

This is the sense, and as near a^ may be the Bishop of Condoms ver^
expressions, whereby he would sweeten his Doctrines as much as he could but for
all this, what might not o^ say upon each of these propositions, if this were a
place to handle the question to the bottom? But seeing the Bishop of Condom
desires not to insist upon refuting of him, and also it being not the design of
this answer, we shall also content our selves almost throughout, to set forth
simply our belief in opposition unto his, because it may be thought, that
there is no more needful, as well to judge in general, which of the two has
more the character of truth, as to make appear that his exposition is always
equally contrary to our fundamental points. Only, after (...) ^^ample, we will
touch some reasons, upon which we ground our selves, for the same consideration
which he himself makes, where he says that the knowledge of the principal
reasons of a Doctrine does often make up a necessary part of its exposition.

The reformed Churches do believe, that it is not only for the Glory of God,
but that it is his will also, as he has told us in his word, that we should
worship but one God, that we should serve none but God with a religious
worship, that we should have recourse unto none but God only in our
necessities; that we should call upon none but God in our Prayers, and that
invocation, according to the very word is a spiritual sacrifice, which makes up
the chiefest part of the worship due unto God only. We believe that this is
the true meaning of the Commandments of the Law, and of all the Doctrine of the
Gospel, which directs us throughout, to address unto God our vows, our Prayers
and our thanksgivings; and as for the faithful Servants of God, which we esteem
to have dyed in his favor, we say that we should honor their memories, praise
their faith, their zeal, their charity, and all other their Christian virtues,
and propose them for example, and imitation unto the faithful. This is properly
our beliefs and we are persuaded that those who will consider it with a free
and equal mind, will not only find it safe, and right, but also pure and
disengaged from abuse, from difficulties, and uncertainties, which accompany
that of the Bishop of Condom.

We will begin to examine this Article of his exposition where he ends it, to
wit, how the Saints know our vows, our needs, and our Prayers, because it is in
vain to pray if not understood; we have seen that the Bishop of Condom has
declared that never any of his Communion, did conceive, that the Saints could
know our Prayers and desires by themselves, that is, by their own proper
nature; that also there is not any immensity attributed unto them, and that
nevertheless the Church of Rome does not decide, whether it be by the Commerce
of Angels or by revelations, as were those of the Prophets, or whether it be
that they see all in God himself. But does not this uncertainty already show
what that Faith can be, that has no surer foundation? Is it not a new circuit,
if our vows and our Prayers must pass from us unto Angels, from Angels to
Saints, and from Saints to God? and is it not yet a new difficulty, if we must
suppose that Angels themselves know our thoughts and our d^sires? For although
they are Mi^string Spirits as the Bishop of Cond^^ alleges, when they are sent
fo^^ to attend the Faithful, it do^ not follow that we ought to attrib^ to them
the knowledge of hearts which only belongs to an in^nite essence. Heb, i. 14
Jerem. 17 6 and 10. Amos 5 7.
There is also this diff^rence betwixt the Saints and the Prophets, that God
himself has said the he revealed things to come unto the Prophets; but he
never said that (...) revealed our thoughts unto Saints and very unlike it is,
that the knowledge of future things seems to (...) more reserved to God, than
o^ thoughts and our Prayers, as the Bishop of Condom affirms. It (...) known
that the Devils, and even m^ themselves, sometimes search i^ what is to come,
and that it is properly the knowledge of the hear^ which God reserves unto
himself ^lone.

P^s 7 10 and 1 Chro ^6 s 7.
It is yet a gulf of difficulties to Im^gin, that the Saints see all things in
the infinite essence of God: For is not this to attribute immensity unto them?
And is it not also to suppose that all things are in God, either according to
their proper nature, or by their Images, as they must needs be, to be known, or
seen by the Saints? whereas it was never said but that all things were in God
only eminently, as it is said in the Schools; that is to say, that the
perfection or infinity of his essence comprehends all things, and that there is
nothing properly without him.

Besides good heed ought here to be taken, that the principal and essential
question, is not to know how the Saints can understand our thoughts, and our
Prayers (that may be in some sort indifferent) but how we may be assured at
Least they do know them; For if we have only probabilities and conjectures for
it, this is not sufficient to establish a Religious Worship, such as that is,
nor praying unto the Saints with confidence. In the mean while the Church of
Rome does agree, that the Saints do not know our desires and our wants by their
own nature: it were very needful therefore that their should be some very
express revelation, that might at Least inform us that they do know them,
though we were ignorant of the means: but no^ having any Likely revelation in
this matter, it is evident that all this worship of Saints has no foundation.

There is yet another difficulty, that the Bishop of Condom has not touched,
which does manifestly show that there can be no assureance that the Saints, who
are prayed unto, ca^ know our desires, and Prayers, o^ that they are in a
condition of doing what we pray unto them for: it is, tha^ we cannot be assured
of this it self that the greatest number of the Saint^ who are prayed unto, are
in Heaven especially in the Roman Church where they believe a third place. For
although we ought to judge charitably of them who seem to dye in the Lord, yet
the judgment of charit^ is not sufficient to establish such worship as this is.

The Council, nor the Bishop o^ Condom upon the whole say nothing to these
difficulties, which yet are essential and preliminaries also, as it may be
said, because it is a most evident truth, that no true Religious Worship can be
grounded upon uncertain reasons.

But Lastly, having touched what the Bishop of Condom does not resolve it is
time to examine what he explains, and that which he says to be the Doctrine of
the Church of Rome. And First it is a Wonderful thing that in Laying down as he
does, so Long a train of Doctrins as has been mentioned, going about to
establish so considerable a Worship as the Worship of Saints is, in all its
parts, he tells us not one Word which says that God has thus ordained it: as
if Religion were only an human Discipline, and that God would be honored and
served according to our thoughts, Deuteronomy, 12 32 Is: 1:12 M^t: 5.9
and not after his own institution. Look into the Decrees of the Council, the
Catechism made by its authority, the Commandments of the Church of Rome, they
never tell us upon this matter, no more than on many others, God Wills we Pray
unto Saints, or God bids we Pray unto Saints: but the Church does teach, or the
Council does teach, the Council Ordains, and pronounces Anathema. This style
is very different, from that of the Prophets and Apostles; the former begins
and almost ever ends, Thus says the Lord; Exodus 5.1 1 C^^ 23 ^1,
and the others, We have received of the Lord what we have also delivered unto
you.

It will be said that the Church of Rome and the Council of Trent are the
Instruments of God, and that it is God himself which speaks by their mouth.
But this is to say a thing that is in question, and very much in question: this
is to multiply questions, whereas the Bishop of Condom pretends to diminish
them. The truth is that neither the Church of Rome, no^ the Council of Trent,
nor the Bishop of Condom who explains their Doctrine are able to find one
single passage it all the Scripture of the Old and new Testament, which says
that God wills the invocation of Saints: nay (what is far from that) we do
allege in this case a great number which say the contrary.

The First thing, which the Church of Rome does teach, is, that is profitable
to call upon the Saints, and it is certain that as to this part the Council
does speak in these terms. The Bishop of Condom does a Little more sweetten the
matter in adding, that the Council is content to teach the Faithful, that this
practice is good and useful for them, without saying any thing more, and that
so, the meaning of the Church, is to condemn those who reject this practice
through scorn or error.

This does manifestly enough declare, that those which are already in the Roman
Communion, might very well abstain from all Invocation of the Saints, doing it
with good intention; as for example, not to Pray but unto God alone, or not
believe the invocation of Saints, to be absolutely necessary; provided they do
not despise, nor condemn it: that is to say, that the Bishops are obliged to
Preach the Invocation of Saints, as the Council does very expressly ordain, that
we are bound to hearken unto them, and believe also what they teach, but not to
do what they teach.

From whence it appears to be a strange Doctrine, and a Communion very
extraordinary, if it be true, that some may practice a Religious Worship, and
others may refuse it. This does sufficiently make evident, that our belief and
our practice is safe, and that we do follow the securer Way in that regard; for
if this Worship be but useful, if the Council is contented also to teach it so,
without saying any farther, we who openly profess that we do not reject it
through scorn, but only through the belief which we have, that we ought not to
address our vows and Prayers but to God only, in appearance are not in any
danger of incurring Gods displeasure in that behalf; especially having neither
Comm^ndment as to this matter, nor example in his word to oblige us ther^u^^^
(...) whereas the Church of Rome, may well fear the jealousy of God, if it be
true as we believe, that this Worship is contrary to his Will. And it is Likely
that we, who reject this Worship, because we are persuaded that God alone
should be invoked, are in as much safety at Least as those, who are in the
Roman Communion, who have their Liberty to forbear it; for it is a much less
fault in Religion not to do a thing when one thinks it not to be good, than not
to do it when one believes it to be good and useful.

But on the other side, how shall we reconcile the expressions of the Council
of Trent and of the Bishop of Condom, either with the profession of Faith,
which the Roman Catechism does prescribe by authority of the said Council, or
with the opinions of the greatest Doctors of the Roman Church and with the
general practice of all those of their Communion? For the profession of Faith
does say in express terms, not that it is good and useful to pray unto the
Saints, but purely and simply, that we ought to Pray unto the pronouncing
Anathema against all those which do not receive this Doctrine. And the Cardinal
Du Peron of whom every one knows how his judgment is followed in the Roman
Church, says in express Terms, that the invocation of Saints is not only
useful and lawful, but that it is necessary, though by a conditional necessity,
which he does not explain clearly. However he pretends to prove this necessity
by the authority of St. Ambrose, and St. Hilary.

In sum, how can it be said of such a Religious Worship as this, that it is but
useful? as if in Religion all true Worship, were not a true duty, and by
consequence a thing necessary; especially a Worship, which it is seen does take
up above half the time, of the Ceremonies, and services of the Roman Religion.
And when the Bishops have orders, as in the matter now in hand, In primis
Counc. Trent. Sess. 26. de invoc. etc.
to teach above all things that the Saints who Reign with our Lord Jesus Christ
do pray for us, and that it is good and useful, to render unto them a Religious
honor, and to fly unto their aid, and succor is not this to say that we ought
to do it?

But if any amongst them would forbear in this matter, either because they do
not think it absolutely necessary, or because they will not address their
Prayers unto any but God himself, how can they assist at all the public
services where Saints are every hour called upon, without saying Amen as others
do, or without being as it were a Sect separate in the midst of those of their
Communion?

It is therefore most certain that these sorts of expressions of the Bishop of
Condom are only sweetnings in terms to draw us unto a Religious service, which
he knows we believe to be truly evil. It is but for the present, the Gentlemen
of the Roman Church give us to understand, that if we would join with them, we
should not pray unto the Saints if we pleased: but when once men are engaged,
we call to witness those who desert us, if they do not oblige them to swear
amongst other things, that men ought to pray unto Saints, as it is contained in
the profession of Faith made by the Council.

However it be, useful, or necessary, We do not Pray unto Saints (s^ they) but
in a Spirit of charity a^ Communion, as we do pray our Brethr^^ that are living
to pray for us, and the one does not more derogate from the Glory of God, than
the other.

But the Scripture is full of examples and precepts which oblige us t^ pray one
for another; we are assure* that our brethren who are Living d^ understand us,
and there is so great a difference betwixt what we thin^ of them, and of God,
that these sort of charitable Offices which we render to another, were never
Looke^ upon, but as actions purely human and never making up any part of
Religious Worship; Whereas, on the one hand, we have no Command for Praying
unto Saints, nor certai^ knowledge that the Saints understan^ our vows and our
Prayers, and o^ the other hand, the Idea which w^ form of the Saints Reigning
in Glory with Jesus Christ, the honors much more than human rendered unto them,
the benefits and succors demanded of them (however any endeavor to sweeten
the matter in dispute) make them approach so near unto God, that it is too
apparent, the people regard the Saints as ( Divi or) Gods, which also is the
name that several Catholic Authors give them. The Prayers which we make to our
Brethren alive consist but in a Word, and do not any wise divert our hearts
from the Religious Worship of God; but the Worship of Saints does alone make a
Long exercise of Religion, Bellar. lib 3 Sanct. beat. cap 9 Lips. in virg.
Bonav in Psalt Beat virg.
and while it shall do nothing else, but employ and often fix heart and
thoughts on men, is not this to divert them for that time from their. true
object, which is God.

The Church of Rome thinks to excuse this Worship by the difference which she
pretends to put betwixt the Prayer she makes unto God, and that she makes unto
Saints; but it is all along Prayer: and according to us, Religious Prayer, what
ever the matter or end may be, is always a part of that Worship and honor
which we owe God only. An^ moreover, it is not true, that they only Pray unto
the Saints to pray for them. They of the Roman Church beseech of them redress
of their evils deliverance from dangers, in a wor^ all things temporal, and
spiritual of St. Paul, or St. Nicholas to sa^^ them from Shipwreck, of St. Roc
(...) preserve them from the Plague, of S^ Peter to open unto them the Gates o^
Heaven, of the Virgin that she would defend them from the enemy, which is the
Devil, that she would receive them at the hour of death, that she would have
mercy upon them; which is precisely what we beseech of God himself, In the
Litany's of the Virg. Parce nobis Domina etc. Domina mundi, cum filio tuo
sanctissimo miserere nobis.
and that which they would have to make the difference betwix^ God and the
Saints. And what is very remarkable, it is not particula^ persons that make
these sorts of requests by a missled Devotion; the^ are public and solemn
Prayers, inserted in the Offices and rituals (...) they speak, authorized by
the Roman Church, and generally practise^ by all those of its Communion.

Yes, Say they farther, But in what terms soever it is, that these Prayers are
conceived, the intention of the Church, is to reduce the sense, to Pray the
saints only to intercede for us, and to obtain of God all those good things,
which they beseech.

But what then is it, that the Bishop of Condom does here understand by the
Church, if it be not the body of all those who make it up, which are the same
persons who make these Prayers; of whom it was said, that they reduce the sense
of Prayer to the Saints, to Pray the Saints to intercede for us? Is not this to
apply the name of Church unto all things, as if it were a remedy for all
diseases? The people demand of the Saints all good things Temporal and
Spiritual; these people do make up the Church: and they tell us that the
intention of the Church does reduce their demands unto a simple request of
Prayer; that is, that the people do say in Prayer another thing than they
would, and that the intention does here explain the words, whereas otherwise it
is the words that are the Interpreters of the intentions.

Besides, wherefore are they no^ willing, that God should be jealou^ of our
words, as he is of our thoughts For our tongue is Gods, as well (...) our
heart: and it is the words which do declare the honor outwardly, (...) it is
the intention which does rule the inward thoughts, and God will n^ give his
Glory to another.

But when we shall understand (...) the Church, whose intention it (...) said,
is to reduce the invocation (...) Saints unto a simple request to Pr^ for us,
when I say, we shall thereb^ understand the Council of Trent, o^ the sense of
the Roman Church in G^neral, as it does seem he would ha^ us to understand by
it, it is w^ known that the intention of those wi^ Pray, does follow the
natural sense the expressions they use, and that the do not go to seek after
any other i^tention of the Council, or of t^ Church in General: and the
int^^tion of those who Pray, does (...) only not go beyond what is here
supposed but it is impossible it should be otherwise. The nature of man is
such, that not only it inclines, but also does evermore fix it self unto some
Religious object proposed to it, which has some resemblance unto the sense and
Nature of man, what care soever is taken to direct the intention: and the more
gross and proportioned to its weakness this object shall be, the better will
humane Nature accommodate it self thereto.

It is the constant default of the Roman Communion, that they make not
sufficient reflection, on the one hand upon the Nature of God, and the true
Worship which he requires of us, and on the other, upon the Nature of man
himself; God, Great, infinite, Jealous of his Glory, a pure Spirit, did not
seem heretofore to be otherwise pleased with sacrifices and ceremonies in the
infancy of the world or under the rudiments of the Law, than that he only
might temperate himself unto the dullness of people, and of the Jews in
particular. These poor people had nothing dearer unto them than their flocks,
the fruits (...) their lands, and the commodities o^ this Life: God required of
them s^crifices of their flocks and offerings o^ their fruits, as the most
assured pledg^ which they could give of their Lov^ and obedience. But since it
hat^ pleased God to increase the Lights o^ ^eason, by a Longer use of reason i^
self, and to join unto these Lights the Light of the Gospel, which has raised
and purified our thoughts and ou^ affections, God would no Longer have any
offering, nor Sacrifice but the hearts of men, their Love, their fea^ and their
Religious confidence: bu^ he will have this same confidence a^ entirely, and
will not suffer that w^ should impart the least share of it unt^ any others
besides himself. Men for their parts, although more enlightn^ now than the Jews
were, cease n^ yet to be men, that is to say, weak and as the Light of the
Gospel^ strange to their reason, they easily return ^n^o their gross and
carnal sense if ever the least occasion be give^ them: there must therefore be
taken away from their senses all that may incline them unto the Creatures, much
less may we present unto them objects of Worship, that should incline them to
them: otherwise, it is to will two things, which are altogether incompatible;
one that they should regard these objects, and the other that they should not
incline to them.

One general mark of this Natural inclination of men, and of the difficulty
there is in restraining them, is, that let the Church of Rome pretend as Long
as she please, that she puts a difference betwixt the Worship, which she
renders to God, and that which she renders unto the Saints, yet it appears
almost in all places and in all things, that there is no sort of homage, of
honor, or outward service which is given to God, that they do not also render
the Like thereto unto Saints. It has already been showed how she addresseth
unto Saints Prayers altogether like to those which she addresseth unto God; it
is seen how she Consecrates Temples, Altars, Hosts, Holy days, Monasteries, and
Religious societies in their names; how they put persons, families, cities, and
whole Kingdoms under their protection, how they offer incense unto them as unto
God himself etc. In some s^t they go farther, they join the Saints unto God in
several things: in praying, they have no sooner said a Paternoster, but they
say an Ave Mary: in the general confession of sins they say, I confess my self
unto God, unto the Virgin, unto the Apostles, and all the Saints in Paradise.
In dangers, in surprises, and at the hour of death, they teach the people to
say Jesus, Mary, the poor do not ask Almi^ but in the name of God and the
Virgin: the Authors in like manner pray or thank God and the Virgin in the
beginning and end of their Works and Lastly the Pope himself does en^ all his
Bulls by a form of threatening of the indignation of God, and St Peter and St.
Paul, joining the Apostles with God for companions of h^ ^n^^^.

If there appear any difference betwixt the Worship which is given to God, and
that which is given to Saints it is this, that in truth there is much more of
these outward things done to the Saints, than there is to God; for one Prayer
addressed to God, how many are there addressed unto Saints, and particularly to
the Virgin, whether it be in the offices and Rituals, or when they say their
beads which is as it were the measure of the Peoples Devotion. In Paris, for
one Church consecrated to the Name of God, there is an infinite Number to be
seen consecrated to the Name of Saints, and several unto the name of one Saint;
a thing very different from the usage of the first Ages of Christianity, which
only made mention of the Temple, or of the house of God, and that had not so
much as one Temple that was consecrated unto the Name of Angels or Saints.

But Let us yet observe the difference there is betwixt the Churches
Consecrated unto the names of Saints, and those which bear the name of God or
of any of the persons of the Holy Trinity: For example, betwixt our Lady's, and
St. Eustace's, on the one side, and St. Savior's, and the Holy Ghost's, on the
other: nothing can be added to the greatness and magnificence of the two first,
either within, or in the Frontispiece. These are the Grand Churches, here is
properly the Grand devotion and concourse of people: The others are (as it
were) neglected, obscure, and almost forsaken, in comparison of the former.

This, it will be said, matters nothing unto the Essence of Religion, these are
but popular things; the Churches themselves, though they bear the name of
Saints, are first and principally intended to the Service of God, and all
finally refers unto God, and is terminated on God. In good time: and would to
God that it were really so! But these things are only here mentioned, to prove
what has been said of the natural inclination of people, who turn their
hearts, their devotion, and their dependence it self ever toward the
Creatures, when they make them the object of their Religion. You may, as long
as you please, distinguish betwixt a mediate and an immediate object or
Worship, an adoration or invocation relative or subalternate, and absolute or
final; Say, you make a difference betwixt the Prayers unto Saints, and those
which are made to God, endeavor to reduce thoughts and expressions by the
intention of the Church, or the Council of Trent, or by some sweetnings of
expressions: men shall be judged by their own proper intentions, and not by
those of the Council; and not only by their intentions, but if they must
render an account for every idle word, by greater reason, of Vows, of Incense,
of Bowing the Knee and Prayers, or of words of Devotion, which they shall have
addressed to others besides God; and these very words shall be taken according
to their natural sense, and not according to a strange or forced interpretation.

The Bishop of Condom cannot conceive, how reducing the Invocation of Saints to
nothing, but to demand their aid for obtaining benefits of Go^ through his Son
Jesus Christ, who i^ our only Savior and Redeemer, w^ can say that this is to
go aloof off from Jesus Christ: and we for our parts, cannot conceive, how the
Bishop of Condom should not see by the very subtilt^ of his expressions, and by
the troubl^ he has had, to put them in the condition they are now in; how, I
say, h^ should not see, that this is to go alo^ off from Jesus Christ, for to
fetch thi^ compass about to come unto him. For we suppose, that Jesus Christ
would that we come directly unto him, the he commands this very matter, tha^
he is alone the truth, Joh 6.14;
the way, and the life; and that there are none come un^ the Father but by him,
and is not this (...) keeping aloof off from Jesus Christ, to put the Saints as
a medium betwixt Christ and us? whereas we should immediately embrace, and
closely hold him by a true and lively Faith.

Let the Gentlemen of the Roman Church make here a sincere and serious
reflection. Our Religion goes straight unto God, it looks only to God, and fears
to give unto the creature that religious honor, which is due to none but God:
theirs, besides that it is not found authorized by any command of God, or
example of the Apostles, professes indeed to refer all their devotion unto God,
but at the least it cannot be denied, that much is lost in the way, by the fast
hold which the people take upon the creature.

As to the last sweetning, which the Bishop of Condom uses here for that
particular worship, which is given to Saints, when they offer the sacrifice of
the Mass (that is Jesus Christ sacrificed) in their honor, he is pleased to
say, that this is nothing but nameing the Saints as faithful servants of God,
and praying God that he will become propitious through their intercession; the
mere expression of offering Jesus Christ sacrificed in honor of the Saints,
has somewhat in it so strange, and abhorring from the true Spirit of the
Gospel, that we cannot imagine how Christian ears could become accustomed to
it, and, less yet, how the Council of Trent could prevail with themselves to
make a Doctrine or Decree of it.

We have a little more enlarged upon this point of the Invocation of Saints,
because it is one of the most essential parts of their Religion, and one, on
which the Bishop of Condom himself has most insisted: we shall be more brief
upon most of the others, as being less important. In the mean while it seems
already apparent, by this sole Article, that the Bishop of Condom's Exposition
has nothing in it new but neat and delicate artifice, and that in conclusion
it takes not off any thing from the whole force of our principal objections,
nor from the number of important controversies; and that his doctrine,
whatsoever artifice he uses in expressions, overthrows all along, according to
us, the foundations of the Faith. Nay, we know not whether there be not cause
to fear, that if on the one side, he had removed some questions, as it would
seem to be his design by putting out of the way many doctrines and practices of
the Roman Chur^^, yet he had not on the other given place to some new
difficulties, for that ofttimes these kinds of seeming sweetnings, which are
only in some terms, or in matters of small consequence, do not at all satisfy
a man, and only raise new doubts in stead of resolving the old.

The Bishop of Condom passes from the Invocation of Saints, V. Of Images and
Relics.
to the particular Worship of Images and Relics; and, as it seems, does not
approve all that is seen to be practiced in this matter. In the beginning, he
would that we judge of what nature the honor is, which the Church of Rome
outwardly gives unto Saints, by the inward intentions she has for them; Page
30. ibid.
The outward Worship (says he) being established to testify the inward
intention of the souls.

But is not this, in a manner, to contradict himself, and to overturn or
confound the natural order of things; for, if the Worship be established to
testify the inward sentiments, why will they have us to judge of the exterior
by the interior, whereas it is of the interior that we should judge by the
exterior? Or wherefore should it be, that the exterior answers so ill to the
interior, and that notwithstandig there is nothing said of amendment.

But if the Bishop of Condom does think, that what he here declare unto us of
the intention of the Rom^ Church, does warrant him henc^ forward to reduce the
outward maid of Honor, which she gives to Saint^ unto what sense he thinks fit
to gi^ it, besides that it is not enough f^ such a declaration, to change the
common usage of expressions, a^ the natural meaning of Signs, h^ will they, for
instance, that a Tr^ a Pagan, the Americans, the ign^rant amongst us, who are
not acc^stomed unto these refinings of inte^tion, and who judge of things one
by the common use, and by the common notions; How will they, I sa^ that all the
World behold all the great pomp of Religious Worshi^ which is given to Saints,
to their Images, and their Relics, so li^ the honor that is to be given to
Go^ himself, without taking this Worsh^^ for a true mark of adoration, and the
Saints themselves for so many Gods.

The Council does forbid (says the Bishop of Condom) to believe any Divinity
or Virtue in Images, for which there should be any reverence due to them; or
for which any honor should be required to them, or confidence put in them, and
will that all refer to the Originals which they represent, which does
distinguish the Church of Rome from Idolaters, because very far from helieving
as they, that any Divinity resides in Images, she attributes no virtue unto
them, but that of exciting the remembrance of the Originals.

Here is it notwithstanding, and in what follows, that the Bishop of Condom
does sweeten the terms, as much as he thinks may be done: it is not any longer
to worship Images, as is the common and ordinary sense of the principal Doctors
who have written for this Worship, and of the very second Council of Nice it
self; It is no longer to serve them, as yet the very terms of the Council of
Trent run, but only to honor them. And it is true, this is, in appearance, a
step toward a reformation, and a sign, that men of wisdom and clearness, such
as the Bishop of Condom is, are somewhat ashamed of the height whereunto they
have advanced the Doctrine of this Worship: But in the conclusion, it is still,
notwithstanding this, all one and the same thing, because they still continue
to give the same religious Service unto Images.

The Council of Trent does pronounce Anathema against all those who reject this
Worship, by this means boldly condemning the ancient Council of Elibery, that
of Constantinople, consisting of 338. Bishops; That o^ Francfort, where there
were 300; The Emperor Charlemaigne, and the Churches of France, and of Almai^
of that time, and of a long time after, Council. Trent, Sess. 25. de Invoc.
Sanct, etc. Remissiones. Vetustissimum esse in Ecclesia Dei. and a sanctis
Patribas comprobatum, usum sanctorum Imaginum earum denique adoratio pluribus
testimoniis comprobatur, etc Tho. p. 3 q. 25. Art. 4. Bonav. Cajet. etc. Pon.
To. p. 3. ord. ad vis. par. page 480. Page 33. Page 32.
which all rejected the Worship of Images. The Observations that are printed
with the Text of the very Council of Trent it self, pretend that it is an
ancient and approved usage, to have Images, and to worship them (these are the
very words) and they authorize this practice by the judgment of Thomas Aquinas,
of Bellarmine, of Vasques, and of a great number of the chief Doctors of the
Roman Church. It is also known, that many of the same Doctors teach, that it
is a duty to worship the Cross, and the Image of Jesus Christ, with the Worship
of Latry, as they speak, which yet is the Divine honor that is given to God
himself. It is seen, with what devotion and zeal, the people kneel before the
Cross, before Images, and before Relics; how they greet them, how they kiss
them, how they incense them, how they fasten their eyes and their hearts upon
them. The Bishop of Condom does pass all this over, by the word Honoring: it
is not any longer the Cross that is adored, but he is adored before the Cross,
who did bear our sins upon the Tree. The intention of the Church, is not so
much to honor the Apostle or Martyr, as to honor the Apostle or Martyr in
presence of the Image: which does show nevertheless, that the Image is honored
in it self, and that unawares they speak of the presence of the Image, as if it
were animated.

Besides, this is nothing else but the Doctrine of the Council of Trent; it is
the Council of Trent which teaches, which ordains, which forbids; and never
any one word of God, never the least Commandment, nor the least Example of all
the Holy Scripture, of the Old or New Testament: that is to say, this is only
a Doctrine merely humane.

So far is it from being true, that God has commanded this Worship, or that he
has approved it; that it has already been showed, he has expressly forbidden
it: and it may here be added, that all the Commandments of the Law supposing
great punishments against those who violate them, this which forbids to make
Images, and to serve them, is only found accompanied with threatenings, unto
Childrens Children of them who shall make Images, or serve them: as if God
foreseeing the narural inclination of men, carrying them to this Worship, would
more particularly make them know his Jealousy, and hold back this tendency or
inclination by the terror of his Judgments.

They think to avoid the meaning of the Commandment, and to distinguish
themselves from Pagan Idolaters, in saying they do not adore the Images, and
that they believe not there is any Divinity or virtue in them, as the Pagans
did.

But does the Council dare so to restrain and qualify, if it may be so said,
the express Commandments of God, which not only forbid to worship Images, or
to believe any virtue in them, but absolutely to make them, to worship, to
serve, and to bow down before them? for the terms of the Commandment have
precisely all this.

The Bishop of Condom says elsewhere, Page 80.
upon the words of the institution of the Lords Supper, that himself, and those
of his Communion, do understand these words according to the letter, and that
none ought any more to ask, Why they hold unto the literal sense, than to ask
of a Traveller, why he follows the Highway; and that it is those that have
recourse unto a figurative sense, and who follow crooked ways, that should give
an account of what they do.

Nevertheless, the sense of the Old Testament is, without comparison, more
literal than that of the New; and all the World knows, that the terms of a Law
or a Commandment, should be more express, and in a more literal sense, than
those of a mystery, because it behooves necessarily that the Commandment be
clear, to the end that all those who are to keep it, may plainly understand it;
whereas in Mysteries, it is seen almost always, that the ways of speaking are
mystical; and as the word it self imports, signifying something hid and
figured. Now let the Bishop of Condom tell us here, why he does not follow the
letter of the Commandment, which is so express? wherefore he forsakes this
Highway marked with Gods own finger, to fly unto a forced or alienate sense.

It is further but an undue imputation, touching Heathens, Athenag. in Apol. p.
17. St. Aug. in Psalm. 96.
to say as he does, That they believed that their false Divinities did dwell in
their Images: the Pagans did not yield by any means, that they worshipped wood
and stone, but only the Originals, which were represented by them. They did
also make a great difference betwixt the Worship which they gave unto the great
Gods, and those which they gave unto the less Divinities: neither did they
believe, that their Gods were shut up in their Shrines, or that they dwelt in
them, as the Bishop of Condom does affirm; and if it be found that any such
thing has been imputed unto them in the first Ages of Christianity, it is
only but by reason, that the Superstition of the people went much farther,
than the Opinions and Maxims of their Philosophers, or of their Priests and
Arch-priests.

The Pagans believed, that their Gods came sometimes upon earth, but that they
made their residence in the Heavens, or in some places separated from the sight
of men. Pallas, for example, could not attend to be in the Palladium in Troy,
whilst she was in the Grecian Army, conducting the Chariot of Diomedes, and
fighting against the Trojans themselves.

Arnob. adver. Gent. li. 6. Maxim. Tyr. Sermon. 38. Exodus 32.4, 5.
The Pagans believed only in general, that there was fatality or virtue in the
Images of their false Gods; as in the Palladium, the virtue of preserving the
City of Troy: and that these Gods did only at some times, give some
extraordinary marks of their presence, and of their power, in their Images.
These things are too well known to be called in question.

No more did the Israelites acknowledge that they did worship the Brazen
Serpent, nor the Golden Calf, nor that the Golden Calf was God himself; but
they looked upon it as an Image or a representation of that true God, that had
delivered them from the Bondage of Egypt.

Nevertheless, the Pagans and the Israelites were both alike guilty of
Idolatry, by these two principal reasons, the one, that their false Worship,
whatever it was, or whatever construction they gave it, was condemned by God:
The other, that though the clearest amongst the Heathens, and amongst the
Israelites, did say in general, that they did not worship, neither the Images
of false Gods, nor the Brazen Serpent, nor the Golden Calf, the people,
nevertheless, did not forbear to give a Religious Service unto those things, to
kneel before them, to incense them, and in some measure, to fasten their trust
and affections upon them.

The Roman Church does not believe any Divinity in the Images: it is true;
except happily some grosser Spirits, which are capable of thinking any thing,
when they are kneeling before them, and are possessed with the wonders that
have been done by the Images.

But how can it so formally be said, that the Church of Rome does not believe
that there is any virtue in them? For she desires this very m^^ter of God in
consecrating of them that he would bless them, that h^ would accompany them
with hi^ power, and all those other points, which are to be seen at large in
the Rom^ Pontifical. The Books of the Rom^ Church are full of the Virtues of
the Cross, of the miraculous Images o^ the Virgin, and of the Saints, ar^ of
the Marks which the Saints do often give of their presence, and of the^ power;
from whence also do proceed the Vows, the Offerings, t^ Pilgrimages authorized
by the Counci^ and to conclude, Memorias frequentari.
all those affect^ Devotions, which are tied more t^ one place than another.

This is what has been alread^ touched upon the Worship of Saint in general.
The Church of Ro^ may, as long as she pleases, tell u^ they put no confidence
in Images and that they believe no other virt^ in them, but only to stir up
the remembrance of the Originals: That (...) not the question, whether it must
b^ believed or not believed that there (...) virtue in Images, but whether a
religious Worship ought to be given unto them. The general practice of the
people does manifestly contradict this profession; and the people do not only
fix their confidence upon Images: but the experience of all Ages does
manifestly show, that it is impossible but that they should naturally incline
thereto.

A public mark of this confidence, and that the people do believe something
more than humane in Images, is, that though the better sort of the Roman Church
themselves, condemn openly the excessive Worship which is given unto many
Images of the Blessed Virgin (as for instance, unto those which have been, or
are yet to be seen in the Streets at Paris, In Goos-street near the Capuchins,
etc: St. Honore's street, etc At the Capuchins in St. Honore's street.
and unto others yet more famous in Foreign Parts, whereunto the people do
flock in great numbers) yet we have seen one Image amongst others, which they
durst not remove out of the peoples sight, but only to transport it into the
adjacent Chapel: and it seems they much less dare take away the others,
because it is known that the hearts of the people are fastened unt^ them.

To omit, that the Church of Rom^ is so far from having contained h^^self in
the worshipping of Saints sinc^ the Council of Trent, that it appea^ on the
contrary, That whereas the Council does only authorize in express terms, the
Image of Jesus Chri^ as man, of the Virgin, and of the Saints; and at the
farthest, only some representation of some History of the Scripture, or some
action of the D^vinity, there is to be seen in sundr^ places in the Churches,
Images s^ up, not only of Angels, in forme^ young Children, with wings; bu^
also of God the Father, in likeness o^ an old man; and of the Holy Ghos^ in
form of a Dove; against what the Apostle expressly says of those, Deuteronomy.
4.12.15.16. Isa. 40.18. Acts 17.29.
wh^ change the glory of the immortal God into the likeness of a mortal man,
an^ of Birds, etc. against the prohibition of the Law so often repeated; and i^
fine, against the Judgment of the second Council of Nice it self; and (...) the
first and most zealous Patriots of Images, who, at the least, would not that
there should be any image made of the Trinity.

But what is yet most stange of all, is, that this usage is not only
established by the general practice of the Roman Church, but also maintained
expressly by the Catechism of the Roman Church, which was made by the order and
authority of the Council.

The only thing that the same Catechism does allege, to authorize, Romans
Catech. part. 3. de cultu Sanctorum.
in some sort, the use of Images, and the Worship given unto them, is, says
he, that God did command that two Cherubims should be placed upon the Ark, and
that the brazen Serpent should be lifted up before the people. True; but you
say it your selves, God commanded it upon occasion, and for reasons all
particular, which it is plain you cannot argue from, except you had had some
special order in this behalf. The Cherubims were nothing else, but a mere
ornament for the propitiatory, and were only in the most Holy Place, where
none entered but only the High Priest once a year; and the brazen Serpent was
only a Type of Jesus Christ, instituted by God, to heal the Israelites of the
bitings of the Serpents of the Wilderness, as Jesus Christ does heal us of the
bitings of the old Serpent. They did not kneel down before the Cherubims, nor
before the brazen Serpent, they did not worship them at all. Ezekias brake the
brazen Serpent, as soon as he saw that the people offered incense unto it; and
the Scripture does expressly declare, 2 Kings chapter 18.
that this was a matter acceptable to God.

We agree all of the one and the other Communion, that the Gospel i^ only the
accomplishment of the Law: we have not yet at this day any other rule than the
Jews, either for our duties unto God, or our duties unto men. All the
differenc^ there is betwixt the Jews and us, i^ that the figures of the Law,
have given place unto the truths of the Gospel: in stead of sacrifices, and
ceremonies, of the ancient Covenant, we have Jesus Christ, which has offered
himself upon the Cross; and in stead of the Passover, and Circumcision, the
Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper. This is properly and only the
true Christian Religion: why then should they adjoin hereto the Worship of
Images, which is nothing else but an imitation of Pagans, and which lays an
insuperable obstacle to the communion of the Jews, and of the Turks, who are
half Jews.

Images, Council. Trid. Sess. 25. de invoc. SS.
(say they) do serve to instruct the people in the mysteries of Religion, and
to maintain devotion and piety.

But in the first place, as to instruction, if they will own the truth, the
people is no where worse instructed in the true mysteries of Salvation, than in
those places where the Worship of Images is most urged, as in Muscovia. They
have reason to say, that Images are the Books of the ignorant, that is a
pernicious mean, which the slothfulness or ignorance of those, who ought to
instruct the people themselves, have substituted in the place of true and sound
instructions. Every one may see, that our Reformed People who have no Images,
nor other exercise, but our Prayers, our singing of Psalms our Sermons, the
reading of the Holy Scriptures, and the Sacraments administered in the same
simplicity, that our Lord did institute them, are not less instructed, than
those of the Roman Church with their Images. The Bishop of Condom knows as well
as any man, that, in truth, it is by preaching, that there should be formed in
the hearts of men, the lively Images of Jesus Christ, who died for us, and (if
we will have them) the Images of the life and death of holy men, who have
sealed the Truth with their blood, and the Holiness of their life.

And as to matter of devotion, the same is also seen, that the people which use
Images, and all the other ceremonies where with Religion is encumbered, have, it
may be, more of the outward appearances of zeal, but not therefore a more solid
piety toward God; and on the contrary, all their devotion is turned toward
these outward things, Council. Trid. Sess. 25. de invoc. Sanct. Populum. Plebi
indoctae.
and toward the Images themselves. That is, in a word, that the Images being
properly only for the people (as the Council does intimate) and the people
almost always abusing them (as the most sincere persons do confess) the
Images, therefore, are properly only for those who abuse them.

As to what concerns Relics, it will only be needful to apply hereto, what
has been spoken in general, and in particular; touching the object of
Religious Worship, and touching the invocation of Saints, and the veneration
that is given to Images. For, as to the Doctrine, we have almost the same
reasons against all these different objects of Worship: And, as to the
practice, all the World knows, that there are yet far greater abuses committed
in the Worship of all that they call Relics of Saints, than in that of Images.

What we have in particular, touching Relics, may be reduced unto two
principal Heads; the first, that neither the Council of Trent, nor the
Catechism, nor the Bishop of Condom, say, that Relics have no virtue, nor
that we ought not to place confidence in them, as they all do say of Images.
Ibid. de ^^voc. Sanct. etc. de cultu Sanct.
On the contrary, the Council teaches, that God confers very great graces by
means of Relics; and the Catechism speaks stronger, and more openly; that God
makes use of them to heal the lame and the blind, to raise the dead, and to
exorcise devils, and to drive them out of the bodies of living men. By which
passages, the Council, and the Catechism, on the one hand, recommend the
Worship of Relics, above that of Images, for the virtue which they would have
believed to be in Relics: And on the other hand, themselves, in some measure
overthrow, the principal reason, which they allege to justify the Worship of
Images, which is, that they believe there is no virtue in them.

As for the Bishop of Condom, he shelters himself from all these difficulties,
in not saying, whether there is, or is not, any virtue in Relics. And here is
the second thing, which is to be observed, touching Relics in particular,
that the Bishop of Condom seems not to consider them, but as marks of reverence
and affection, which are borne for the persons we love and honor. From whence
he draws this consequence, That if God, P. 36, 37, and 38.
all jealous as he is of the love of men, does not look upon us, as if we
divided betwixt him and the creature, when we love our neighbor for his sake;
the same God, howsoever jealous of the respect of Believers, does not behold
them, as if they divided the Worship which they owe unto him alone, when they
honor, for the respect which they bear unto him, those whom he himself has
honored. And in the end he concludes, that these outward marks of reverence
not being absolutely nec^ssary, the Church may extend more or less these
exterior practices, according to the diversity of times and places, not
desiring that her children should be servilely subject unto visible things.

All the World may see, how this discourse is turned and sweetened, and how it
seems to open a way to some Reformation: but if these opinions be sincere, and
approved by all those of the Roman Communion, let them, at least, make appear,
that their actions do answer their words. If they will only honor the Saints,
the true honor of dead bodies is burial; and as for apparel, and other things,
which served for their use, let them be carefully preserved, if they please,
but let them not incense them, and let them not expose them in the House of
God, to become an object of Worship. Let them not suffer the people to trust in
Relics, that they should carry them with them, as preservatives against
danger of Fire, of Shipwreck, and against the Devil himself; and that thereby,
their hearts cleaving unto the things which they have before their eyes, they
become more negligent of praying unto God, and having recourse to him alone. No
persons have greater respect and veneration for the memory of Saints, than we
have; let there be no mixture of Religion, nor Worship, no not the very terms:
for, as for us, it is our unmovable Foundation, that God alone ought to be the
object of our Regilion, and that there ought not to be any sort of Religious
Worship given to any, but unto God only.

God will have us to love our neighbors, which are living members of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and which are not things inanimate, or the dead parts of living
members, as are the Relics; for this is the reason, for which the Council
will have men to have a veneration for them. But who does not know, that even
in this love for our neighbors, there may be an excess, and that God may be
displeased thereat. God permits us to love goods, and riches, as gifts from his
hand, but this love does often extend too far, and God is offended at it. The
Scripture calls coveteousness Idolatry; and we every day say, that men do
idolize what they love, when they love it to excess. It is the same thing, in a
manner, as to the honor that is due to Saints. God will have us to love and
honor their memory, that we should praise them, that we should propose to
imitation their Faith, their Zeal, that their names should be in veneration and
blessing amongst us: but he will not we observe no measure, he will not have us
give unto them the same marks of Honor, as we give unto himself; and he not
only forbids that we should divide this honor betwixt him and the Saints, but
he will also have us not communicate the least part of it unto any but himself
alone.

Now to end this article of the worship of Saints, of Relics, and of Images,
if the Bishop of Condom will do any thing that is sincere and solid, if he will
cure the disease, and not palliate it; that is, if he will leave the
Foundations of Faith whole, and entire, and dispel a considerable part of our
Controversies, as he says it is his design to do, it is not enough to change
some terms, or to fasten them; nor to insinuate, as he does, that the Church of
Rome may use some moderation in the outward signs of this Worship, whilst in
the general, it is seen, that at the bottom, the Doctrine and practice of the
Roman Church, is all along one and the same.

As for us, though it may seem that there is less appearance of evil and
superstition, in the manner of the Bishop of Condom's speaking, than there is
in that of the Council, of the Roman Catechism, and the other Doctors of his
Communion, we can look neither upon the one nor the other but only as humane
inventions. And to conclude, these very sweetnings of the Bishop of Condom
himself, being far from giving us any ill opinion of our Reformation, rather
confirm us the more, that the worthy and moderate persons of the Roman Church,
do themselves, at least, condemn a good part of what we condemn, and that by
consequence, they acknowledge thereby in some sort, that a Reformation is
useful and necessary.

VI. Of justfication,
THE THIRD PART.
The method which the Bishop of Condom has observed, requires, that after the
Worship of Saints, etc. we examine his Doctrine concerning Justification, the
merit of Works, of Satisfactions, Purgatory, and of Indulgences.

It is true, as the Bishop of Condom says, that the Article of Justification
is one of the chief things which gave occasion of reformation to our Fathers.
Very few are Ignorant what was the state of the Latin church at that time. On
one hand presented it self the Doctrine of the merit of works, the necessity of
satisfying Gods Justice in this life, or endureing the fire of Purgatory after
death, to complete what was wanting of this satisfaction; on the other hand was
to be seen an extraordinary irregulatity in the life and manners, as well of
the Clergy, as of the people; and by consequence no likelihood of salvation
neither by works, nor by those satisfactions: and in fine there appeared no
other Object before the eyes of men, but Purgatory, or Hell.

In this state of the Church, the Pope opens the Treasures of his Indulgencies,
distributes his Agnus's, his Beads, and Relics, and prescribes certain
numbers of Pater nosters, and Ave Mary's, of Stations, of Visits of Churches,
of Pilgrimages, Fasts, Pennances, of macerations and mortifications; with
which, and with the help of Pardons, Dispensations, and Indulgences, which were
purchased at a dear rate, those who had them were not only justified
themselves, but helped to justify others, delivering souls out of Purgatory,
and acquiring for them a greater degree of blessedness, or an augmentation of
glory, as the Council speaks. Our Fathers did believe, that there was an abuse
in all these things, and that this Doctrine which possessed the minds of the
people, and that made up the greatest part of their piety, did overthrow the
Foundation of Religion, which does essentially consist, in placing our chiefest
confidence in the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ; and farther, in serving God
according to his will, and not according to the commandments of men.

It is also true, that since the Reformation, the Church of Rome it self does
seem to be a little more reserved, than she was before, as well as to
expressions, in regard of her Doctrines, as in regard of the practice, and the
very use of Indulgences; and they are beholding to us for it, which does very
much serve for the justification of our first Reformers; but the abuses are yet
too great in one, and the other, for the corrupting of piety, and scandalizing
of true Christians.

Those who only consider the controversy of Justification at a distance, or
transiently, without searching into the grounds and consequences, will not, it
may be, at first, think it so important as it is: but it is of so great moment,
what herein is the judgment of those, who are well informed amongst us, that as
to the contrary, we should not stick here to maintain, that the difference of
Belief, which does separate us from the Church of Rome, as to this point, is of
so great consequence unto Religion, that there is scarce any greater.

Let us therefore be permitted, according to the liberty that Dispute does
require, to deny here formally what the Bishop of Condom does aver in something
an uncertain manner, That there are but few learned men of our side (as he
speaks) but do confess, that we ought not to separate from the Church of Rome,
about this point, and that this difficulty is not any longer considered as much
material, by the most intelligent persons amongst us.

The Bishop of Condom does not cite one of those learned men, nor one of those
intelligent persons, unto whom he imputes these sorts of Sentiments, as the
importance of the business does require. The Confession of Faith of our
Churches, which contains the General Belief of those of our Communion, explains
it self to the contrary upon this point, as thoroughly as may be: it confirms
the very Doctrine, which the first Reformers taught, declaring in express
terms, That how little soever we swerve from this Foundation, we can never
find any ease, but that we shall be continually tossed with inquietude.

The Council of Trent it self acknowledged the importance of this Controversy;
First, in that it takes notice of it from the first, as one of the principal
causes of the Schism, and which did most deserve the care of the said Council:
And in the second place, by the prodigious length of its Decree, and by the
vast number of its Canons and Anathema's, much greater upon this point, than
upon any other.

In sum, it may be said, that it is not only a principal point, but it is
one of them which are most such. The others, for the most part, do only regard
some part of Religion: Error does corrupt but that part, and does not
influence the others, if we may so speak. The worshipping the Host, for
example, is, without doubt, one of the most essential points, in which it is
impossible to find any mean, because the question is, whether it ought to be
worshipped or not worshipped, which is the first and greatest Act of Religion:
Nevertheless, this is but a particular point; a capital error indeed for them,
who are deceived in it, but which does nothing, or changes nothing, in all the
other Fundamental Points.

But who speaks of Justification, speaks of the means of our Salvation, that is
to say, the Mystery of our Redemption; there is nothing more important, than
not to be deceived in the choice of such a matter, because if a man fails to
take the right way, he falls from error to error, and the very true essence
of Religion is changed and altered.

This truth will plainly appear, by the bare comparing of our Doctrine with
that of the Church of Rome.

We do believe, that our Justification does alone consist herein, that having
deserved death, Jesus Christ dyed for us, and satisfied the Justice of God the
Father for us, who for the love of his Son, pardons all our sins in general,
uniting us unto him by a true and lively faith, and imputing his righteousness
and obedience unto us, that is to say, the merit of his Death it self, as
though we had suffered it in our own persons. We believe that it is God
himself, that does beget and strengthen this Faith in our hearts, by the inward
operation of his Holy Spirit, and by the outward Ministry of his Word and
Sacraments, as shall be explained in what follows, upon the subject of the
Sacraments; that this Faith is not a dead, or idle Faith, but a living Faith,
and working by love, and by all sorts of good works, and that these works are
very acceptable to God, and necessary to Salvation, as an inseparable
consequent of that Faith which justifies us; but that it is only of pure Grace
and by the alone merit of the death of Jesus Christ, that God does forgiv^ us
our sins, and give us everlasting Life. Lastly, we believe, that we ought to be
so far from making the goodness and mercy of God a motive of sin, or of
neglecting good works, that we ought, on the contrary, to make it a motive of
Love, of Fear, of Thankfulness, and of an humble obedience unto all his
commandments.

This is the sum of our Doctrine, wholly conformable to the Spirit of the
Gospel, worthy of the infinite goodness of God, and of the honor that we have
of being his children, and which also leaves unto him all the glory of our
Salvation, and thereby puts us, by its very own nature, under an indispensable
obligation of being an holy people, and of doing his Will.

There are other Doctrines which do proceed from hence, or relate hereto,
whereof it is true, that many times the dispute is only of words; and it
seems, that a man may be in an error, as to some of these Doctrines, without
derogation from the Glory of God, or prejudicing the rule of our conduct: as,
touching the assurance which Believers may have of their Election, and touching
the sense wherein it is said, that God does recompense our good works: but as
to what concerns those due sentiments, which we laid down, touching the only
cause of our Justification, namely, the Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
blotteth out our sins, without our bringing any thing on our parts, but that
grace wherewith he himself makes us to embrace the merits of his Death, as it
is the Foundation of the love and regard which we owe unto him, so also of the
quiet of our own consciences: and not to think of God on this respect, as
highly as may be, and as we are thereby bound; or to diminish directly or
indirectly, by our thoughts or expressions, the least point of this glory
(which he has to be the only Author of our Salvation) or of the obligation
which we have toward him, is to offend his Divine Majesty in the most tender
part, as we may so say, of that love which he himself has for us.

We have this advantage on this point, as on many others, that the Gentlemen of
the Roman Church do agree almost to all that we believe: the dispute is, for
the most part, only touching what they add unto that which we believe. They
confess, as we, that God is the only Author of our Salvation; and it would be
said at first sight, that all which the Bishop of Condom has set forth as to
his Belief, touching Justification, does entirely agree with our Doctrine; for
he says as we do, That our sins are freely forgiven unto us, through the
Divine mercy, for his Son Jesus Christ's sake, who blotted them out by his own
Blood. He says also, that the righteousness of Jesus Christ is imputed unto
us, which is an expression we ordinarily keep our selves to, according to the
style of Scripture, for the better understanding the very Word, the nature and
means of Justification. The Gentlemen of the Roman Church, and the Council of
Trent in particular, do commonly decline this expression, because it intimates
openly enough, that it is not by any righteousness, that is in us, that we are
justified, but by that righteousness of Jesus Christ which is out of us, and
which is made ours by imputation: as the Money which is paid by the surety, is
made the Debtors, or reputed to be his; because the Creditor is accountable for
it, and discharges him of his debt. Those of the Church of Rome, do not at all
accommodate themselves unto this manner of thinking or speaking, because they
join unto this Righteousness of Jesus Christ, that is imputed unto us, a
righteousness, that is proper and inherent in us, as they say, which does
concur with the former. This it is, which is properly the ground of the
Question betwixt them and us, and the source of several other Doctrines, which
we do reject, as shall be spoken in the following Discourse.

However, it is true, that the Bishop of Condom here seems to advance a step
toward us: at least, it is certain, that he has done much good to Religion in
general, in discharging it in some sort, from all the vain speculations, not
only of the Schoolmen, but also of the Council it self, which is evidently as
much or more Scholastical on this point of Justification, as the most thorny
School-Doctors. The Decree contains no less than sixteen great Chapters, and
thirty two Canons, to which the Chapters of the Decree are reduced. The Decree
is full of distinctions of the final cause, the efficient cause, the
meritorious cause, the formal cause, the instrumental cause, and the like; the
Canons full of Anathema's against a great many opinions, if not good or
innocent (being yet in dispute) at least doubtful and indifferent, and which
are visibly of the opinions of those particular Doctors, which the Bishop of
Condom would with good reason have laid aside: the Council thereby making
Articles of Faith, of all those subtilties in Canonising them, and by this
means putting an invincible obstacle unto a reunion, by the great number of
Anathema's which it thunders generally against all those, who will not admit
all these opinions and distinctions of the Schools.

Our Confession of Faith, reduces all this matter of Justification, unto a few
Articles, in Apostolical style, very simple, and very clear. And the Bishop of
Condom does also reduce the very Chapters of the Decree, and all the Canons,
unto a few words; so far we seem to go, as it were, hand in hand.

But it must needs be, that the kindness which the Bishop of Condom does us, is
not sincere; what he gives us with one hand, he takes away at the same time
with the other: and it may be said, that this is still one of those Articles of
Faith, which the Roman Church receives as we do, well nigh as fundamental, but
from whence, at the same time, she derogates by contrary Doctrines.

The Bishop of Condom says here, That God does freely forgive us our sins, and
that he blots them out by the blood of his Son. In the following Sections it
will appear, that these sins are not so forgiven, nor so blotted out, but that
we are bound necessarily to satisfy our selves by temporal pains in this life,
by the torments of Purgatory in the other; or by the Pardons and Indulgences of
the Holy Chair: and from hence, without going farther, having said that our
sins are blotted out by the blood of Jesus Christ, he immediately adds, and by
the Grace which regenerates us. Now here we must observe, that it is the
constant Doctrine of the Church of Rome, that it is in our power to reject this
grace, or accept it, when it is offered unto us; and that then, when it falls
out that we do not reject it, but receive it, and afterward act of our selves
with the assistance of this grace, we have a proper merit of our own, and some
part in the Work of our Salvation, though it should be only for not having
rejected it.

And though it seem at first sight, that there is not in this point so great a
difference betwixt the Gentlemen of the Roman Church and us, it will appear,
upon very i^^le r^flection made thereon, that as to the Foundation, this
difference is very great, as well upon the points of their Doctrine in this
very matter, as upon all the other points that proceed from it.

In the first place, he busies himself more or less, touching the sincerity and
purity of thoughts which we ought to have, not only of the power of God, but
more particularly of his grace and infinite goodness, which could make us
without us, and which will yet save us, in some sense, not only without our
selves, as when he is found of them which seek him not, but also often maugre
our selves as when he does touch the hearts of; those which persecute his
Church, which in effect is, what the Christian Religion has, more noble, most
essential, and most admirable. We have nothing upon this point, but to compare
our Sentiments with those of the Church of Rome, to see which are most
conformable unto this fair Idea of the great mercy of God, which makes him to
extend his benefits and compassions even unto those very persons who resist him.

1. We attribute all unto God, in the Work of our Salvation, without desiring
to take any thing unto our selves; and albeit this very thing were true, that
we could pretend unto any small part, yet upon the whole, the error may not be
criminal. It may, on the contrary, be esteemed profound humility, and an
acknowledgment of our nothingness; whereas the Romish Church, whatever
protestation she makes, that she also attributes all to God, as we do, sticks
not nevertheless to attribute unto man, a great part of the merit and honor of
his Salvation.

2. In ascribing all unto God, as we do, and in renouncing our selves, we
assure the quiet of conscience, because thereby we put all the confidence of
our Salvation in the goodness of God, and in the merits of his Son's Death,
which is an unshakeable Foundation; whereas the Church of Rome gives man an
opinion of his own strength, which, on the one side, cannot but diminish, in
some sort, that entire confidence which he ought to have in the blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ; and on the other side, make him promise himself much from
his Fasts, and from his other good Works, like the Pharisee in the Gospel: and
notwithstanding this, he cease not to be miserably perplexed in this life, or
at his death, with fears of Purgatory, or of Hell, when he comes to perceive
his weakness, and to think that it was partly in his power to have saved
himself.

3. Our Belief does very strictly engage us, by all the strongest bands of
Love, and Gratitude, to Worship God, and to serve him, and to keep his
Commandments, with so much the more care and zeal, as he saves us by his pure
grace, overcoming the very opposition of our Will. The Doctrine of the
Gentlemen of the Roman Church, does also engage them to the same Duty, but it
diminishes much herein, by supposing that they are something beholding unto
their own natural strength: and besides this, it mingles with this duty,
motives of Hope of good, and fear of evil, which in their nature would not be
amiss, were it as easy, as it is difficult, to keep them within just
moderation; which nevertheless are always more of the dispensation of the Law,
than of the true Spirit of the Gospel.

The only or the principal thing, which is alleged against us upon this
Article of Justification, is, that they pretend that our Doctrine referring, as
it does, our Salvation wholly to the mercy of God, and to the righteousness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which is imputed unto us, it seems to put men at
liberty, or at least under a relaxation from good Works; as if they had nothing
to do on their part, or that it ought to be indifferent unto them, whether they
did good or evil.

But we have already prevented this Objection, by giving to understand, that
being very far from making the mercy of God an occasion of sin, and negligence,
we say with David, that there is mercy with God, that he may be feared.

And besides, though there be but too much of vice and sin in us, as we do not
presume that our manners are better than those of Roman Catholics; we can say,
for the defense of our Doctrine, that it cannot be seen that we are much more
wicked or extravagant than they, whether the people or Clergy be regarded.

We, on our side, do yet oppose unto the Gentlemen of the Roman Church, that
their Belief does produce two infallible evil effects; it casts some into a
presumption of their own merits, from whence proceed Vows, Abstinences,
Macerations, and other the like practices, which we believe superstitious, and
contrary to the Word of God; and it precipitates others into despair, by the
resentment they have of their own weakness, from whence proceeds their recourse
unto Saints, Purgatory, Indulgences, and all those other Doctrines and
Practices; which we believe to be contrary unto true piety.

It may therefore be seen by the bare comparing of our Doctrine with that of
the Church of Rome, which of the two does most tend unto the glory of God, and
to form the most pure and disinteressed thoughts in our hearts; and if in the
end, the difference which there is betwixt the one and the other, does not
induce any very considerable change in Religion, this will yet farther appear,
in examining other Doctrines, which in some sort, depend upon Justification.

The first, VII. The merit of Works.
in the Bishop of Condom's order is the merit of Works, upon which we confess
sincerely, that the Bishop of Condom, and those of the Roman Church, who
discover the purest sentiments of Free Grace, speak almost every where as we
do. We agree with them in the principal, which is, that good Works are not only
well pleasing unto God, but necessary to Salvation: Nor do we deny, either one
or the other, that God does crown his gifts and his graces, and that, according
to his promises, he does freely reward those who serve him. In sum, it would
seem, that this Doctrine were sufficient to entertain in our hearts the true
love of Righteousness, and hatred of Sin; and here it is properly, that the
dispute is only touching words. This term of merit, Mereri.
which has been introduced only by an ill interpretation of the Latin, has
indeed thus much of disgust, that on the one hand, it seems to make our weak
endeavors to concur with the merit of the blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and to suppose some proportion betwixt our Works, and eternal Life: and
on the other hand, it puffs up that arrogance, unto which man is naturally too
much inclined. But these Gentlemen do in some sort salve the former of these
inconveniences, in declaring as they do, that they do not attribute any merit
unto Works, but by virtue of the free promise, which God has made to reward
them, producing them himself in us by his grace; and besides the moderate
persons amongst them, do not dissent, but that these sorts of expressions of
merit, may very well be waved, and that ours are more humble and more safe: as
also on our part we do not deny, but that those of the Roman Church, may be
suffered in the sense wherein they now explain them. And it may be this is it,
which the Bishop of Condom does here understand, when he says, that the
Learned of our Communion do not believe some of our Disputes upon this point,
to be very material.

What is here most mysterious, is, that upon this expression, that good Works
do merit eternal life, there are ^ounded two other Doctrines which are very
evil. The first is, that they are not contented to command works that are truly
good and commanded, as to worship God only, to serve none but him, to obey our
Superiors, and lastly, to love God with all our hearts, and our Neighbor as
our selves, which is the sum of the Law, and of Christian Religion; but they
have brought in the practice of Vows, of Abstinences, of Pilgrimages,
Macerations, and all those other Works, which the Bishop of Condom does call
Pennances, because in very deed, God has not required any of that nature.

The other evil Doctrine which proceeds from the merit of Works, is that of
Satisfaction, of Purgatory, and Indulgences; for those who do these Works of
Penance, believe they satisfy, at least in some part, the justice of God; and
therefore it is, that they call them Satisfactions: and those who do none of
them, believe themselves destined to the pains of Purgatory, and have recourse
unto Indulgences to deliver them.

VIII. Satisfactions, Purgatory, and Indulgences.
The Doctrine of Satisfactions is, in reality, so evil, according to us, that it
does entirely vitiate all that is good, in that of Justification, and of good
Works. One would say, that it were another Gospel, a Discourse merely humane,
the several parts whereof do so ill agree together. Very far is the whole
Article from being conform unto the Analogy of Faith.

Es. 1.18. Psalm. 32.12. Ps. 103.12.
The Scripture reiterates unto us throughout, that God does pardon us our sins
for his Son's sake; that if our sins were redder than scarlet, he makes them
white as snow; that he imputes them not unto us, that he covers them, that he
blotteth them out, that he separateth them from us, as far as the East is from
the West.

The Bishop of Condom says on the contrary, that God does pardon our sins, but
upon such condition, under such Law, and with such reservation as he pleases;
that he confers an entire abolition of all sins committed for Baptism; but as
for those that are committed after Baptism, God forced by our ingratitude,
changes the eternal pain into a temporal. This is, what the Council of Trent
calls remitting the sin, and retaining the punishment.

This is to say, that God does pardon, and he does not pardon; or at least,
that he does not fully pardon. Our sins, all blotted out as they are, do
nevertheless cry for vengeance. It is not enough, that Jesus Christ has atoned
for them, nor that we repent, and endeavor to amend, and to keep the
Commandments of God, if together herewith we do not Works, which the Bishop of
Condom calls painful and laborious, or if we, suffer not temporal pains, either
in this life, or after death. This is what has been already touched; the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, is not only injurious unto the mercy of God,
and unto the merit of the death of Jesus Christ, by the conditions and
restrictions which she presumes to bring thereunto, but she contradicts her
very self, pulling down with one hand, what she builds up with another. On the
one hand, Jesus Christ has fully paid the price of our ransom; there is
nothing wanting of this payment, his justice is imputed unto us, our sins are
blotted out by his blood. In a word, Jesus Christ has fully satisfied for us.
And on the other hand, Page 60, and 61.
the justice of God, and a certain way which he has appointed, will have us
not to suffer our selves for our sins.

The Bishop of Condom would salve this contradiction, by saying, as he does,
that these pains which God reserves, are only to keep us in our duty, within
the hands of Justice, as he speaks, and not to satisfy for our sins: therefore
it is that he makes a kind of protestation, that if after the explication,
which he gives in that sense, We shall object unto those of his Communion, that
they do prejudice unto the satisfactions of Jesus Christ; that we must forget
what he has already told, us that Jesus Christ has paid the full price of our
ransom, etc. and that if we yet object to them, that they believe they shall be
able to satisfy of themselves, as to some part of the pain which is due to
their sins, he may boldly say, that the contrary does appear by the Maxims
which he has established. Unto which he adds for a conclusion, That what they
call satisfaction, with the ancient Church, is nothing, AFTER ALL, but an
application of the infinite satisfaction of Jesus Christ.

It may plainly be seen by these last expressions of the Bishop of Condom's,
that he seems to do like the Dove, which returned unto the Ark not knowing
where to rest her foot. AFTER ALL, what they call satisfaction, is nothing but
the application of the satisfaction of Jesus Christ. This expression has
something in it improper, and encumbered, because it cannot be any thing but
Faith only, which is the hand of the Soul, that can apply unto us the
satisfaction of Jesus Christ, by acts of love, and reliance. It cannot properly
be said, that any Works done by us, or that any pain that we suffer, can be
the application of the obedience, which Jesus Christ rendered unto his Father,
and of the pains which he suffered for us.

The truth is, that the Bishop of Condom, after having defended as much as he
could, the opinions and the expressions of the Church of Rome, will give to
understand, that AFTER ALL, what they call satisfactions, are not properly
satisfactions: that they themselves do not believe they can satisfy, as they
just now said more expressly, and that in conclusion, there is nothing really
but the satisfaction of Jesus Christ, which ought to be called by this name.
This Doctrine is sound, and it is certain, that it is in some sort to come unto
us, or rather to the truth of the Gospel; but this is nothing in the main, if
the Doctrine of the Council of Trent be still allowed to stand, that is to say,
if that be the Supreme authority which must be proposed to us as the rule of
our Faith: because the Council is formally contrary to the Bishop of Condom's
Doctrine. Sess. 1^. cap. 6. de S^cram. Poen^^.


The Council speaking of Works, and of Penances (the things here in question)
does not only call them satisfactory in proper terms, as also sometimes does
the Bishop of Condom himself, but the Council does declare, that it suits not
with the justice and goodness of God to forgive us our sins without some
satisfaction on our parts, and yet more expressly, that these pennances wh^^^
the Church of Rome does impose, are not only a precaution for our amendment
and a remedy for the time to come, which the Bishop of Condom calls the bands
of justice and duty, but a punishment or a revenge, and a chastisement for our
past sins, requiring in proper terms, that the Curates have always this maxim
before their eyes, and that they be very exact in examining the quality of the
crimes, and the abilities of the penitents, and to impose upon them pennances
proportionable to their sins. This is so clear and express, that nothing can be
more.

In very deed, this Doctrine of the Council, is the common and constant
Doctrine of the Church of Rome upon this point: Lib. 1. de Purg. ca. 14.
insomuch that Bellarmine, by a subtilty contrary to that of the Bishop of
Condoms, does teach that it is we, who, properly satisfy for our sins, and that
the satisfaction of Jesus Christ only puts a value upon ours: The Bishop of
Condom therefore ought either to make all those of his communion to relinquish
this Doctrine of the Council, which is the common and constant Doctrine of their
Church, or to come to an accord, that even by his own judgment, we have right
to charge them with the two things that have been touched; The one, that the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome does contradict it self; and the other, that
they believe to satisfy at least in part, for their sins, and that by
consequence they do injury unto the infinite satisfaction of Jesus Christ.

The Bishop of Condom did not judge it for his purpose, to speak more openly,
what those painful and laborious works, and those satisfactory pains are,
whereof here is question: it might be said, that these are verily of the number
of those things, which must be little explained; and which are much better when
they are lightly passed, or wrapped up in general terms. It would indeed seem,
that the Bishop of Condom has introduced this term of painful and laborious
works, in the room of what the Roman Church directly calls penal works, or
pennances and satisfactions. There is much difference betwixt the one and the
other; the one imports only difficult works, the other punishments; and it may
plainly be seen by what has been said, that this alteration in the
expressions, does only proceed from the alteration which the Bishop of Condom
has made in the common Doctrine of the Church of Rome.

But to conclude, by what name soever they are called, we know they are such
kind of works whereof we have already spoken, Vows, Pilgrimages, Visits of
Churches, Abstinences Prayers by set-number, Hair shirts Sack-clothes, going
without Shirts, lying hard, and such other Mortifications in this life; and at
last, the pains of Purgatory in the other.

Now if it be here demanded, whether there be not some authority for all these
Doctrines, the Council of Trent produces not any. It only says, that in the
Old Testament there are some examples of persons, whom God has punished with
temporal pains, though he had forgiven them their sin; and that it seems to
suit with the justice of God, that it should be one kind of Grace which he
shows unto those who have sinned before Baptism, and another which he shows to
those who have sinned after Baptism. The Bishop of Condom says the same, that
this is just, that this is a certain Order established; as when God does
forgive us the sin of Adam, and yet for all that not free us from the maladies
which are the consequent of that sin.

This is the only ground, and sole authority that they give us, for so
considerable a Doctrine as is that of Satisfactions; that is to say, an
argument merely humane, without any command or precept in Scripture: as if the
evils and corrections which God sends us to exercise our faith and patience,
were not at all effects of his love, rather than punishments, or as if this
were a title or reason for us to give our selves discipline, as they speak, or
to torment our selves, and attempt in some sort upon our own lives.

As to us, who have only the will and Word of God for the rule of our manners
and actions, as well as of our Faith, we are persuaded that all these Works
which God has not commanded, being very far from pleasing, do offend him; that
all this appearance of devotion, is nothing else but an imitation of the Sect
of the Pharisees, which corrupted the Law by their Traditions, fasting formally
twice aweek: The abstinence from meats, in particular, is an imitation of the
Sect of the Pythagoraeans, which fed on nothing but Herbs: Whippings and
Macerations, an imitation of the Priest of Baal, and of those of Cybele, which
whipped themselves, and tore their skin, even till the blood gushed out; and to
conclude, all these pretended Satisfactions are nothing else but commandments
of men, which, as it has been said, do manifestly derogate from the infinite
Satisfaction of Jesus Christ. Purgatory Joh. Roffen. Nav. l. 3. com. de Jub.
and Ind. De purgatorio apud priscos illos nulla vel quam rarissima fiebat
mentio, etc. Nulla, de purgatorio cura, etc. Cajetan. in Tract. de Indulg. cap.
2. Nulla Sacrae Scripturae, nulla priscorum Doct^^rum, Graecorum aut Latinorum
authoritas scripta hac ad nostram deduxit no itiam, sed hoc solum a (...) annis
Scripturae commendatem est, de uer^stis ^^^b^s quod B. Gregor. stat. Indulg.
instituit Gab: Biel lect. (...). 57. upon the Can. of the Mass. Ante tempora
Greg. medicus vel nullus suit usus In^l. nunc autem crebrescit, etc.


We have the same things to say against Purgatory, as against Satisfactions; it
is also a Doctrine which derogates from the merit of the death of Jesus Christ,
as if the expiation which he made of our sins, were imperfect, and that there
were need that we should complete it. There is no track of Purgatory to be
found in the Scripture, whether of the Old or New Testament, without forced
interpretations and consequences, whereof our Doctors have sufficiently showed
the vanity. Many also of themselves, of the Church of Rome, accord, that for
this Doctrine they have nothing but Tradition, since the time of Gregory the
first, who wrote in the end of the Sixth Age, and that the Doctrine of
Purgatory and Indulgences, are not only not in Scripture, but also that there
is very little, or scarce a jot of this usage, nor of the mention thereof,
found in the first times of the Christian Church. It is well known, that the
Fathers of the first three or four Centuries, and some of the fifth it self,
had several Errors touching the state of souls after death, which process of
time has taken away; some having believed, that the souls did abide in a place
of refreshing near Heaven, or under Heaven, until the Day of Judgment. Others,
that they did sleep, and that they should arise the first time with their
bodies to reign a thousand years upon earth with Jesus Christ; and finally, at
the day of Judgment, and of the last Resurrection, all that were raised should
pass, as it were, through a Sea of Fire, which should purify and cleanse them.
But never any of them did believe a place where the souls should suffer, after
the death of the body, pains, in some sort, like those of Hell, except for
continuance, as the Church of Rome teaches. No more did the ancient Jews
believe it, neither do the Greeks yet at this day believe it, though they pray
for the dead after the same manner, as the Fathers now mentioned did. Dial.
lib. 4. ca. 39, 40, 51, 55.


It may be made appear here, that this Doctrine is only an imitation of that
of the Pagans, and that even Pope Gregory himself, who is the first that put
this Doctrine in credit, speaks in the same sense, and the same terms as
Virgil, saying, that the souls are purged, some in the Fire, others fanned in
the Air, others washed and cleansed in Rivers and in Ice; and lastly, others in
Baths and Stoves; but we only design to touch things here as in pass.

Indulgences.
If the Doctrine of Satisfactions and of Purgatory be evil, that of Indulgences
does fall of it self, because this, as it is taught in the Church of Rome, is
but as consequent and dependant on the other. If God has not subjected us unto
Works of Satisfaction, and unto temporal punishments, unto which the Church of
Rome would subject us, there is no need of her dispensations, and we have no
business to examine if she has any power herein

Few persons are ignorant of the great difference that there is, betwixt the
Indulgence which was formerly used unto public penitents, and the pardons
which Popes give, as well for the dead, as for the living; and we have showed
by the very confession of themselves of the Roman Church, that this Doctrine is
not grounded upon any authority in Scripture, and that there is not found any
practice nor mention of it in the five or six first Centuries. Also every one
knows what interest the Court of Rome has, to maintain as well Purgatory, as
the power of the Keys, as the Council speaks; the great authority, and immense
riches, which this Doctrine has brought unto it, and that it brings unto it
daily; the cases reserved unto the Holy See, the Table of Sins rated, Sess. 25.
de Indulg.
more or less, according to the nature of Sins; Lastly, the crying abuses are
too visible, whereof the Council it self has been constrained to order a
Reformation. They are it may be, something less in France, where people have
their eyes more open; but they are so great in Spain, beyond the Mountains, and
in the very place which is termed the Center of Religion, that the sober
persons of their Communion, cannot forbear condemning of them.

This is what we had to say of Justification, and of the Doctrines which depend
upon it. It may be believed, that this may suffice to show, that the questions
which separate us from the Roman Church upon this point, are not of so small
consequence as the Bishop of Condom would insinuate; but that on the contrary,
herein is concerned the purest, and if it may be spoken, the most Christian
part of Religion, as has been proved throughout upon this Article; and that to
conclude, the Bishop of Condom does not make any controversies to cease, except
perhaps in regard of those things which he has suppressed, and upon this
particular point of Satisfactions, upon which the Council of Trent, Bellarmine,
and in a word, the doctrine and general practice of the Roman Church, formally
take away what the Bishop of Condom would grant us.

THE FOVRTH PART.
The Process of the Bishop of Condom's Treatise, IX. The Sacraments in general.
does call us to the matter of the Sacraments. We will but little insist, as
neither does he, upon the name, the number, and the efficacy of the Sacraments
in general; and in like sort, upon the greatest part of what he calls
Sacraments in particular, because the difficulties upon these points, are not
in reality so hotly agitated, as the Bishop of Condom himself says. It may be
believed, that the time and patience of them who shall take the pains to read
this Answer, will be better employed upon the matter of the Eucharist, and upon
the other articles, which concern Tradition, and the authority of the Pope,
which are more important, and upon which we have most controversy.

In the first place, as to the name of Sacraments, Greg. in cap. 16. ^ib. Reg.
Tertul. de praesc. etc. Lib. 10, and 50. Tra. 80. (...) Joan. Accedit verbum ad
elementu^, and fit Sacrame^tum.
it were a thing indifferent to give them one name, rather than another, if we
were agreed of the things; or if the names would not by consequence draw in the
things themselves.

The name of Sacrament may be taken in a double sense; the one general and
extensive, to signify any sacred act or ceremony, as it is often taken in the
Fathers; the other proper and less extensive, as St. Augustine defines it in
his Book of the City of God, when he calls it a visible sign of an invisible
grace, the blessing of the Word being joined, as he says elsewhere, unto the
matter of the outward Elements. In the first sense, they may if they please,
make not only seven Sacraments, Pierre de Damien Ser. 69. pa. 168.
but twelve if they will, as a Catholic Doctor did before the Council. The
Bishop of Condom does in some sort accommodate himself unto this general sense,
when he uses this expression, that in his communion, there are received seven
Signs, or sacred Ceremonies.

The difficulty is, that the Council being herein less equitable than the
Bishop of Condom, has in this, as well as in the matter of Justification, made
Articles of Faith of many particular Opinions, which are nothing to the Essence
of Sacraments, which are good for nothing at all but for the Schools.

For the Council will have us expressly to believe, not only seven Signs or
sacred Ceremonies in a general sense, but seven true Sacraments, properly so
called, as it speaks, and that we believe neither more nor less, under pain of
Anathema; however it is plainly to be seen, that at least in the ceremonies of
Marriage, of Penance, and Order, which are three of these seven Sacraments,
there is nothing of a visible sign, unto which the blessing can be joined, as
there ought to be, to make true Sacraments, according to the Doctrine of St.
Augustine.

As to their Efficacy, we agree with the Gentlemen of the Roman Church, and
with the Bishop of Condom in particular, in that we acknowledge, as they do,
that the Sacraments are not only signs, or seals of the grace of God, but
instruments or means, which he accompanies with his power to confer that very
grace.

But there is this difference, which is very considerable, betwixt them and us,
that they will have it, that the Sacraments do confer grace, by virtue of the
words which are spoken, and by the action which is outwardly performed upon us,
Page 69, and 70.
provided that we put no obstacle by any evil disposition; which is, what the
Council terms conferring grace, ex opere operato (as it is also the language of
the School) that is to say, by the action, or by the bare celebration of the
Sacrament it self.

And as for us, we believe in truth, that God does accompany the Sacraments
with his power, and that they confer grace, when they are received with Faith;
but not that they do confer it of themselves; or by the words which are
pronounced, and by the outward action done upon us, if they be not received
with a true Faith.

The Church of Rome does believe, that this virtue is, as it were, inherent, or
affixed to the Sacrament, and to the outward action which is in it performed,
though neither the Council, nor the Bishop of Condom believed themselves bound
to explain, whether it be a Moral, or Physical virtue; so that according to
their Doctrine, this iis not necessary it self to be in a good disposition,
that is to say, to have Faith, or at least, to exercise the acts in receiving
the Sacraments. It will suffice not to be in an evil disposition, and thereby
not to interrupt the virtue of the Sacraments, or not to put an obstacle
thereto: for neither the Council, nor the Bishop of Condom, require any thing
else.

But as for us, we hold unto the Word of God, which does teach us in several
places, that it is by Faith only that we partake of these graces, God not
affixing his power (merely) unto visible things, Pa. 154
as the Bishop of Condom himself confesses in another place.

We reject the Doctrine of the Church of Rome upon this point, with so much the
more reason, for that besides that it is very evil in it self, there may be
observed several considerable abuses which proceed from it.

1. First, This Doctrine is very evil in it self, in that it does tie the grace
of God unto outward things.

2. In that it carries men to neglect the acts and habits of Faith, and of
other Christian virtues, teaching them that the Sacraments alone regenerate and
sanctify them, without ever troubling themselves so much as to bring any good
disposition with them, which is a Doctrine, whereof the bare Exposition does
disgust those, who are not accustomed unto it.

From whence also proceeds, that in the Roman Church, they make the greatest
part of devotion and piety, to consist in causing to be said a great number of
Masses, and of going often to confession, as they speak; because they are
taught, that the action of the Priest, and the words which he pronounces, have
the virtue to confer grace, provided only that they put not any obstacle on
their part.

3. This opinion has served to introduce or establish the Doctrine of the Real
Presence, such as it is taught in the Roman Church, which we believe to be very
bad, as we shall show hereafter.

4. From thence also is plainly come the Opinion of the necessity of giving the
Eucharist unto Infants, which is an Error that reigned a long time in the
Church; and this other Error of the necessity of Baptism, which yet does reign
at this day in the Church of Rome.

5. The same Opinion does also give occasion, to several other very wicked and
superstitious acts, insomuch that there have been some people, who have
employed the matter of the Sacraments for Charms, and for other most
mischievous uses.

6. To conclude, the Council makes this Opinion a principle to establish
thereby many others, which we reject, and which together do corrupt very much
the purity of Christianity.

So that it is evident, that this matter of the Sacraments in general, which at
the first sight appeared not very considerable, cease not nevertheless to be
of great importance, by reason of the consectaries which it draws after it;
for that this is the nature of Error to be fruitful in productions.

It were much to be desired, that for an entire clearing of what is most
considerable upon this Article, the Bishop of Condom would have been pleased to
have told us something of his thoughts upon the several Doctrines of the
Council, which he passes over in silence; and amongst others, upon that of the
Eleventh Canon, which requires, that the Priest which administers the
Sacrament, have an intention to consecrate, and to confer grace, without which
there is nothing effected. It is known, that there are men to be found so
wicked, as to sport themselves with the Holy Mysteries, as indeed of them there
be but too many Examples. Let them tell us in this case, what ought to be
thought of all those, unto whom these wicked Cheates do pretend to give the
Sacraments of Baptism, and of the Eucharist, of Penance, and of Absolution,
etc. As to some, have they not adored what was not adorable? as to the others,
are they not deprived altogether of the effect of Baptism, or of Absolution,
and so of the other Sacraments? And as to all the necessary consequents of this
principal Doctrine, do they not clearly show, that the Doctrine it self is
very evil? The Bishop of Condom not saying any thing unto these controverted
matters, would be content, that here, and elsewhere, where he deals after the
same sort, his silence should be taken for a tacit consent, that all these
Doctrines, howsoever established by the Canons of the Council, are at least of
the number of those things, which may be waved.

The Bishop of Condom reduces all the Questions touching Baptism, Baptism.
unto that of the necessity of this Sacrament for Infants, and indeed that is
the chiefest. All that he says herein, consists in three things, upon which it
may be said at first sight, that this happily is one of those places of his
Treatise, wherein he does most of all swerve from his natural equity. In the
first place, he condemns those poor small creatures in terms more formal and
severe, than the Council it self does. Infants (says he) not being able to
supply the want of Baptism by the acts of Faith, of Hope, and of Charity, nor
by desire or vow of receiving this Sacrament we believe that if they receive it
not in, Page 71, and 72.
reality, they partake not any way of the grace of Redemption, and so dying in
Adam, they have no part in Jesus Christ.

The only pronouncing of this sentence against the Infants of Believers,
causes a kind of horror, mingled with a tender and just compassion for these
poor Innocents; for they are looked on as such, though they are tainted with
Original sin, and the Church of Rome calls them Innocents, and Martyrs, which
Herod caused to be slain, and celebrates a Feast unto their memory. Now this
very sense of horror and pity, which such condemnation it self excites in our
spirits, being natural and reasonable, it is a sign there is no condemnation.
You condemn them, because they cannot supply the want of Baptism, by acts of
Faith, as do the adult persons, whom you save without Baptism: but it is for
that very reason, that you ought not to condemn them. The Roman Church is well
contented, that the Faith of Godfathers, and Godmothers, and of the Church,
should supply the want of Faith in Infants even then, when they receive
Baptism. It is the Godfather that speaking for the Child, says, that he
demands to be baptized, that he renounces the Devil, that he Believes in God;
and, in a word, that makes the whole Confession of Faith, which we make in the
Creed. Wherefore then will she not yield, that this same Faith of the
Godfathers, and of the Church, may supply the place to Infants, of those
desires or vows which adult persons have for Baptism, or of those acts of
Faith, which are in stead of Baptism? There is no more reason for one, than for
the other; if the Fathers, or Godfathers, speaking for the Infant, may say, I
believe in God the Father Almighty, etc. they may as well say for him too, I do
promise and vow to be baptized, if death, or want of means do not hinder.

Dying in Adam, they have no part in Jesus Christ. But why will you have these
Children to die in Adam, seeing they are born of Christian Parents, and that
they die in their arms, in the midst of vows and prayers, which are made to God
for them? Genesis 17.7.
God is the Father of Abraham, and of his posterity; our Father, and the Father
of our Children. And the Children of Believers are holy; 1 Cor. 7.14.
that is to say, they are Children of the Promise, as the Scripture speaks; or
they are born in the Covenant of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and by
consequence, they should not be excluded from the benefit of his Death, which
is common to them with their Fathers, under a pretense, that they are not of
age to declare, that they accept of this benefit: as in the World, the Children
that are born in Cities, or in Countries, have a share in the Rights and
Privileges of the Cities and Countries which they are born, and in the
benefits of Treaties of Peace and Friendship, which are made betwixt the
Princes, though the Children be not in a condition of ability to testify, that
they do submit unto those Treaties.

You have a veneration for the Relics of Saints, because they are parts of the
living members of Jesus Christ; this is the reason which the Council gives, as
it has elsewhere been said. But after all, these are only of the bones and
dead parts of those living members: and yet without scruple, you condemn these
poor little Infants, which are as much parts of Saints, and living and animated
parts. And further, do you believe that all Infants departed since Adam, before
the institution of Baptism, or of Circumcision, which was the Figure of
Baptism, for example, the Children of Abel, or of Noah, under the Law of
Nature; do you believe, I say, that as it may be said, they dyed truly in Adam,
so that they had no part in Jesus Christ? Or that God, who substituted some
other means of Salvation for those Infants, in the place of Baptism, or of
Circumcision, cannot and will not also, even yet at this day, supply the
(necessitated) default of Baptism, by his grace.

How is it, that those of the Church of Rome, who find so much difficulty to
comprehend the eternal Decree of God, according unto which, though we are all
children of Adam, God has chosen some, and passed by others, without, as we
can conceive, any other reasons, but his good pleasure; how is it, I say, that
these Gentlemen find no difficulty to believe, that the Infants of the Faithful
should be so entirely excluded from the (common) Redemption, without any other
reason, save that they are children of Adam, as the Fathers themselves also
were, whom God called unto Salvation.

To conclude, what can there be more convincing against this absolute necessity
of Baptism, than this other necessity of the intention of the Priest, who
administers the Sacrament? For if on the one hand, there can be no Salvation
without Baptism, and on the other, the effect of Baptism depend on the
intention of him who baptiseth, not only the Salvation of Infants, who have
not been baptized, but the Salvation even of those, who dye soon after Baptism,
before they come to age, depends then absolutely on the Priest: which is
equally inconsistent with the Justice, the Power, the Wisdom, and the
Goodness of God.

The only or the principal authority, that the Gentlemen of the Church of Rome
do allege, for the belief of a Doctrine so dangerous, as is this absolute
necessity of Baptism, is a passage of our Saviors, in St. John's Gospel,
speaking to Nicodemus: Except a man be born of water, and of the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. This passage is like another of our
Saviors near the same place, Joh. 6 53.
If you eat not the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no
life in you; and it is true, that upon these two passages, taken according to
the letter, some of the fathers have grounded themselves, as well for the
necessity of administering the Eucharist unto Infants, as for the necessity of
Baptism.

But if the Church of Rome has in process of time justly acknowledged, that
the necessity of the Eucharist unto Infants, was a gross error, and that this
Sacrament ought not to be given unto Infants; wherefore is it, that she does
not also acknowledge, that this necessity of Baptism may be as much an error?
If they believe, that this last passage ought not to be understood of the
Eucharist, or at least, that it ought not to be understood according to the
letter, of all sorts of persons indifferently, but only of such as have age,
and means necessary to partake of the Eucharist, why do they pass a judgment
so contrary touching the other? Why will they not also admit, it ought to be
understood likewise of regeneration, or of a spiritual washing, under the
figure or expression of water, and of the Spirit, which is joined unto the
water? As that place which says, Ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost, and
with Fire, is also taken for a Spiritual Purification under the figure of Fire.
And so much the rather, because the occasion it self, on which Jesus Christ
speaks thus to Nicodemus, is but indeed a particular occasion, where there is
not the least appearance that our Savior had any thoughts, neither expressly,
nor by consequence, to establish the necessity of Baptism.

The second thing, wherein the Bishop of Condom here recedes from his natural
equity, is this, that he would take a false and indirect advantage against us,
by what he says, That the Lutherans do believe with the Church of Rome, the
absolute necessity of Baptism for Infants, and that never any man before
Calvin, dared openly to call in question this truth, it was so strongly
imprinted in the minds of the Faithful.

For, in the first place, the Council it self does not impose this necessity so
absolutely, as does the Bishop of Condom; it says not so positively, as does
the Bishop of Condom, that Infants have not any part in the Redemption of Jesus
Christ, or with Jesus Christ. The Council does not condemn those who say, that
Baptism is not altogether necessary to Salvation; Sess. 7. de Bapt. Can. 5. Si
quis dixerit Baptismum liberum esse, hoc est non necessarium ad salutem,
Anathema sit. Heming in via vitae. Calixt. de Bapt. Co^^. Dieter. de Bapt.
and if it did, that would not infer an absolute necessity. It condemns only
those, who would have Baptism indifferent, or unnecessary, as the Council it
self explains it, which is very much different from this necessity, that the
Bishop of Condom makes so absolute. And it is much to be admired, that he who
is naturally inclined to sweetness, and who seems to remit somewhat upon other
Questions, does on the contrary discover more severity upon this point, which
yet is one of the most favorable.

Further, if he oppose the Lutherans to us, as b^ing of a contrary judgment to
ours in this point, besides that the Bishop of Condom ought not to impute unto
the whole body of the Lutherans, what is constantly rejected by the most
eminent Divines of their Communion, we will allege and produce against him the
Ethiopians and Christians of St. Thomas, which are very ancient Churches, where
at this day they do not baptize their Children upon any account, Males 4^ days,
Females 80 days after.
until whole months after their birth. Not to speak any thing here of the
Testimony of Tertullian, who advised to defer Baptism until years of
discretion; nor of Gregory Nazianzen, of St. Ambrose, of St. Austin, of Paulin
Bishop of Nole, and many others, which were not baptized till far gone in age.

As for Calvin's part, to whom the Bishop of Condom imputes it to have been the
first that denied this absolute necessity, it is very easy to show the Bishop
of Condom, how much he is mistaken in this matter, not only by what we have
just now alleged of those Christian Churches, of Tertullian, and of others who
were named, but also by Hinemar Archbishop of Reims in the Ninth Age, and since
by Catharin, Gerson, Gabriel Biel, Cardinal Cajetan, Tilman de Sigebert,
Cassander, and many others that were Roman Catholics, who have all denied this
necessity before Calvin: For Hin^mar did teach, In Ep. 55. cap. 482. pa. 572.
that the Faith of Fathers, and of Godfathers, might serve for Infants, by the
grace of God, whose Spirit blows where it lists; and all the others have
also expressly declared themselves, for the possibility of the Salvation of
Infants departed without Baptism.

To conclude, the Bishop of Condom does here again recede from his natural
equity, when he says, in terms too severe, Page 73.
That the pretended Reformers are not afraid voluntarily to let their children
dye, like children of infidels, without bearing any badge of Christianity, and
without having received any grace, if their death does precede the day of their
public Assembly.

We are very far from suffering willingly our Children to dye without Baptism:
contrary to what he says, nothing is more against our wills; for though we do
not believe, that Baptism is necessary unto salvation by an absolute necessity,
(such as is that of the Bishop of Condom's) no more than the participating of
the Eucharist, yet we find very great comfort in celebrating the Sacraments,
and suffer not that they be slighted or neglected: We do what we can possible
to supply the want of ordinary Assemblies, by condescending to them who demand
this comfort with greater importunity. But it is also true, that we do not
believe for all that, that the grace and goodness of God is tied unto sensible
things, nor unto the outward Acts; that is to say, to the words that are
pronounced, and unto the exterior action that is done upon us, as it has been
before set forth: and we not only believe that God can, but that he will
supply this defect, by the operation of that Holy Spirit, which blows where
it lists, as Hinemar cites it out of the Gospel.

To conclude, we believe as the Prophets, that God is the Father of our
Children: as the Apostles, that the Children of Believers are holy, as we have
already observed; and that so, to be born and dye in Christianity, is not to
dye in Adam, or out of the Covenant of Jesus Christ.

As for Confirmation, Confirmation.
we do not only not believe it to be altogether necessary, but we cannot
believe it to be a (true) Sacrament instituted by God: and so far are we from
being a-one in this Opinion, as the Bishop of Condom alleges, that we can
make good the quite contrary by the Testimony of Authors, even of his own
Communion: Zaga Zabo. Alvares. Guido Carme. Soto. Armachanus, Gouvea Jarric,
lib. 6. c. 9, and 12.
to wit, the Eastern Churches had not, nor to this day have, for the most part,
any knowledge of Chrisme, or of the Confirmation of the Roman Church: Amongst
the Greeks themselves, who have a kind of Chrisme, it is the Priest, and not
the Bishop, that gives it with Baptism, as making it a part of Baptism; and by
consequence, on the contrary, there is none but the Church of Rome alone, who
have made Confirmation to be a particular Sacrament.

It is true, that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, who had
the gift of miracles, laid their hands, sometimes upon the sick, sometimes upon
the Baptized, and sometimes upon them, whom they sent to preach the Gospel; at
the same time communicating unto them, extraordinary and miraculous graces. But
besides, that there is not, to speak properly, any imposition of hands in the
Confirmation used in the Roman Church, which might ground it upon this practice
of the Apostles, and that the use of Chrisme, that is to say of Oil with Balm,
is a thing unknown in the First Ages, we find not, that either Jesus Christ, or
the Apostles, ever said, Go, lay your hands upon all those that have been
baptized, as they have said in express terms of the Sacraments of Baptism, and
of the Supper, Go and Baptize, etc. and, Do this in remembrance of me. And
the gift of miracles, by the imposition of hands, being ceased so many Ages
past, This is the Opinion of some French Protestants at present: but as to the
perpetual expediency of such imposition of hands, as our English Church uses in
Confirmation, while not made a Sacrament, See the first Reformers, whom the
Reformed French most follow, Calvin on Hebr. 6. And in his Institut. lib. 4. c.
19. Sect. 4, and 13. And Theod. Bez. on Hebr. 6. Diodat. on the same.
it cannot be seen why, nor how, at this time, they should make an institution
of that, which was only an extraordinary practice, and a practice in a word,
which depended upon a gift that is ceased.

The Church of Rome following the natural inclination of men, which carries
them not only unto an imitation, or emulation, but a desire to surpass one
another, has miscarried almost every where in this regard, that of the least
occasions, she has made pretexts to establish Worships or Ceremonies; as if
she had nothing to do, but to frame a Religion of all the usages, or of all
the actions, ordinary or extraordinary, of our Lord, and of his Apostles. Our
Lord being tempted of the Devil, did fast Forty days in the Wilderness, to
convince the World that he was truly God-man: It must be from hence, that the
Church of Rome also, by degrees, is come to make particular Fasts, not only
from time to time, as was practiced at the beginning of Christianity, but even
a Lent entire of Forty days. We find that once or twice, the Apostles healed
the sick, using a kind of anointing, from hence there must be made a Sacrament
of Extreme Unction, of which we shall speak hereafter. And here, because there
are found some examples of an imposition of hands, which wrought miracles, they
have also by degrees, made a grand Establishment of Ceremonies, called
Confirmation; and when once this Establishment was achieved, the Council made
a true Sacrament, and a Law of this Ceremony, charging perpetually Religion,
and men's consciences, with a yoke, that neither we nor our Fathers were able to
bear.

The same is also to be said against the Sacrament of Penance, Penance, and
Sacramental Confession.
and of Sacramental Confession: On the one hand, the Prophets and Apostles
seeing men in Idolatry, in Error, or in Sin, said unto them, Repent ye, or do
penance, for it is the same thing; Amend and be converted unto the Lord, which
is an-ordinary exhortation in the Holy Scripture of the Old, and New Testament:
And on the other, our Lord Jesus Christ sending his Disciples after the
Resurrection, to preach the Gospel, breathing upon them, said, Receive ye the
Holy Ghost: whose sins soever ye remit, Joh. 2^.22.
they are remitted; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained. This
Interpreta^^on is ^tely the opinion Calvin and his followers.
This imports evidently no more, but the Power and Commission, which Jesus
Christ gave them in general, before he left them, to announce pardon of sins
unto those, who believed the Gospel; and on the contrary, to announce the
Judgments of God against those, who rejected their Doctrine. For it
sufficiently appears, that these words of Jesus Christ's, did not exclude the
Apostles inspection into the manners of men, but on the contrary, charged them
with the conduct of the Churches: and it is evident by the occasions on which
our Savior spoke them, and by all other circumstances of time and place, that
on those occasions our Lord had regard principally, unto the preaching of the
Gospel.

In the mean while, behold here the use which the Church of Rome has made of
this Doctrine, or the consequence that she has drawn from it. We do believe,
says the Bishop of Condom, that it has pleased Jesus Christ, that those, who
have submitted themselves unto the authority of the Church by Bapptism, and who
have since violated the Laws of the Gospel, should come to undergo the judgment
of the same Church at the Tribunal of Penance, where she exercises the power
which is given unto her, of remitting or retaining of sins.

We believe that it has pleased Jesus Christ, etc. but upon what ground? Every
one sees what resemblance there is of the repentance whereto the Prophets and
Apostles exhorted the people, and of the power the Apostles had to announce
Remission of sins in preaching the Gospel, unto this Tribunal of Penance,
which is not imploid formally in preaching to the people, or in bringing men to
receive the Doctrine of the Gospel, or to repent, and be converted to God (I
say not formally) but in subjecting every Believer in particular, to go to
declare all his mortal sins by name, one after another, with all their
aggravating circumstances, to crave for them pardon or absolution of the
Priest, and to undergo all those satisfactory pains of Prayers by number, of
Fasts, of Pilgrimages, and the like, of which we have spoken before, and all
this under pain of cursing and eternal damnation against those, who being able
to make this confession, Dall. de Paen. and Satisfact. etc.
shall fail to make it. Our Books are full of very solid reasons, which
plainly prove two things; the one, that this Doctrine, very far from being
grounded upon those words of the Scripture which have been alleged, is
directly contrary to the Word of God, and that it is injurious to his Wisdom,
to his Goodness, and to the merits of the Death which Jesus Christ has
suffered for us; as has been already made appear, upon the matter of
Justification, and of Satisfactions, whereof the penance and confession of the
Church of Rome is only a dependent.

Dall. de Confess. Morin in his Comment. Hist. of Penn. 4.
The other, that this pretended Sacrament of Repentance, of auricular Confession
and Absolution, are things unknown in the First ages of Christianity, as the
Roman Catholic Doctors accord; and besides, very different from the Penance
and Satisfactions spoken of in the Fathers.

It will be needless here to report all the reasons, Beatus Rhenanus upon
Tertullians Book of Repentance.
because they may be seen in the places, where this matter is treated of
expressly: neither will it agree with the design we proposed, to be brief and
attemperate, as much as might be, to the desire, and manner of the Bishop of
Condom. There shall only be here made a short reflection, as well upon the
First Canons of the Council, as upon what the Bishop of Condom has set forth,
whereby it may be easily judged of all the rest.

In the first place, is it not a strange thing, that the Council does oblige
all to believe, as an article of Faith, under pain of Excommunication, and
Damnation, that Confession, Absolution, and Satisfaction, as they speak, are
not only a necessary means of Salvation, or a sign and sacred Ceremony, as the
Bishop of Condom terms it, but a true Sacrament properly so called, as are
Baptism and the Eucharist; though it is plain, that there is nothing properly
here, whereby the blessing of the Word might be joined unto some visible sign,
which serves as matter, according to the Doctrine of St. Austin.

2. Is it not also an odd thing, that the Council does make articles of Faith
of all these distinctions, of Attrition, Contrition, and several others, which
at least ought to be left to the Schools? and that because a certain Father
speaking of Repentance after sin, St. Jerome.
compares it unto a Plank, by which a man saves himself, when the Vessel is
cast away, Sess. 14. de Sacram. Paenit. Can. 2.
the Council applying this comparison unto the Sacrament of Penance, and of
Confession, which nevertheless is quite another thing, as has been showed,
thunders out an Anathema against all such who do not agree, that Penance is
rightly called a second Plank after Shipwreck; as it were, canonising a Figure
of Rhetoric. Perhaps it may be said, that the Council intended only to define
the thing it self: but let them say herein what they will, it does not at all
suit with the simplicity and gravity of the Subject, nor with the honor and
gravity of the Council it self, and it cannot be, but that this easiness in
making articles of Faith of all things, and throwing out Anathema's on all
hands, must create offense in some, and contempt in others.

To conclude, if it be true, as the Council it self has once defined it,
touching all the Sacraments in general, and here in particular touching this of
Penance, that when the Priest has no real intention to absolve the sinner, or
when he does not make use of this Form of Absolution, Ego te absolvo, etc. I
absolve thee, etc, which is the essential and necessary Form of this Sacrament,
in which principally consists all its virtue, according to the same Council, or
where the Priest has not power to absolve, as in cases reserved unto the
Bishop, or unto the Pope himself, in all these cases, Confession is without any
effect, and the sinner without pardon: of what nature then is this Doctrine, or
Religion, which runs all along upon so uncertain principles, which makes the
grace of God, and the salvation of men, to depend still upon the villainy
giddiness, error or want of power of one man?

The Bishop of Condom has almost throughout used an easy expedient to
disentangle himself; for either he says nothing of all these Doctrines of the
Council, or he does not engage himself to prove any thing, of what he himself
speaks to them, if it be not sometimes, when he thinks that the matter is
favorable for him, or that he may enlarge himself without the least danger.

Here he wraps himself up in two opinions, which are little to the purpose,
keeping a profound silence upon all the rest: The First is, that the terms of
the Commission which is given to the Ministers of the Church to remit sins, are
so general, that they cannot without temerity, be restrained unto public sins,
etc. This is a little obscure, the Bishop of Condom seems to intimate that
amongst us, we do believe that the Ministers of the Church cannot give
absolution, but only of public sins, because that amongst us, there is none
but sinners who have committed notorious sins, that make a public
acknowledgment in the presence of the Assembly; unto whom, in this case, the
Ministers announce the pardon of their sins, with the circumstances and
co^tidions, which, according to custom, relate thereto.

But yet for all that, it is not true, that we limit the power of announcing
pardon of sins unto public sins: and because we have no better mean, whether
it be to refute the Doctrines of those of the Roman Church, or to make them in
love with our Doctrine, than to make them rightly understand it, it shall be
explained here in a few words, what is the practice of our Churches, touching
confession, and remission of sins.

There are several occasions, upon which we do confess our sins, whether it be
in public or private, and wherein our Pastors do announce unto us
forgiveness. First, in the public Assemblies, in our entrance upon our
ordinary exercises, we make unto God a general confession of our sins: Every
one makes a particular reflection upon his own sins, and upon them whereunto he
finds himself most subject.

2. In the Sermon, we are again exhorted to confess our sins heartily, to
repent of them, to be a better people, on which condition God pardons us; it is
the main subject, and perpetual conclusion of all our Sermons.

3. In our Houses, in our Closets, we do again more particularly confess our
sins in the presence of God; and both on the one and the other of these
occasions, we believe, that if we are truly penitent, with a true and lively
confidence in the sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, and a steadfast
resolution to live better for the time to come, God vouchsafes us the grace of
pardon, and regeneration.

4. Upon the particular occasions of communion in the Sacraments of Baptism,
and of the Eucharist, in afflictions, and upon the solemn occasions of Fasting,
we do make a more express, and as we may so speak, aggravated confession of our
sins, whether it be in public prayers, or in our own private reflections: and
on these occasions again the Ministers, in the name and in the authority of
Jesus Christ, in the very Quality of Ministers, declare on the one hand, the
Judgments of God upon the impenitent; and on the other, supposing the Faith and
repentance of the Sinners, they announce unto us the remission of our sins.

5. In our sicknesses, and especially in those that are most dangerous, we
likewise more particularly confess our sins, whether it be before our Pastors
and Guides, or before our Friends; making also acknowledgment sometimes more
particularly and freely, of the infirmities and sins whereunto we are most
subject. Our Friends and our Pastors exhort us unto a lively sorrow for our
faults, and unto an entire trust in our Savior; and our Pastors in particular
do exhort and comfort us. If they see us in too great security, or too little
touched with the sense of our sins, they declare unto us the severity of Gods
Judgments against impenitent Sinners: as on the contrary, if they behold in us
true motions of sorrow and repentance, and a lively hope in the death of our
Savior, they assure us, that God will show grace and mercy to us. If we have
any quarrel or animosities, whether it be in sickness or health, they say to
us, as St. James, Confess your faults one to another; for this is the true
meaning of that passage, and not the Sacramental confession, as the sincere
Cardinal Aureolus in Compen. elucid. 5. upon this passage of Saint James. Hu.
Menard in Conc. regular. pa. 564. Cardinal Cajetan in his commentary upon the
Epistle of Saint James.
Doctors of the Roman Church do agree. They exhort us unto reconciliation, and
they in effect reconcile us. They exhort us generally to restore the Goods we
do unjustly retain, and those who are honest and sufficient, do thereupon
really restore them.

6. Even in health it self, we are invited to have recourse to the wholesome
advice and consolations of our Pastors and Guides, and those under their
charge, who are afflicted with any considerable perplexity, whether as to
Faith, or as to any great sins whereunto they find themselves inclined, are
to have recourse unto them, and so really have.

7. To conclude, upon occasion of any public sins (which moved us to enter
upon this subject) when any one has committed any crime, or notorious sin,
whether it be for that he was born, according to us, in a bad Religion, or that
he has been so weak, as to forsake the true Religion, or that he is convinced
to have sinned against the Commandments of the First or second Table, or to
have given scandal to his Neighbor, he is summoned, or he comes first of his
own accord, before the Assembly of Ministers, and Elders, where he makes a
particular confession of his sins; he is then severely censured, according to
the quality of his sin, and at the same time, prayers are made with him, and
for him, to obtain of God forgiveness of his sin. If his sin be great, he is
interdicted the communion of the Holy Sacraments, to humble him: if he has
scandalized the whole Church, he is then enjoined to make a public confession
before the whole congregation, and when all this is done, and that he has
given evidences of his Repentance, the Ministers of the Church announce also
unto him the remission of his sins; but always under the condition of Faith,
Repentance, and a true amendment of life. In this manner is it, that the power,
which Jesus Christ has given unto his Ministers, is exercised amongst us;
which is, what we call the Discipline of our Churches: thus far is it, tht we
extend it in this regard; and not any farther, to set up a Tribunal for our
Guides, wherein they should exercise an absolute dominion over the consciences
of men.

Those who are but the least versed in Ecclesiastical History, may easily see,
if this be not as merely as can be, the ancient usage of the Church, whether
for ordinary Sinners, or public Offenders, except it be, that the corruption
of the times has caused but too great a relaxation of the rigor of this
Discipline; which thing is the cause, that the censures and punishments are
nothing near so grievous, and so long as they were, and as there was a
necessity they should be, at the first establishing of Christianity, for the
better persuading the people of the Holiness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. In
which behalf, the Gentlemen of the Roman Church are so far from having any
thing to reproach us of, that they very well know they have not any resemblance
of this public penance of the Ancients, as has been showed we have; for they
have changed all into this other kind of Penance, or into this private
confession to the Priest, even of sins which are most notorious, and which give
most scandal.

But this private confession, adds the Bishop of Condom, is so necessary a curb
of licentiousness, so fruitful a spring of wise Counsels, so sensible a
consolation of troubled souls, when Absolution is not only declared unto them
in general terms, as the Ministers practice, but that they are effectually
absolved, by the authority of Jesus Christ, after a particular examination, and
with cognizance of the cause, that we cannot believe that our Adversaries can
behold the so great benefits hereof, without regret for the loss of them, and
without some shame of a Reformation, that has taken away a practice so
wholesome and holy. This is the second conceit, in which it was said, that the
Bishop of Condom had wrapped up himself.

In the first place, it was just now showed, that it is not true, that we have
taken away this practice, nor lost the benefits and fruits of the Counsels,
and comforts which may be thence expected; we have taken away the Evil, which
is almost always in the abuse and excess of the best things: wherefore, God be
praised, we have no cause of regret nor shame, in this regard.

If the Priest or the Minister were our absolute Judge, if it were so with him,
that he had truly the right or power to condemn, or to absolve us, it were to
be acknowledged in this case we ought to render him an exact account of all the
circumstances of our lives: but it is God alone, who is the true Judge, who
knows our hearts, and our most secret thoughts, even when we say nothing unto
him of them.

And as to what concerns the benefits and fruits of Confession, which the
Bishop of Condom thought fit only to touch in general terms, as we are
sincere, and as there are but few Doctrines so bad, that have not some good in
them in some regard, we ingenuously acknowledge, that private confession of
sins may sometimes produce some good effects, either to cause restitutions to
be made of what is unjustly detained, or to beget a greater shame in sinners
for their miscarriages and sins: therefore also it has been showed, that we
are very far from condemning or rejecting all sorts of Confessions. We only
say that we cannot sustain, with good conscience, this Tribunal, or rather,
this Yoke, which is imposed upon conscience it self; this Article of Faith, and
this absolute necessity, to tell all a man's sins by particulars, without which
the Roman Church is so bold as to teach, that the Faithful cannot obtain pardon
of their sins, whatever bitter sorrow they feel for them, and whatever firm
belief they have in the death of our Savior: for even this also the Council of
Trent teaches. Sess. 14 de Sacram Paeni^. cap. 6. can. 4.


In sum, in exchange of what benefits may accrue by the Sacramental
Confession of the Roman Church, we call to witness the sincere persons of her
communion, if it be not true, that this Confession is also the original of
infinite Evils. If any shall not be pleased to agree hereunto, we have the
experience of all times on this matter, and the testimony of their Cassand.
Art. 11. of his Consult. Beatus Rhen. in his Preface upon Tertullian's Book of
Repentance.
own Authors, some of whom do openly enough acknowledge, that things are come
to that pass, that auricular Confession, such as is practiced in the Church of
Rame, cannot any longer be of any good use.

In plain truth, instead of being only a curb unto licentiousness, men
accustom themselves to sin, upon the confidence they have, that their sins
shall be blotted out by this ordinary and easy way of Confession, or by some
corporal or pecuniary pennances imposed upon them. Therefore also it has often
been observed in our Churches, that the least regular persons are most subject
to forsake our Communion, because that whilst they continue in their sin
amongst us, they find nothing that may assure them of the pardon and
absolution, which they hope for of a Confessor. And if it be true, that the
Confessors, or Directors of conscience, as they are termed, often give wise
counsels, it is but too true also, that the Counselors themselves very often
take occasion thereby to corrupt themselves, or to insinuate themselves in all
public affairs of State, or in the particular affairs of private Families: and
History is but too full of the Evils, which have happened unto the public, and
to particular persons. The very consolation also which they give Sinners in
pronouncing their absolution, does turn into security; and to conclude, as has
already been openly declared upon another subject, it cannot be made appear
that they, who live in the practice of auricular Confession, are better people,
than those who confess themselves chiefly unto God.

The Council here joines Extreme Unction unto Repentance. Extreme Unction.


There is this difference betwixt the precedent Article, and this, that this
latter is nothing near of so great consequence. This is nothing in a manner,
but an useless ceremony, and an evil custom, whereof the error may be
tolerable in it self, if it were not of dangerous influence in introducing into
Religion lesser matters, which might by little and little turn away the soul
and heart from solid piety. We might upon better grounds, call this ceremony a
Sacrament, than Penance, Marriage, or Orders, which follow this, because at
least, the Oil may there hold the place of a visible Sign, as the Council, and
the Bishop of Condom, do not fail to give to understand.

But, after all, this pretended Sacrament has this common with penance and
the others, which we admit not as Sacraments, that the Institution made by the
Church of Rome herein, is only founded upon some custom practiced on
particular occasions, which are now ceased.

St. James speaking of the virtue of Prayer, says (and that only once) in
concluding his Epistle, Is any sick amongst you? let him call for the Elders of
the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with Oil in the name of
the Lord: And the Prayer of Faith shall save the Sick, and the Lord shall raise
him up; and if he has committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. The Roman
Catechism cannot deny, but that these words have allusion unto what was said
before of the Apostles, who being departed from our Savior, preached that men
should repent, S. Mark cap. 6.12, 13.
that they cast out many Devils, and anointing with Oil many that were sick,
healed them, because indeed the Apostles and their Disciples, who had the gift
of Miracles, did then heal many, either by anointing them, or only by laying
their hands upon them; which caused also, that one of the greatest men of the
Church of Rome, speaking more fully than the Catechism, does openly
acknowledge, that these words of St. James, are to be understood of an
anointing, exercised by the Disciples of Jesus Christ upon the Sick, Cardinal
Cajetan upon S. Jam. 5.
such as is related in the Gospel, and not of the Extreme Unction, which is
practiced in the Roman Church; In the mean time, this is all the Foundation, or
all the pretext which the Council, and the Bishop of Condom have, for the
instituting of such a Sacrament.

What is worst of all is, that the Church of Rome does not do the thing it
self, according to the words, and the intention of St. James. St. James
testifies, that it was to heal the Sick; and, which is very remarkable, the
other words of the Evangelist, unto which these of St. James allude (as the
Roman Catechism does agree) speak only indeed of healing the Sick; unto which
it is true that St. James adds, that if the Sick has committed sins, they
shall be forgiven him, which is principally to be understood of those sins,
that may have drawn the chastisement of sickness upon the sick person. The
Roman Church does on the contrary, make Extreme Unction to be a Sacrament of
Remission of sins, as Baptism; and regards little or nothing the health of the
body, acknowledging that it has not now the miraculous gift of healing the
sick. Therefore also it is, that, whereas St. James speaks of the sick in
general, in what estate soever they be, the Church of Rome does for the most
part understand, that they must be at the extremity, before this Unction be
carried unto them; and she never gives it unto little children. This is as much
as to say, that in all things, even of the least moment, she must invent or add
something of her own, if it were but only to show her authority.

The Bishop of Condom speaks only one word here of Marriage, and he says
nothing but what we would very easily consent unto. We acknowledge, as he does,
that Marriage is one of the most sacred Bands of civil Society: but we do not
agree with the Church of Rome, that Marriage is a true Sacrament, nor that it
should not be permitted unto them that are in Orders, as they speak, to marry;
as if there ought to be a kind of incompatibility betwixt two diverse Sacraments
of the Gospel: neither, Lastly, do we agree unto many other maxim of the
Church of Rome, touching Marriage, whereof we do not find any track in
Scripture, nor in the practice of the ancient Church. But seeing the Bishop of
Condom enters not upon these Questions, we will forbear speaking of them here.

We will only observe, that the Council could not better set forth the
reasons, that it had to make so many Decrees, and so many Canons touching
Marriage, which is nevertheless naturally a civil contract, than by the first
and the last of these same Canons, which comprehend all the rest. The first
does pronounce Anathema against all those, who do not believe that Marriage is
a true Sacrament; and the last, against all those, who will not believe that
all causes concerning Marriage, do belong to the Church: that is to say, that
these two Canons were made the one for the other. Every one at the first sight
may see, the great consequences of this Doctrine, and the great advantages
which do arise unto the Court of Rome, whether it be for the authority in
examination of Matrimonial causes, or for the income of Dispensations. It was
necessary that the Church of Rome might take cognizance of causes Matrimonial,
for the great advantages which accrue unto her thereby: and to bring it to
pass, that she might have cognizance of them, it was necessary to make Marriage
a Sacrament; as also she would have had cognizance of all other civil affairs,
under pretext of the Oath which was inserted in contracts, if the just
jealousy of the Parliaments of our Kings, had not set some bounds to the
enterprises of the Court of Rome.

As for Order or Orders, (for the Council sets down Seven under this name, to
wit, the Priest, the Deacon, Order.
the Subdeacon, the Acolyte, the Exorcist, the Reader, and the Porter,) The
Bishop of Condom speaks only a word of Order in general, as he has done of
Marriage, to put it into the number of Sacraments. It is true, as he says,
that we hold the ministry of the Word of God for a sacred thing, taking the
term in a general sense. We practice the ceremony of Imposition of Hands, as it
was practiced in the Apostles time; but we cannot agree, that Order or Orders
are a true Sacrament, as Baptism, and the Eucharist: as well for that in
Orders, there is no Element, or Visible sign, no more than in Marriage, and in
confession; as also because it is in truth the nature of the Sacraments of the
Gospel, that the Sacraments ought to be common to all the Church, and Orders
are not.

It is in this point also the interest of Rome, that made Orders a true
Sacrament; to the end she might withdraw all the great Body of the Roman
Clergy, from the Jurisdiction of the civil Magistrate, and thereby make unto
her self proper subjects of other Princes people, in the midst of their States
and Kingdoms, as a particular Kingdom, or Hierarchy apart, not only distinct
from the Temporal Monarchy, but superior, and overruling Kings themselves.

Many things might be said upon this Article, to show principally, that the
Priesthood and the sacrificing of the Roman Church, is an invention purely
humane; and that it has no example, nor any foundation in the Gospel: for
there can be no true Priesthood, where there is not a true Sacrifice; and in
the following Discourse it shall be made appear, that there is none such in the
Mass. But in this place we will be content to follow the Bishop of Condom, who
had no mind to engage in all these Questions; whether it be that he deserts
them tacitly by his silence, or that he thought them to be fitter for the
Schools, than for public edification; or Lastly, that he hastened to pass unto
the matter of the Eucharist, where he believed he might enlarge himself with
less disadvantage.

THE FIFTH PART.
We are, says he, now at last, X. The Doctrine of the Church of Rome touching
the Real presence of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, and
the manner how she understands these words, This is my Body.
arrived at the Question of the Eucharist, etc. as if one should say, after a
great deal of bad way, now we are gotten a little more at large.

On the whole, there is this difference betwixt all these Questions of the
worshipping of Saints, of Images and Relics, of Satisfactions, of Purgatory,
of Indulgences, of the number and efficacy of the Sacraments, whereof we have
hitherto treated, and this of the Eucharist, whereon at present we enter, that
in all the others, there is not to be found any Footstep of the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome in all the Scripture of the Old and New Testament, nor in the
very First ages of Christianity; whereas upon the question of the Eucharist,
the Roman Church pretends, that she has the Scripture it self on her side.
Therefore also it is, that whereas the Bishop of Condom did but lightly pass
over all the rest, here, says he, it will be necessary more amply to explain
our Doctrine.

And here, the better to accommodate our selves to the Bishop of Condom's
method, as we have done upon the other articles, we will distinctly examine all
the several Heads, of which he makes so many Sections. 1. The Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, touching the Real Presence of the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ in the Sacrament, and how she understands these words, THIS IS MY BODY.
2. How she un^erstands these other words, DO THIS IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME. 3. The
Exposition which she makes of our belief, as to the reality. 4.
Transubstantiation, and Adoration, and in what sense the Eucharist is a sign.
5. The sacrifice of the Mass. 6. What the Apostle teaches in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, when he says, That Jesus Christ offered himself once. 7. The
reflection which the Bishop of Condom makes upon this Doctrine. 8. and Lastly,
The point of Communion under both kinds, which the Bishop of Condom does only
consider as a sequel or consequent of all the rest. We will touch each of these
Heads, with as much brevity as shall be possible.

The Bishop of Condom begins with this proposition, that the Real Presence is
firmly established by these words of the institution of the Eucharist, THIS IS
MY BODY. The reason, which he gives thereof, is, because the Church of Rome
does understand them according to the letter: and here it is that he says,
what has been alleged elsewhere upon another subject, that you must no more
ask them, wherefore they apply themselves to the literal sense, than of a
Traveller, why he follows the High way.

Let any one judge of the sequel, by the beginning. The Question betwixt us is,
Whether the Bread and the Wine in the Sacrament, are truly and really the Body
and Blood of Jesus Christ; or whether they are so only in the mystery: That is
to say, whether the words of the institution, This is my Body, ought to be
understood literally, or figuratively; whether they truly signify a real
presence, as they speak, or a presence mystical, and of virtue, for it is all
one and the same thing. The Bishop of Condom says, without any other pretext,
that the belief of the real presence, is firmly established upon these words,
because the Church of Rome does understand them according to the letter; that
is, it is so, because I understand it so; that is to say, that he decides the
question, by the thing it self, which is in question; or that he does give us
his sense, and his will for a reason. To have the liberty to speak as the
Bishop of Condom does, we must lay it as a principle, that there is nothing in
the Scripture that one should not, or at least, that may not be taken
literally. Then might she take literally, what our Savior says elsewhere,
John 6.35. and 19.5.
that he is the bread of Heaven; or that he is a vine, and his Disciples are
the branches, and that none should be allowed to inquire how it might be.

The Bishop of Condom judging truly enough, that this was not a proposition
maintainable, enters upon two other conceits more reasonable; On the one side,
he ingageth us to prove, that the words of institution of the Eucharist, ought
to be taken in a Figurative sense: On the other, he engages to prove himself,
Pa. 80
that they ought to be taken according to the letter. It is their part, says
he, who have recourse to Figurative senses, to give a reason of what they do.

We will therefore here set down some of the reasons, which we have for the
Figurative sense, seeing that the Bishop of Condom does require it of us; and
afterward we will examine those, which the Bishop of Condom does allege for
the proper and literal sense.

In the First place, whenever any great of a Mystery, and of a Sacrament,
(...) and the common use, to take the ^^pressions, and the things themselves,
mystically and figuratively. The very word it self Mystery, does lead us
thereto, otherwise it were no more a Mystery. Let any examine generally all the
Sacraments, as well of the Old as the New Testament, not one excepted, no not
the very ceremonies of the Roman Church it self, where there is any visible
sign, as the Passover, and Circumcision under the Law, Baptism under the
Gospel, that which the Church of Rome does call Confirmation, and Extreme
Unction, through all will be found things, and words, which must be understood
in a mystical and a Figurative sense.

But if it be demanded more particularly, wherefore the Bread and the Wine are
said to be the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, St. Austin, and Theodoret, Aug.
Epist. 23. ad Bonif.
answer for us. The First says, that it is because of the relation which the
Sacraments have to the things whereof they are Sacraments: and the latter, to
keep us from resting in the nature of the things that are seen, Theodoret.
Dial. 1.
and that as Jesus Christ said, that he was bread, and a stock or vine, so be
honors the Symbols of bread and wine, with the name of his Body, and of his
Blood. The force of these Testimonies is not here urged, as to the maine
Question; they are only alleged to give a reason of the use, wherefore it is,
that the sign does bear the name of the thing signified, by a kind of mystical
and Figurative way of speaking, to elevate our spirits and our hearts, above
the Visible signs.

2. We know in general, that all the Scripture of the Old and New Testament, is
full of these sorts of Figurative expressions: whether it was the Style of the
Eastern Nations in those times, as indeed it was; or that God judged this Style
the fittest to exercise our Faith. We see, that the First preaching of Jesus
Christ is nothing else, but a continued succession of Figures: John 6.35. Joh.
15.3.
every one knows those just now mentioned, I am the bread which came down from
Heaven. I am the vine. The rock was Christ. 1 Cor. 10.4. Mat. 5.29. De Doctrine.
Christ. lib. 3. cap. 6.
If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and an infinite number of others. Now
if it be demanded of us, how we can distinguish betwixt Figurative expressions,
and those which are proper and literal, St. Austin here again answers for us,
that what seems to offend good manners, or the truth of Faith, ought to be
taken in a Figurative sense; and yet more expressly, that this, which Jesus
Christ says, that we must eat his body, and drink his blood, appearing a
wicked thing, is therefore a Figure. We press not still this passage as to the
main Question, we only allege it, to make the reason, which we have for the
Figurative sense, better apprehended.

3. Finally, what can there be more natural, and more reasonable, than to
understand the Scripture by the Scripture it self, the obscure places by them
which are more plain, those which have a double meaning, by them which have but
a single? The Author of the Book, entitled, Lawful Prejudices, lays down
this Maxim for the understanding of Books, that when there is any passage,
which may admit of a double sense, that must be taken, which agrees best with
the whole, and which is the most reasonable. There is but one passage only in
the Scripture, which seems to favor the literal sense, that the Church of Rome
gives to these words, This is my Body; to wit, that which we now spoke of, If
you eat not the flesh, and drink the blood of the Son of man, you have no life
in you; and this very expression St. Austin notes, ought to be understood
Figuratively: whereas there are a great number of others, which say, that Jesus
Christ is no more with us, but by the operation of the Holy Spirit. The poor
you shall have always with you, Mat. 26.11.
but me ye shall not have always. And, if I depart, I will send the Comforter
unto you; and so many more, Joh. 16.
that make us daily say in the Creed, he ascended into Heaven, and from thence
he shall come, etc. the very words of the Eucharist require, that we do this in
remembrance of him, and to show forth his Death till he come. To be in Heaven
corporally, and upon Earth by representation, are not two senses repugnant: but
not to be any more with us, or to be corporally in Heaven, and yet to be every
day upon Earth, in men's hands in his proper Body, are two terms contradictory
and incompatible. It is therefore natural to take these words, This is my body,
in a mystical and Figurative sense, which alone does perfectly agree with all
the other passages of the Scripture.

It is well known, that the Church of Rome does suppose, that there be two
diverse ways, according unto which she pretends, that the Body of Jesus Christ
may be present in Heaven and upon Earth; the one with his dimensions, and his
exterior qualities, such as he was seen upon Earth; and it is after this
manner that she will have it to be said, that Jesus Christ is no more with us,
or that he is only in Heaven: the other without his dimensions, and exterior
qualities, as she pretends that he is under the covert of Bread and Wine. But
this is to answer here punctually the thing in question. We formally deny this
second manner of being bodily in a place; and it is not contested, but that
nature, the senses, and reason, far from teaching any such thing, cry loudly
against it. It would therefore highly concern the Church of Rome upon the whole
case, to establish this second manner of being in a place by some passage, the
sense whereof were not at all in question; and till that is done, it may be
truly said, that the figurative sense of these words, This is my Body, is the
true and genuine sense, the first, and the only that presents it self unto the
mind.

We might here add many other reasons, as to the main, to make appear, that the
Doctrine of the real presence, is not only above reason, as the Mysteries of
the Trinity, and Incarnation, but directly against reason, and which in fine,
destroys the testimony of the senses; which nevertheless is it, that our Lord
made use of, John 20.27. Theodoret Dial. 2.
to prove unto Th^mas the truth of his presence, as the Church also has since
done, to prove, that the Body of Jesus Christ was a true Humane body, against
the Eutychians: but this would be to proceed too far in the question. What has
been here said, which is only taken from the nature of Sacraments, and the
style of the Scripture, may suffice to show the Bishop of Condom, that it is
not without reason, that we do understand these words, This is my Body, in a
mystical and figurative sense; let us now see what he will produce on his part,
for the proper and literal sense.

His discourse does reduce it self unto two propositions: the first is, That it
is the intention of Jesus Christ, that we should effectively eat his flesh; and
the other, that there is no natural relation betwixt bread, and the body of
Jesus Christ; and that our Savior having only said these words, This is my
Body, without explaining them, as he did ordinarily other figurative
expressions, the law of discourse, as the Bishop of Condom speaks, does not
permit that they should be taken otherwise, than in a proper and literal sense.

As to the first, touching our Saviors intention, it is a good principle,
provided it be well established, for Jesus Christ can do what he will, and what
he wills, is done as he wills; and the Bishop of Condom has no need to enlarge
upon the power of God, as he does in what follows; nor to seek for reasons, why
Jesus Christ would not give us his flesh in its very Form, but under the covert
of Bread, that so we might not conceive an horror at the eating it. These are
the common places of the first inventors of this Opinion, and of all those who
have followed them, and yet nevertheless, all this has nothing of solidity:
because on the one hand, we concern not our selves to examine, whether God is
able to do the thing, but whether this thing is possible in it self, or if it
does not imply a contradiction: and on the other, if it be matter of horror to
eat true humane flesh, the covert may diminish this horror, but it cannot
quite take it away, especially if a man were certainly persuaded, that he did
truly eat humane flesh, and besides that, such flesh, for the which he should
have a tender veneration.

But to conclude, how is it that the Bishop of Condom proves, that this is the
intention of Jesus Christ, that we should effectively eat his flesh? As the
Jews did eat the victims which were offered for them, Page 81, 82, 83, etc.
so, says he, Jesus Christ our true sacrifice, would that we should
effectively eat his flesh, etc. The Jews were forbidden to eat the sacrifice
offered for sins, to show them, that the true expiation was not made under the
Law; and for the same reason they were forbidden to eat blood, because the
blood was given for the atonement of souls: but by a contrary reason, Jesus
Christ wills that we should eat his flesh, to show, that the remission of sins
is accomplished in the New Testament, and that we should drink his blood,
because it is poured out for our sins.

Thus it is, that instead of giving us reasons, the Bishop of Condom gives us
only comparisons, relations, agreeances: as if it were not a known rule, that
comparisons and examples may serve well to illustrate things already proved,
but can never prove the things which are in question. It is true, that the
sacrifices of the old Law, were the figure of the sacrifice, which our Lord
Jesus Christ offered upon the Cross: that is to say, that as they offered up
sacrifices, which were types of Jesus Christ our true sacrifice, to appease the
wrath of God, Jesus Christ offered up himself to reconcile us unto his Father.
This is the true accomplishment of the figures of the Law, and the principal
and true relation, which there is betwixt the sacrifices of the Old and New
Testaments: therefore also it is, that our Savior giving up the Ghost, said
these last and great words, Joh. 19.30.
It is finished. The Apostle St. Paul, which makes a parallel between the
sacrifices of the Law, and of Jesus Christ, insists only on this point; that
under the Law, the sacrifices were to be reiterated every day, whereas Jesus
Christ offered himself only once, and we see not, that the Holy Scriptures
pursue any farther mystery in it. To press further these sorts of relations and
differences, to make new doctrines, and to bring all that is said of the
sacrifices of the Old Testament, to be said or denied, of the sacrifice of the
New, this would be to make Articles of Faith, and Worships, upon consequences
wherein humane reason would have too much share.

But nevertheless if they will have it so, that our Lord Jesus Christ intended,
there should be a relation betwixt all the circumstances of the sacrifices of
the Old Testament, and the Eucharist, which is the representation of the
sacrifice, that he himself offered upon the Cross, we are so far from thinking,
that all the relations and all the differences, which are to be found betwixt
the one and the other, should be understood according to the letter that we
know, the intention of the Gospel is opposed to the letter of the Law of Moses;
that whereas the Jews under the Law, did servilely and carnally ty themselves,
to outward and material actions, it concerns Christians under the Gospel, to
take all spiritually, and lift up their souls and hearts unto Heaven; Jo. 6.63
The flesh profits nothing, it is the spirit that quickneth.

The Jews laid their hands upon the heads of their sacrifices, and did eat of
them, to signify the union which they had with them. This is true, we lay hold
on Jesus Christ by Faith, we eat him by Faith, according to the speech of St.
Austin, Believe, and thou have eaten. The Jews did not eat the sin-offering,
nor did they ever eat of the blood; we eat the mystical body of our sacrifice,
and we drink his mystical blood: and as the expiation of our sins is actually
made by his death upon the Cross, so our Savior sets before our eyes the
sacred Symbols of his dead body, as seals of his grace, and of the remission of
our sins.

See here how we might enlarge for our edification, the relations and
differences, which we may find in this case, betwixt the Old and New Testament;
betwixt the sacrifices of the Law, and the divine sacrifice of our Lord Jesus
Christ. These considerations are right, pious, and conform to the spirit of the
Gospel: but as to the main, that which is called a Doctrine and a Worship, and
an Article of Faith, as is the eating of the proper flesh and blood of Jesus
Christ, should not be founded upon relations and agreeances, but upon a clear
and positive revelation.

Page 84.
But this eating, says the Bishop of Condom here, ought to be as real, as the
expiation of sins is actual and effective, under the new Covenant.

In the first place, it must be observed here, that the Bishop of Condom does
perpetually mistake himself upon the term of Real, in the question of the
Eucharist: he always supposes, that real and corporal, are but one and the
same thing, and that a thing is not real, if it be not corporal. The eating or
partaking of the body of Jesus Christ, is very real according to us, and as
real and effective, as the expiation of our sins: but it does not follow for
all that, that there is a necessity that this participation be corporal, that
is to say, that we must receive the proper flesh, and the proper blood of Jesus
Christ, with the mouth of the body; according as in Baptism we do agree, both
the Gentlemen of the Roman Church and we, that we do partake of, or that we are
truly and really united unto Jesus Christ, and unto his sacrifice, and yet for
all that, this union is not corporal.

In fine, there is a kind of incompatibility, or of contradiction, in the
Bishop of Condom's arguing. He would have it, that as the Jews did effectively
eat of the sacrifice offered for their sins, we also should effectively eat the
body of Jesus Christ our sacrifice; and he does not consider, that as the
sacrifices which the Jews did eat were dead, so it would be necessary that the
body of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, were in a state of death, that it might
be eaten as a sacrifice: whereas the Church of Rome teaches, that he is there
in a state of life, that is to say, living, and not dead.

As to what is the Bishop of Condom's other proposition, that there is no
relation betwixt the bread and the body of Jesus Christ, is it not openly to
gainsay, what has been already alleged out of St. Austin, and Theodoret? that
the Sacraments do not take the name of the things whereof they are Sacraments,
but because of the relation which there is betwixt the Sacraments, and the
things themselves: that without this relation, they could not be Sacraments;
that it is formally because of this relation, that the bread and the wine are
called the body and the blood of Jesus Christ (for these are St. Austin's own
words) and that to conclude, Epist. 23 ad Bonif.
As Jesus Christ had said, that he was bread, and a vine, he said afterward,
that the bread was his body, and the wine his blood, giving, as it were,
reciprocally, the names of the one, unto the other, Dial. 1.
as Theodoret speaks.

In sum, our Savior seeing his Disciples bent upon the things of this life,
taking an occasion by the miracle of the Loaves, did himself strongly establish
the resemblance which there is betwixt him and bread, saying, that he is the
bread which came down from Heaven, John 6.41.51, 55.
that this bread is his flesh, that his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is
drink indeed, showing plainly, that as the bread does nourish our bodies, Jo.
6.68
so his flesh, and his blood, is the life and nourishment of our souls. This
word seemed hard to many who forsook him, but the Apostles understood very well
from that time, the relation or similitude, which made Jesus Christ say he was
bread, and that his flesh was this bread: unto whom shall we go, Lib. 1. de
Offic. Eccl. cap. 18. Com. en Marc. 14
says St. Peter, thou have the words of eternal life. St. Isidore, Bid, and
many others, very far from saying, that there is no relation betwixt the
Sacraments, and the body and blood of Jesus Christ, as does the Bishop of
Condom, say on the contrary, that the bread is called his body, because bread
nourishes and fortifieth the body; and that the wine is called his blood,
because wine breeds blood in our flesh, and rejoices the heart. There is
another resemblance also well known, which the Fathers have explained, not
only betwixt the bread and wine, and the flesh and blood of Jesus Christ,
Theoph. Antioc. 1 Comment. in 4 Evan. pa. 359. St. Cyprian Ep. 63.
but betwixt the Sacraments, and that other mystical body of Jesus Christ,
whereof he himself is head, to wit, the Church: that as the bread is made of
many grains, and the wine of many clusters of grapes, so the mystical body of
Christ is composed of many Believers, which are his living members. So that we
may plainly see, so far is it from there being no relation betwixt bread, and
the body of Jesus Christ, as the Bishop of Condom supposes, that we find on
the contrary the two relations, which he calls natural relation; and relation
of institution, and of which he demands but one, or the other, that the sign
may take the name of the thing, and that it might be proper to bring down the
Idea into the mind: to wit, a relation of the natural virtue of bread, unto
that of the body of Jesus Christ, the body of Jesus Christ being the
nourishment of our souls, as bread is the nourishment of our bodies; and the
relation which Jesus Christ had established before in the minds of his
Apostles, Jo. 6.52
by the use which he had made of this likeness, having accustomed them unto
this manner of speaking, even before the institution of the Sacraments, and
confirming or establishing anew this relation, by the very words of the
institution it self.

But there is here yet something else to be understood: The Bishop of Condom
does curteil, if I may so say, the words of institution, or rather the sense;
and secretly makes a kind of Sophisme in dividing the words, and examining them
in a sense separate the one from another, instead of taking them altogether.
Here it concerned not to enquire the relation there is, betwixt bread and the
body of Jesus Christ barely; this relation consists, as it was said, in that
the one does nourish our bodies, and the other does nourish our souls. The
likeness betwixt the bread broken, and the body broken, should have been
searched into: for Jesus Christ gives us not his body properly, but in this
regard; and Jesus Christ says not only, this is my body, he says in the same
breath, my body which is broken for you. And suppose that these first words had
not clearly enough intimated the relation, which there is betwixt the bread and
the body of Jesus Christ, these others which our Savior adds, are as a second
touch of a pencil, or a new color, which heighthens the draught, and better
expresses the resemblance betwixt the Image, and the Divine Original: that is
to say, that as the bread is broken in pieces to serve us for nourishment, and
as the wine is poured out to serve us for drink, so the body of Jesus Christ
was broken, and his blood was shed upon the Cross, to be the spiritual
nourishment of our souls.

Here we must observe the perpetual error, or the continual source of the
error of the Roman Church upon this point. The Roman Church makes the
Essential, the Principal, the force, and virtue of the institution of the
Sacrament, to consist in these first words, This is my body, which are the
only ones she is wont to call Sacramental. It is by virtue of these words
alone, that the consecration is made; one would think, that the others signify
nothing, or that they be nothing in comparison of the former, whereas if we
rightly take the thing, according to the end, which it is plain, our Lord
proposed to himself in this Institution, these first words are only the
introduction, the vehicle, or the foundation of all that follows; as in
arguing, the first propositions are only a leading unto the conclusion, and
are far less considerable than the conclusion it self. The true essence, the
force and virtue of the Sacrament, is without doubt in the sense of these other
terms, 1 Cor. 11. Luk 22.19.
which is broken for you; do this, and do it in remembrance of me; and to show
forth my death until I come, which is the sense in which St. Paul explicates
these latter words of our Saviors: for Jesus Christ gives his body, 1 Co^ 11.
only as it was broken for us; and his blood as poured out for our sins. This
is properly the Mystery of our salvation, the expiation of our sins, the
accomplishment of the Law. These are the words properly, which make the true
likeness betwixt the Eucharist, and the sacrifice of the Cross; betwixt the
Sacrament, and the thing signified by the Sacrament. We ought to take them
altogether, to form a true Idea of this Mystery; and it may be truly said, that
it is only for not taking them altogether, that the Church of Rome is fallen
into all these errors which make us separate from her. If instead of insisting
so much, as she does upon these first words, this is my body, she had weighed a
little more the following words, which is broken for you, she would doubtless
have acknowledged, that Jesus Christ having not yet suffered death when he
spoke them, and nevertheless giving his body as broken, and in a state of
death, his intention could not be, that his proper body was really in the
Sacrament; and less yet that it was there in a state of life, such as the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome does suppose it: If instead of insisting so much
as she does upon the first words, she had also weighed a little more those
other, do this in remembrance of me, she would have also understood thereby,
that the sense of these words imports, that Jesus Christ kept aloof from, and
did not at all put himself in the place of the bread: and to conclude, if she
had a little better weighed these last words, drink ye all of this, instead of
insisting only upon the former, she had never proceeded so far, as to take
away the cup in the Sacrament.

But to return to the point on which we are here principally concerned: what
has been now said, does not only show, the relation there is betwixt the
bread and the body of Jesus Christ, but does wholly overthrow the consequence
of the Bishop of Condom's Argument; to wit, that Jesus Christ did not on this
say any thing to explain himself, as he was careful to do in the other
figures, or in other parables. For in the first place, we know, that Jesus
Christ did not explain generally all the Figures he used; whether it were, that
he would leave some exercise for our Faith and meditation, or that he thought
them sufficiently intelligible of themselves, as we do pretend that this very
passage is.

2. If this Figure had not been so plainly intelligible of it self, it has
been already showed, that Jesus Christ had prepared the Apostles to understand
it; having told them, that these sorts of expressions were to be understood
spiritually. And to conclude, John 6 63.
how can it be said, that Jesus Christ said nothing to explain himself? If our
Lord had said no more but these words, this is my body, as the Bishop of Condom
only frames his Argument upon these words, it might seem somewhat less
strange, that they should dare to speak thus to us; but Jesus Christ said all
in the same breath, this is my body which was broken for you, do this in
remembrance of me: 1 Cor. 11.24. Mat. 26.29.
This is the New Testament in my blood which is shed for many. I will not any
more drink of this fruit of the vine, etc. And the Apostle St. Paul, who very
well understood the words of our Lord, does add, 1 Cor. 11.26.
that as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords
death till he come. What greater explication, or rather, what greater clearness
can be desired in a Mystery, to give to understand, that Jesus Christ leaving
his Apostles, and speaking to them, as it were, his last Farewell, left them
this Sacrament, as an earnest, a memorial, and a seal of the death which he
suffered for them and for us?

XI. The explication of those words, Do this in remembrance of me.
The Bishop of Condom passing over the first words of the Institution, This is
my body, to those which immediately follow, Do this in remembrance of me, is
no longer the Traveller that those follows the great High way; I mean, words,
he no longer understands the words of our Lord, according to the letter. The
literal and natural sense of these last words altogether, Do this in
remembrance of me, is this; that we should do what Jesus Christ ordained, to
put us in remembrance of him: for it is Jesus Christ that says in remembrance
of me. But the Bishop of Condom somewhat detorts this sense, and would have it,
that the intention of our Lord, should be only to oblige us to remember his
death; under pretense that the Apostle concludes with these words, that we show
forth the death of our Lord. It is not difficult to comprehend, what this the
Bishop of Condom's little detortion tends to, namely, that if this be the sense
of those words, Do this in remembrance of me, we ought to call to remembrance
the very person of Jesus Christ. This sense leads us naturally to believe, that
the divine person that we ought to call to remembrance, is not really present:
For, according to the manner of usual conceiving and speaking amongst men, to
call to remembrance, is properly of persons absent: Otherwise, supposing the
real presence of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, as the Church of Rome
supposes, the sense and the Idea which these words carry, Do this in
remembrance of me, is this, Eat my proper body, to call your selves to
remembrance of me in my presence, or as if I were present; which makes but an
odd and inconsistent sense. In the mean time, neither the nature of the thing,
that is to say, Jesus Christ, who was now about to leave the Apostles, nor his
expressions at all suffer us to doubt, but that he requires precisely these two
things, to wit, to call our selves to remembrance of him, by an act of love and
acknowledgment, and that we meditate also on his death, as an effect of his
love, and the price of our Redemption.

The Bishop of Condom, very far from acknowledging, that to call to
remembrance, as our Lord requires, supposes his absence, turns the thing to the
clear contrary, so as to infer, that this very remembrance should be grounded
upon the real presence. To this purpose, he here brings in again the comparison
of the sacrifices. As, says he, the Jews in eating the Peace Offerings, did
call to remembrance that they were offered for them, so in eating the flesh of
Jesus Christ our sacrifice, we ought to call to remembrance that he dyed for
us: and from thence he passes unto a kind of Rhetorical rapture upon the
tender remembrance, which the Tombs of the Fathers excite in the childrens
hearts.

First, as to what concerns the comparison, we have already said that it is not
a proof, and that upon the whole case, the relation there is of the Law to the
Gospel, is no reason that we should take all according to the letter in the
Gospel, as we do for the most part matters in the Law: that on the contrary it
is sufficient, that our spiritual eating of the body of Jesus Christ, answers
unto the Oral eating of the sacrifices, which were the Figure of his sacrifice.

But there is yet more in it: the Bishop of Condom only speaks of
Peace Offerings, and remembers not himself of what he himself had said of the
sacrifice offered for sins, which is the true Figure of the sacrifice of Jesus
Christ upon the Cross. May not his argument be returned back against himself,
that as the Jews did not eat of this expiatory sacrifice, and yet for all that
failed not to remember, that it was offered for their sins, in like manner it
is not necessary that we should eat the proper flesh of Jesus Christ our
sacrifice, to put us in remembrance of his death. We have this advantage of the
Jews, that they ate nothing instead of this sacrifice, whereas we eat the holy
Symbols, which livelily represent unto us the body and blood of Jesus Christ;
his body broken for us, and his blood poured out for the expiation of our sins.

Further, what are our manners, and our education, that to put us in a tender
remembrance of the death of our Lord Jesus Christ, we must needs eat his proper
flesh with our bodily mouth? Or rather, if it be true that the remembrance,
which is the thing in question, be nothing else but an apprehension excited by
the objects which affect the sense, has the manner, in which it is believed
they eat this flesh in the Church of Rome, any thing which does more affect the
senses, than ours? seeing, that we eat it, both one and the other, under the
same kinds or forms of bread and wine.

We will not here enquire, whether it excite a real tenderness, to conceive
that we effectively eat the flesh, which we love and adore; or if on the
contrary it be not by degrees, that the Church of Rome it self, is become
accustomed unto this conceit, which of it self does stir up contrary
affections.

It will be only needful to compare the manner, how they administer the
Sacraments in the Church of Rome, with that wherein they administer them in our
Churches, to judge which of the two is most capable to entertain a true
remembrance of the death of Jesus Christ. The Church of Rome believes, she
holds the proper flesh of Jesus Christ under the sacred coverts of bread and
wine, as it were under a mystical Tomb, or under dead signs, but a living and
vivifying flesh, etc. These be the terms of the Bishop of Condom, which form a
notion or Idea very perplexed and contradictory; as if we should say, a dead
body full of life, and the fountain of life, under the coverts of death. Which
is the very cause that this Idea, being so confused, is not without much
difficulty received into the mind, and that it there makes the less impression,
or at least does not make so lively an impression only of the death of Jesus
Christ, of which the main question here is: whereas amongst us, where we only
regard the bread broken, and the wine poured out, but as an image and
representation of the body of Jesus Christ broken for us, and his blood shed
for us, This image does give unto us a clear and distinct Idea of the death,
which Jesus Christ has suffered for us; which is properly the effect which our
Lord would produce in the Sacrament.

In the Church of Rome, the Priest that says Mass, or that consecrates, often
says it alone, most commonly very low, and always in Latin, which is not at
all the Language of the people. The Consecration being done, if he gives the
Host, for every one knows that there are infinite Masses without communicants,
he says not unto them who do receive it, that the body of Jesus Christ was
broken for them, which is properly what he ought to say unto them, according to
the words of our Savior, to imprint well in their minds the Idea of his death,
and to excite in their hearts a pure sense, and such which becomes hearts
engaged in love and acknowledgment of this Divine Savior; but it is only said
unto them, by form of a Petition which is made for them, the body of Jesus
Christ keep or preserve their souls unto eternal life: and though we do not
here repeat this form of Petition, to condemn it, because it is good, and of
ancient use, yet it may be said, that it is a more self-interessed
consideration, which makes them not to reflect, but only upon their own profit
and advantage; and which is more, the Priest says this it self in the same
Latin Tongue, which the greatest part do not understand. In very truth, what
sound remembrance, or what true sense of love and thankfulness, can this kind
of setting forth the death of the Lord, all in a low mumbling tone, in general
terms, and in a Language ill understood, excite? We speak of a sound
remembrance, and of a love with understanding: for as for an outward devotion,
or confused resentments of Holiness, it is not denied, but that the way of the
Roman Church, being full of pomp, may excite as much as, or more than ours,
which is more simple.

Amongst us, to the end there may be no mistake in this matter, behold in a few
words what is our practice.

In the first place, some days before the time appointed for administering the
Sacrament, there is an exhortation made to us, to prepare our selves by acts of
Repentance, of Faith, and of charity, and by an holy life; the day be^ing come
after the usual exercises of devotion, which consist in Prayers, singing of
Psalms, and reading portions of the holy Scriptures, most proper unto the
subject, there is ordinarily a Sermon made to us, expressly upon the death of
our Lord Jesus Christ, or upon the Sacraments themselves. The Sermon is
followed with an excellent Prayer also upon the same subject: the Prayer being
ended, the Minister does read unto us publicly, with a loud voice, the Liturgy
of the Lords Supper, which contains principally the manner, wherein St. Paul
relates that our Savior did institute it, with another exhortation well to
prepare our hearts. Lastly, the Minister taking the bread and the wine, says
with a loud voice, The bread which we break, is the body of Jesus Christ, or
the communion of the body of Jesus Christ. The Cup which we bless, is the blood
of Jesus Christ, which was poured out for your sins: Or, the Cup which we
bless, is the communion of the blood of Jesus Christ; for either one or the
other of these expressions are indifferently used, the grace of God, according
to us, not being tied unto the words. After which, in distributing the Bread to
the communicants, the Minister says again unto them, to raise and awaken their
zeal and their faith, This is the body of Jesus Christ, which was broken for
you; and in giving the Cup, This is the blood of Jesus Christ which was shed
for your sins, or some words to this sense. And last of all, when every one
has done communicating, we conclude with thanksgiving, in singing the song of
Simeon, and with the Blessing, wherewith the Minister dismisseth the Assembly.

This particular account is only for them, who are misinformed of our
practice. We appeal here to the conscience of all sincere persons in the first
place, if it be not true, that this manner of celebrating, and of giving, and
receiving the Sacrament of the Eucharist, be not most conform unto what we see
in the institution of our Lord, and unto the practice of the Apostles, and of
the first and purest Ages of Christianity; and without comparison, more conform
than that of the Church of Rome. And in the second place, which of these two
manners of communicating, is the most proper to excite and nourish true piety,
according to knowledge, and a sincere remembrance of the death of Jesus Christ.

There remains no more as to this point, but to touch the Bishop of Condom's
last consideration, in which he says, That we do not deny the real
communication of the substance of the Son of God in the Lords Supper; so that
there is a necessity that we should agree, that the remembrance does not
exclude all manner of presence, but only that which does strike our senses.

We do not indeed say, that remembrance excludes all manner of presence; for on
the contrary, it is said of remembrance, as it is of Faith, that it makes
things to be present, that are at the greatest distance. There is a moral
presence, and a mystical presence, a presence of object and of virtue, as they
speak; which are not incompatible with remembrance. For example, the Heavens,
the Stars, though almost at an infinite distance, are in some sort present with
us, not only because we see them, but by the influences which they cast upon
us. We only say, that remembrance excludes a presence real, personal, and as
it were physical, local, and immediate, under the colors and exterior
appearances of Bread and Wine, such as the Church of Rome teaches of the Body
of Jesus Christ, in the hands of a Priest, or in the mouth or stomach of the
Communicants.

But because both here and elsewhere the Bishop of Condom grounds himself upon
what he says, that at the same time that we deny this real presence of the
Body of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, we teach a real participation of his
Body, and that upon this occasion, the Bishop of Condom here makes an express
Article of the Exposition of our Belief upon the reality, what we will say of
our Doctrine upon this point, shall serve for an answer unto all the
consequences which he draws both here, or elsewhere.

To remove at once, XII. An examination of the exposition, which the Bishop of
Condom makes of our Doctrine of the Reality.
says the Bishop of Condom, the equivocations which the Calvinists use upon
this matter, and to make appear at the same time, how near they are come unto
us, though I have undertaken only to explain the Doctrine of the Church, It
will be expedient here to add the exposition of their Judgment.

Let us be permitted, before we enter upon this Article, to complain, that the
Bishop of Condom does at the very first, here begin to treat us in terms
prohibited by the Edicts of our Kings, at the same time also charging us with
affected equivocations, which in no wise agree with the simplicity of our
Doctrine. we are apt to think, that it is the heat of dispute, which has here
insensibly transported him beyond his natural equity, and we would not at all
concern our selves to take notice of these sorts of expressions, especially in
a time wherein we are accustomed unto more strict dealings, if the least thing
of this nature, proceeding from a person of his dignity, and for whom we have a
great esteem, were not more remarkable, and of worse example, than all the
bitterest things that might be said by other persons.

This Article of the Bishop of Condom's Treatise, though more copious, is for
all that obscure and entangled, full of repetitions, of digressions, and of
comparisons (odious and besides his business) which he makes of us, to
Socinians, Arrians, Nestorians, Pelagians, insulting over us upon words,
contrary to what appears manifestly to be our sense. But we will leave the
words, and apply our selves to the things.

In the first place, instead of giving a plain and entire Exposition of our
Belief, and afterward drawing the consequences which he had a mind of, he
only gives it by shreds, and so perplexed, that it cannot be understood. He
only reports here and there some of our Expressions, separate from each other,
endeavoring therein to find some obscurity; and afterward, he grounds upon
this obscurity, which himself has made, the equivocations and contradictions
which he imputes unto us. We need only take notice, what course he takes in
the very entrance, to make a judgment that he speaks after his own manner, and
not after ours. Their Doctrine, says he, has two parts; the one speaks only
of the figure of the body and blood, the other speaks only of the reality of
the body and blood.

Divisions are wont to give order, and to give light unto discourses: but this
on the contrary, does at first sight so little set forth our Doctrine, that our
people would not understand it. The explication which follows, is neither
juster, nor more natural. Instead of laying down what we believe affirmatively,
he lays down indeed but only the negative part of our Belief.

Wherefore we shall do better to explain our own Doctrine our selves in a few
words, with relation unto what the Bishop of Condom says hereof. This shall be
that plain Form of Doctrine, which he says we have not, and shall serve for a
general refutation of all that he has produced. We will not forbear answering
afterward unto whatsoever he shall oppose, that is most considerable.

Our Doctrine is simple, as the Bishop of Condom says that it ought to be,
incomparably more simple, than that of the Church of Rome. Here, as well as
elsewhere, we have this advantage, that the Church of Rome believes all that we
do believe: the difference is only in the things which she adds, and which we
cannot believe.

We believe that Jesus Christ having taken our humane nature, to suffer the
death which we had deserved, it was necessary that we should be united unto
him, as the members are united unto the head, to the end, that his obedience,
and his righteousness, should be imputed unto us, that we might partake of all
his merits.

We say, that this union is made on our part, by the faith which we have in
him: that it is God himself who gives us this Faith, and that to give it unto
us, and to confirm it in our hearts, he makes use of two sundry sorts of
means; the one interior, which is the secret operation of his Holy Spirit,
without which those others were in vain; the others exterior, which are the
Word, and the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, the Word, to declare
unto us the promises of Salvation; Baptism, more particularly, to show forth
our Entrance into the Church, and the washing away of our sins; and the Lords
Supper, to show forth yet more perfectly the death of Jesus Christ, and our
communion with him. Hitherto we go along with the Gentlemen of the Roman
Church. They believe, as we do, that it is necessary we be spiritually united
unto Jesus Christ, that this Union is made by Faith, that it is the Holy Spirit
which produces this Faith in our hearts, and that the Word, Baptism, and the
Eucharist, are the outward means, which the Holy Spirit makes use of, whether
to produce, or to increase and strengthen Faith in our hearts. If there be any
difference about this, betwixt the Gentlemen of the Roman Church and us, it is
not about what we have now said, but upon those several other Doctrines which
she has added.

As to the Eucharist in particular, whereof here the Question is betwixt them
and us, we also say very plainly, that the Bread and Wine are outward signs,
which Jesus Christ has added unto the Word, to set forth his death before our
eyes more livelily, and more sensibly, than by Baptism, or by the Gospel; and
that when we receive these signs by Faith, Jesus Christ gives himself unto us;
or that he confirms the gift which he has already made unto us, of himself in
Baptism, or in the preaching of the Gospel, for the communicating to us all his
benefits. Not that his body is in the bread, and his blood in the Wine, or
under the forms of bread and wine, but by lifting our hearts up unto heaven,
where he is, and uniting us unto himself by his holy spirit. This is truly the
abridgment of our Doctrine, drawn from our confession of Faith, and our
catechism, conformable unto what the scriptures teach us throughout, of the
spiritual union of the faithful with our Lord Jesus Christ. There is nothing
in all this, which is not plain and easy to be conceived, excepting only the
ineffable and incomprehensible manner, in which this holy Spirit works in us,
and whereby he effects this union of the faithful, with Jesus Christ our Divine
Head.

Yet we have some resemblances, though very imperfect, Ephesians. 5.30, 31, 32. 1
Cor. 6.16, 17.
as well of this operation of the holy Spirit in our hearts, as of the union of
the faithful with Jesus Christ, in the conjugal love which unites husband and
wife, and which is the reason that the Scripture says, that they are but one
body and one soul.

However the matter stands, it is very observable in this case, that this
difficulty, such as it is, is common with us and them of the Church of Rome,
and that it proceeds not more or less from hence, that our Doctrine is
different from theirs. They believe (the same as we do) the spiritual union of
the Faithful with Jesus Christ, by the operation of the holy Spirit, as we have
just now said, as well in the preaching of the Gospel, as in Baptism and the
Eucharist. They conceive not at all this spiritual union any better than we,
nor explain themselves otherwise therein than we do; and what they believe more
than we in the Sacrament, to wit, that they receive the proper body of Jesus
Christ, by the mouth of the body into their stomach, does not add any thing at
all, according to their own principles, either to effect, or make understood
this spiritual union, which we have with Jesus Christ, which is the only and
true cause of our Salvation. For they do not deny, that those who receive
Baptism without the Word, and without the Eucharist, or Baptism and the Word
without the same Eucharist, may be saved, and united perpetually unto Jesus
Christ, as well as they who receive also the Eucharist. Neither do they say,
that the body of Jesus Christ, which they do believe they receive into their
stomach, is united unto their soul, or unto their body, by his presence; nor
even that the substance of their body, or of their soul, does touch the
substance of the body and blood of Jesus Christ.

They say only, that their substance does touch the sensible Forms of Bread
and Wine, and that the real presence of the body of Jesus Christ, under these
Forms, is an earnest unto them of their spiritual union with Jesus Christ.
Some also add, that it is unto them a blossoming of life and immortality by its
virtue, without pretending for all that, that the substance of their soul or
body, does join or unite it self unto the substance of the body and blood of
Jesus Christ.

Let us now see, wherein the Bishop of Condom does pretend that we use
Equivocations, or that we come near unto the Church of Rome. To render his
accusation the more plausible, he begins with the reason, which he pretends
has, as it were, forced us to come nearer unto the Church of Rome, in the
point of the reality; and afterward, he passes unto the objections, which he
makes to prove, that in effect we are come nearer unto them.

It is sufficient, says he, to have learned by the Scriptures, that the Son of
God would testify his love unto us, by incomprehensible effects: This love,
says he, was the cause of this so real union, by which he became man: this
love induced him to offer up for us that his body, as really as he had taken
it; and all these designs are followed, and this love is maintained throughout
by the same fervor: So whenever it shall please him to make any of his
children sensible of the goodness which he has expressed unto all in general,
by giving himself to them in particular, he will find a means to satisfy
himself by things that are as effectual, as those which he has already
accomplished for our Salvation. Wherefore it is not to be wondered at, if he
gives unto every one of us the proper substance of his Flesh, and of his Blood;
he does it to imprint in our hearts, that it is for us that he took them, and
that it is for us that he offered them as a sacrifice. And a little afterward
he adds, Our adversaries have very well seen, that simple figures, and simple
signs of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, would not satisfy Christistians
accustomed to the bounty of a God, which gives himself so really unto us:
therefore it is, that they would not be accused to deny this real participation
of Jesus Christ in their Sacrament.

Behold here the reason, that he says has forced us to approach unto the
Church of Rome: but Christians are then either very ungrateful, or very
difficult to be contented, if they are not satisfied that Jesus Christ died for
them, that these sacred signs assure them of it, and that they serve them as an
effectual and saving means, to raise their hearts and their Faith unto Jesus
Christ. They have then the ears of their understanding close stopped, if it be
true, that these sacred signs joined unto the Word, do not yet tell them
plainly, and loud enough, that Jesus Christ became man for them, that his body
was broken for them; and that lastly, his blood was poured out for the
remission of their sins.

The Opinion, which the Church of Rome adds, that Jesus Christ is present,
being very far from better setting forth his death, incumbers, as I may so say,
the conception of it, as has been showed before, because it represents the
body of Jesus Christ in a living state, under dead signs: and moreover, the way
of giving these signs, in a language not understood, or ill understood, makes
much less impression in the hearts, than the way, wherein it has been showed,
they are given amongst us.

But in fine, where is the reason of this consequence? The Love which Jesus
Christ has for us, induced him to dye really for us; therefore it is the part
of this Love, to give really unto us the proper substance of his flesh, and of
his blood. What bond, or what necessary consequence is there of one and the
other of these things? From what time, and in what place, has it been known or
usual, that it is a sign of love in any to give his proper flesh to eat, to
them whom he loves? I do not say, only by morsels, as some possibly may say
the Capernaites understood the words of our Savior, but in any manner or under
any coverts under which it may be put? For, although God does testify his Love
unto us by incomprehensible effects, though his ways are not our ways, grace
does not, for all that, destroy nature; his ways are above our ways, and even
contrary to what ours have of evil, and irregularity; but not at all to what
they have that is good and right, which proceeds from God himself. What there
is incomprehensible in the effects of his Love, is nothing as to the manner, as
we may say, but to the degree, or rather the infinity of this Love it self: For
as to the other point, we in some sort conceive all, that this infinite Love
makes him do for us, by a comparison though very imperfect, of what an entire
Love does make us do one for another. To pay for another, is the true office
of a Friend; and to dye for another, has always passed for a true test of
Love; Joh. 15.13.
Greater Love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his
Friends. To dye for an Enemy, is a generosity that has had no example amongst
men, before the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ dyed for us, who
were originally his creatures, but were become his enemies. This is that, which
this Love has in it incomprehensible; and nevertheless, this Love, which was
foretold by the prophets, was accomplished in the time that was foretold.

But neither prophecy, nor reason, nor humane manners ever yet taught us, that
Jesus Christ should give us his real flesh to eat, with the mouth of our body,
as a token of the Love that he has for us: and when Jesus Christ said unto his
Disciples, John 6.
That he would give his flesh for the life of the world, and that whosoever did
not eat his flesh, had no life in him, seeing that this word offended many, it
does not appear unto us, that our Savior condemned their surprise, but only
that he presently explained this speech unto them, and that he made them
understand, that they should receive it spiritually.

The Gentlemen of the Roman Church do always fall into this error, that
although they do not directly deny, that the communion which we have with Jesus
Christ by Faith, is very real, and of its self sufficing to salvation, as they
do confess in particular of the communion which we have with him, either by the
Word, or by Baptism, nevertheless always, when there is any mention of the
Mystery of the Eucharist, they have this impression reigning in their minds,
which overbears all others, that Jesus Christ cannot give himself really unto
them, but when they believe, that he gives his proper flesh to be eaten with
the mouth of their body. It is from this apprehension; that the Bishop of
Condom faith here again, that Jesus Christ makes as taste his bounty by things
as effectual, as those which he accomplished for our salvation: as if the Faith
which he gives as, and the communion which we have with him by his Spirit, even
out of the Eucharist, were not all of these effectual things, and as effectual,
as it is true that he dyed for us.

Let us now come unto the Objections, which the Bishop of Condom makes against
some of our expressions, to prove that we are approached nearer unto the Church
of Rome.

pa. 146.
In the first place, he seems to contradict himself, for he says afterward,
that the more we explain our selves, (the Gentlemen of the Roman Church, and
we) upon this Article, the more contrary we find our selves one to another; he
gives also the reason for it, which is, that the more we consider the
consequences of Transubstantiation, the more we are discouraged with the
difficulties, which sense and reason discover in it. This does not import, that
we are approached nearer.

Besides, there are very few persons who should hear him say, that we are
approached unto the Church of Rome, but would believe, that the reason is,
because some of our late Synods, or some of our more famous modern Doctors,
had relaxed somewhat of our Doctrine, either in the sense, or in the
expressions. In the mean while, there is nothing less than this: All this
accusation, bears only upon three diverse Expressions, drawn from our
Catechism, which is, as it is known, the ancient explanation of our Doctrine,
The Bishop of Condom pretends, that these expressions do suppose the real
presence, and that they cannot concord, but by admitting the Doctrine of the
real presence, which comes all to one thing; and that it is by these
expressions, that our Reformers themselves approached unto the Church of Rome.
It is in this part of his Treatise, that he has labored most, and conceived
with greatest care, as being the place, where there seemed to be most
advantage; but which at the bottom, is nothing else but an heap of plausible
pretexts, and unjust consequences, and almost throughout playing upon words.

The first of his Objections is, upon this expression of our Catechism, where
we say, that we do make no doubt, ^t that Jesus Christ makes us parta^s of his
proper substance, by uniting us (...) himself in the same life; and upon this
other passage of our Confession of Faith, where it is said to the same effect,
that Jesus Christ does nourish and ^ivifie us with the proper substance of his
body, and of his blood. It is a certain truth, that the Scripture never makes
use of this term of Substance upon the subject of the Eucharist. The first
Fathers of the Church did not use it neither. There are only some ancient
Doctors, which have used it in diverse senses, sometimes to express the matter,
or the essence it self of the things, and oftentimes also to signify the
virtue. Sunday 50. and in the form of administering of Baptism
Our Catechism it self, speaking of the Sacrament of Baptism, says
indifferently, in two places, the substance, and the virtue of Baptism, to
signify the efficacy of it.

Not any of the first Ages have said, that Jesus Christ did give us the
substance of his body and blood; but some, less ancient, have said, that he
nourished and vivified us by his substance; or that he gave us a living
substance, meaning, a quickening virtue, alluding unto that mystical expression,
I am the living bread, Joh. 6.
this bread is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the World.

When the Authors of our Confession of Faith, and of our Catechism used these
sorts of expressions, amongst many others, it plainly appears, that they were
not constrained so to do, to conform themselves unto the Scripture; nor to the
ancient Fathers of the Church, who used them not at all: but they did it
doubtless, to accommodate themselves therein, to the use which the latter times
had brought in, and to show in different terms, the truth of this spiritual
Communion, which we believe we have with Jesus Christ, so as they explain it in
the same place. And we will make no scruple here to add, that it is not simply
the words of institution of the Lords Supper, which oblige us to speak in such
effectual terms; because it is evident, that the first aim of the words of
institution is, to recommend the commemoration of the death of Jesus Christ:
And it is also, on one hand, the Tenor of the Gospel in general, which does
throughout inculcate a most intimate communion of the faithful with Jesus
Christ, saying, that we are flesh of his flesh, Eph^
and bone of his bone; and on the other hand it is the nature of this
Sacrament, which joined to this divine Word, not only sets forth this union in
a most express manner, but also gives us a lively feeling of it, strengthens
and confirms it by the grace, with which God is pleased to accompany an action
so holy.

But that which is communicated according to its proper substance, says the
Bishop of Condom, Pa. 104.
ought to be really present; and it is not possible to make understood, that a
body, which is only spiritually communicated unto us, and by Faith, can be
really communicated unto us, and in its proper substance. But the reason why we
cannot make you understand it, is the prejudice which you will not lay aside
upon this subject of the Eucharist, to wit, that there is no real union nor
participation, if it be not Physical; that is to say, if two bodies, or two
substances be not joined, or be not both together in one place, which yet is a
manifest error. As if, for example, when we acquire an inheritance, though we
are distant from it, it might not be said, that not only the fruits, and the
Revenue belong unto us, but that the propriety, the body, the substance of the
Land; in fine, all that belongs to it, is ours.

Besides, our Catechism, had already answered unto the Bishop of Condom's
Objection, in the Article which immediately follows that which he objects to
us. The Minister demands, Sunday 53.
How can it he, that Jesus Christ makes us partakers of his proper substance to
unite us unto himself, seeing his body is in Heaven, and we upon Earth? It is
(says the Child) by the incomprehensible power of the Holy Ghost, which
joyneth things that are asunder by the distance of place; And Art. 36.
our Confession of Faith, says the same thing, and in the same terms: Would
the Bishop of Condom dispute, that the Holy Ghost cannot effect a real and true
union of us with Jesus Christ, when we partake of the Lords Supper,
notwithstanding the distance that there is betwixt him and us? And who says a
true and real union with Jesus Christ, says he any thing less, than to be made
partaker of, or to be nourished and vivified, with his substance? Does either
the Bishop of Condom himself better understand, or is it possible, that he
should make better understood, the manner wherein he does believe, that the
bread and the wine are transubstantiated into the body and blood of Jesus
Christ, by the operation of the same spirit of God, insomuch, that the bread
does cease to be bread, and that the body of our Divine Savior, his proper
body, which is sitting in Heaven at the right hand of the Father, is
nevertheless upon Earth, in a thousand places at once, after the manner of a
spirit, in less room than a point does take up. In fine, is it possible to make
better understood this other manner, which he believes, that this holy body,
which only passes through his stomach, does unite, or rather is not united,
with his proper body and soul.

The second Objection, which the Bishop of Condom here makes against us, is
upon another expression of our Catechism, Sunday 52.
where it is said, that though Jesus Christ be truly communicated unto us by
Baptism, and by the Gospel, it is only in part, and not fully, whence the
Bishop of Condom infers, that Jesus Christ is fully given unto us in the Lords
Supper, and that there is an exceeding difference betwixt receiving in part,
and receiving fully. Granting this, see whereunto his Argumentation amounts.

If in the Lords Supper, Pa. 106.
Jesus Christ is fully received; and in Baptism, and in the Gospel, but in
part, then the manner in which he is received in the Lords Supper, is different
from that in which he is received in the Gospel, and in Baptism: Now the
manner, in which he is received in Baptism, and in the Gospel, is by Faith;
Therefore it must needs be, that there should be a real manner of receiving the
body and blood of our Lord in the Sacrament, which is not by Faith.

By any the least Attention to his Argument, it will at first sight be found
faulty. In sum, it is certain, there is in it a kind of sophism; Of a thing
which is only true in some regards, he draws consequences, as if it were
absolutely true, and in all r^gards: He changes the terms of the Propositions,
as we speak in the Schools; and he puts more in the conclusion, than there is
in the propositions, whence the conclusion should be formed. It is almost as if
a man should say, the manner of a man's going is upright, and different from
that of beasts: the beast goes upon his feet; therefore men do not go upon
their feet: Or to make all more plainly to be understood, by an example which
has nearer relation unto the subject here in question. The Argument of the
Bishop of Condom is much like unto this: The Sun at Noonday communicates to us
objects, or the sight of objects, in a full manner, and different from that in
which he communicates them unto us at his rising; or if you will in a different
manner, from that wherein Torches communicate them unto us in the night: Now
the Sun at his rising, and Torches in the night, do communicate objects only
by the light; therefore the Sun at Noonday, does not communicate the objects
unto us by the light. Or to form a conclusion upon the Bishop of Condom's very
terms; therefore it needs must be, that there is something in the Sun at
Noonday, which causes a manner of communicating objects, which is not by the
light.

The Sophism lies herein, that the difference of the manner whereby the Sun
communicates the objects at Noonday, from that whereby it communicates them at
his rising, or that whereby Torches communicate them in the night, is in truth
only in the more or less of the light; a difference in degree, as we speak,
and not in kind, in the means it self, rather than in the effect, because these
diverse manners fail not to communicate the same objects, though with more or
less clearness: whereas it is plain that this argument concludes, that there is
in the Sun at Noonday something else, than the light, which makes this
difference.

But leaving the form of the Argument, to follow the thing it self: if the
Bishop of Condom would have pleased to have taken the sense of the Article of
the Catechism entirely, as it had been just, he would have seen, that he had
not the least pretext to play with words as he does. Sunday 52.
The Catechism having laid down, that the communion which we have with Jesus
Christ, is not only in the Sacrament, but also in preaching the Word of God,
the Minister demands, What is it that the Lords Supper adds unto the Word; or
what have we more in the Lords Supper, and what is its use? This, says the
Child, that in the Lords Supper, our communion is more fully confirmed, and as
it were ratified: after which it immediately adds, that though Jesus Christ be
truly communicated unto us, by Baptism, and by the Gospel, it is but in part,
and not fully.

These words taken together, do most clearly give to understand, that what the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper adds unto the Word, is not another manner of
communion with Jesus Christ, more real in substance, or different in kind, from
that which we have with him by the Ministry of the Word, or by Baptism: for
Jesus Christ being truly communicated by these three diverse means, as the
Catechism it self lays down, it cannot in any manner be understood, that Jesus
Christ can be as it were divided, and more or less communicated; Or that there
is more union with him by the Lords Supper, than by Baptism, and by the
preaching of the Word; but only that in the Lords Supper, we have yet a new,
and more ample confirmation of our union with Jesus Christ, and as it were a
final ratification, which are the words of the Catechism.

Baptism properly is instituted only, to show our entrance into the Church,
and to let us understand, that as the water does cleanse our bodies, so the
blood of Jesus Christ, does wash us from our sins; and particularly, from our
Original sin, without representing more expressly, either the death of Jesus
Christ, or our spiritual union with him: though upon the whole, the operation
of the Holy Ghost, does nevertheless thereby produce this spiritual union of
the Faithful with Jesus Christ, and the eternal happiness of them which are
baptized.

The word does very well represent unto us, the promise of Salvation, and all
that depends thereon: it is a very effectual means to work Faith, and to unite
us unto Jesus Christ, when God is pleased to accompany it with his grace; Romans
10.17.
for Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God.

But whereas the Word only works upon one of our senses, the Eucharist speaks
unto all our senses in general; and we know, that the sight in particular makes
a greater impression upon our spirits, than the hearing: and whereas Baptism
only sets forth our entrance into the Church, and only applies or
communicates unto us the blood of Jesus Christ by the form of washing; the
Eucharist does yet more expressly represent unto us, that the body of Jesus
Christ was broken for us, and that his blood was poured out for the remission
of our sins, communicating both one and the other unto us, by the form of meat,
and of drink. In a word, the Sacrament of the Eucharist gives us to understand,
that as bread and wine nourish our bodies, so the body and blood of Jesus
Christ nourish and vivifie our souls: and lastly, that the bread and the wine
are not more truly and really united unto our bodies, then Faith does really
and spiritually unite us unto the body of our Savior. This is it, as every one
may see, for which our Catechism says, that in the Lords Supper, our communion
with Jesus Christ, is more amply confirmed and ratified unto us, than in
Baptism, and in the preaching of the Gospel: or that in Baptism, and in the
Gospel, Jesus Christ is communicated in part unto us, and in the Lords Supper
fully; for it is but one and the same thing, in the sense of the Catechism.

The manner in which Baptism communicates Jesus Christ unto us, in admitting of
us into the Church, may be compared, if we please, unto that wherein it was
said, that the Sun communicates the sight of objects at his rising: the manner
in which the Word also communicates Jesus Christ to us, in declaring unto us
the promises of the Gospel, unto that of Torches, communicating the same
objects in the night: and Lastly, the manner wherein the Eucharist communicates
the same Jesus Christ unto us, by form of nourishment, that vivifies us, unto
that of the Suns communicating also the same objects at full Noonday;
especially if the Eucharist be considered as being added unto the Word, and
unto Baptism, as the Catechism does consider it. These three manners of
communicating Jesus Christ, are different betwixt themselves, because that
these three exterior means, have each their proper way of working upon us, to
produce, or to strengthen Faith in our hearts, and to confirm our communion
with Jesus Christ, by the operation of the Holy Spirit. But it is always Jesus
Christ whole and entire, which is communicated unto us by each of these three
means; and it is always by Faith, and by the operation of the Holy Spirit, which
is the manner common to all those three; as it is the sight of the same objects
which is communicated by Torches in the night, and by the Sun at his rising or
at full Noonday, and always by the light, which is the common mean to Torches,
and to the Sun, to illuminate the objects.

But, it is remarkable (says the Bishop of Condom here) that how great a
desire soever the Reformers had to equal Baptism, and preaching to the Lords
Supper, in that Jesus Christ is therein truly communicated unto us, they did
not dare to say in their Catechism, that Jesus Christ was given unto us in his
proper substance in Baptism, and in preaching, as they have said, in the Lords
Supper.

But the reason of this difference may easily be gathered, from what has been
said hitherto; it is, that when an Exposition is made of the means, whereof
God makes use to unite us unto him, every one ought to be spoken of according
to the proper use, for the which it is known they are established. Our
Catechism does not say, that Jesus Christ spiritually regenerates us in the
Lords Supper, or that he washes us from our sins, as it does speak of Baptism;
nor that Faith comes by the Lords Supper, to use that manner of speaking, that
is to say, that the Lords Supper produces in our hearts Faith, as it is said,
that Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: for that the Lords
Supper is not instituted to represent unto us our union with Jesus Christ under
this notion, but to represent it unto us under the notion of a substantial
union, such as is that of nourishment. In like manner, if the Catechism says
not, that we are made partakers of the substance of Jesus Christ in Baptism, or
in the preaching of the Gospel, as it says of the Lords Supper, it is not but
that in these very actions we are really united unto Jesus Christ, or that
Jesus Christ does not there spiritually nourish our souls with his substance,
as really as he does in the Sacrament; and the Bishop of Condom dares not say
the contrary: but so it is, that although these diverse means produce for the
main the same effect, yet the same expressions do not equally agree to the one
and the other, because the water of Baptism, and the sound of the Word, are not
at all proper, as the Symbols of bread and of wine, to represent unto us, as
well the spiritual nourishment of our souls, as the intimate union which is
made betwixt us and Jesus Christ.

The third and last of our expressions, upon which the Bishop of Condom strains
himself more than upon the former, is taken from an Article of our Catechism,
which follows that which we have now examined. In the first Article it is said,
that in the Lords Supper we have a new and more ample confirmation of the
communion which we have with Jesus Christ, by the preaching of the Gospel: here
the Minister proceeds to demand, What is it then in sum, Sunday 52.
which we have by the sign of bread? As if he should say, On what, in fine,
does the use which we should make of this Sacrament, terminate it self; or what
is the fruit of this confirmation, which you say, that we therein have of our
communion with Jesus Christ? The Child answers, It is this, that the body of
Jesus Christ, inasmuch as it was once offered a sacrifice to reconcile us unto
God, is given unto us, to certify us that we have part in this reconciliation.
This word certify, is a word of those very times, which signifies to assure us
fully, or to make us certain or assured of our reconciliation with God; and
every one sees, that the clear and entire sense of this Answer is, that the
union or communion which we have with Jesus Christ, does fully assure us that
we have part in the fruit of his death.

pa 112.
In the mean time, what is the use that the Bishop of Condom would make of these
words? It is, that by a long deduction of consequences, he would conclude one
way or other, that besides the communion by which we do partake spiritually of
the body of our Savior, and of his spirit both together, in receiving the
fruit of his death, there is yet another real communion (as he speaks) of the
body of the same Savior, which is an assured pledge unto us, that the other is
secured for us. Here again we may observe as we pass, the effect of the error
of the Gentlemen of the Roman Church, which makes them perpetually to oppose
communion real to spiritual, as if that which is spiritual, or which is
spiritually effected, were not real.

But to return to what the Bishop of Condom proposes to himself upon this
Article: it may be said that this is one of those forced arguments, the
strainedness of which shows, that there is in it no more truth, than there is
nature. To answer unto it in such a manner, as that we may understand
something, we must necessarily repeat his Propositions one after another, in
the same terms that he conceived them: for putting them altogether, and all in
consequence, they make such an entangled piece, as will create no small
difficulty to unravel.

If these words, says he, pa. 1^
have any sense, to wit, those of the Catechism, if they be not an unprofitable
sound, and vain amusement, they should give us to understand, that Jesus Christ
does not give us a Symbol only but his true body, to assure us that we have an
interest in his sacrifice.

This is the first consequence, which the Bishop of Condom (...) the words of
the Catechism; and it is true that thus far he keeps the sense and the
expressions very exactly. But on the other side, this consequence is useless
enough, though made with such an ample and specious preface. For we never
brought into dispute in the least, whether without the Symbols, or with the
Symbols, Jesus Christ gives us not what is represented by the Symbols, that is
to say, his body and blood; the sign, and the thing signified both together,
and whether he gives us not both one and the other, to assure us that we have
part in the fruit of his death.

Sunday 46, and 47.
This is that which our Catechism says elsewhere, in other terms, to wit, that
the Sacraments are seals of the Promises of God in our hearts, according to
the doctrine of the Apostle, that Jesus Christ gives himself unto us, to the
end we might enjoy him, and that all that he has may be ours: and here the
same Catechism says, that his body is given unto us, to assure us that we have
part in the fruit of his death, so that this first consequence of the Bishop of
Condom's, is not a consequence at all, for it adds nothing almost unto our
sense, nor unto our words.

He forgets even under this head, to comprehend what we but now touched, which
is not in question neither, but yet is thus far of this place, as that it
conduces to form a complete sense of these words; namely, that not only the
body of Jesus Christ, or the union which we have with him, does assure us of
the part which we have in the fruit of his death: but that the Symbols
themselves also assure us after their manner, or according to the use for which
God has appointed them. For God makes use of these exterior signs to affect
our senses, and to confirm our faith, and our confidence. The dispute is only
of the manner, whereby Jesus Christ gives unto us his body with the signs, and
here the Bishop of Condom does not at all engage in this first proposition.

In exchange, he goes too far, or strays too much, in the second; Now (says
he) if the reception of the body of our Lord, pa. 110.
assure us of participating of the fruit of his death, it must necessarily be,
that this participation of the fruit, be distinguished from the reception of
the body; because one is the earnest of the other Here is it, that the
intricacy and obscurity begins. To reason right, and more intelligibly, it had
been needful to have resumed, as was begun: If Jesus Christ not only gives us
the Symbol of his body, but his body also, or his proper body, to assure us
that we have part in his sacrifice, and in the reconciliation of mankind, we
must then here distinguish the communion which we have of the body of Jesus
Christ, from the part which we have in the fruit of his death, seeing that the
one does assure us of the other. These are the terms of the Bishop of Condom's
first proposition, which agree with them of the Catechism: now the Bishop of
Condom changes them, against the rule of disputation, and this is it which
creates not only the intricacy, but also the Sophisms; for that when we pass
from consequence to consequence, how little soever one term imports more or
less than another, or expresses it with any difference in the sense, or in the
force of the word, we divert or astray; and this is called to take, or give the
change.

When the Bishop of Condom says, that the reception of the body is an earnest
to us of the participation of the fruit of the death of Jesus Christ, these
three terms of Reception, of Participation, and of Earnest, which were not in
the first proposition, though they seem to answer to them which are there,
being so employed by opposition one to the other as they are here, do not so
little alter the sense, but that this change alone is the sole foundation of
this Argument, and of all that there is captions in it.

If the Bishop of Condom resuming his first terms, had only said, that the
communion of the body of our Lord assured us of the part which we have unto the
fruit of his death, he had not had a word to say; because that evidently
imports but one and the same action, which causes that we are united unto Jesus
Christ in the Lords Supper, and that being united unto him, we hold our selves
assured of having share in the fruit of his death. Nothing is more simple, and
easy to be understood, than this: to have part in the fruit of the death of
our Lord, is not here properly an action, it is properly but a right acquired.
But in substituting to these words those other terms, of Reeeption of the body,
and of participation of the fruit, as the Bishop of Condom does, it is a little
color, by the sound of words, for supposing two different actions in this
communion: and afterward adding this expression, that one is the earnest of
the other, this seems yet to make a greater diversity. This foundation being
once laid, in a nimble manner, and almost imperceptible to those who only read
cursorily, there is a long continuance of consequences to attain unto two
different communions of the body of Jesus Christ. The mind of him that reads,
perceives confusedly, that he is led he knows not where, nor how; he only
finds that he is not led on evenly, if it may be so said, or that he is led
amiss.

But let us not forget to resume the Bishop of Condom's consequences in the
same terms that he has conceived them, for the better making known the
defects. If the reception, says he, of the body of our Lord, does assure us of
the participation of the fruit of his death, then this participation of the
fruit, must necessarily be distinguished from the reception of the body. In
good time: let the mind distinguish the communion which we have with the body,
from the part which we have in the fruit; because it is true that the body of
the Lord, and the fruit of his death, are two different things, and may be
conceived distinctly; as an inheritance which is given unto us, is different
from the revenue which it brings us. But it is not necessary for all that, to
distinguish the communion of the body, from the part which we have in the
fruit, as if we had not both one and the other of these two things, but by two
different actions; even as, to make an inheritance, and the fruits of the
inheritance to be ours, it is not at all necessary to have two Titles, or two
different contracts, the one for the inheritance it self, and the other for the
fruits, because that the same Title serves for one and the other.

He proceeds; If we must distinguish the participation of the body of our Lord,
from the participation of the fruit of his death, we must also distinguish the
participation of this Divine body, from all that participation which is made
spiritually, and by Faith: for that the participation by Faith, cannot
accommodate two different actions, by one of which we should receive the body
of our Savior, and by the other the fruit of his sacrifice.

We have already seen, that we must not separate the communion of the body of
the Lord, from the part which we have in the fruit of his death, as if there
were two different actions; although there be two several objects which may be
distinguished, to wit, the body of the Lord, and the fruit of his death: So all
this consequence has no foundation.

In sum, wherefore will the Bishop of Condom have two different acts of
Faith, for uniting us to the body of Jesus Christ, and having part in the fruit
of his death, when it is evident that all is done, or might be done, by one and
the same act of Faith.

Or wherefore may we not even assert two diverse acts of Faith, if they be
conceived severally (by one of which we unite our selves to Jesus Christ
himself; and by the other, unto the fruit of his death) without any need to
imagine, for all this, two different communions, one spiritual by Faith, and
the other with the mouth of the body, or real, as the Bishop of Condom speaks?
Lord, draw us after thee, lift up our hearts unto thee, come dwell in our
hearts by the operation of thy Spirit. Behold here an act of Faith, which
unites us to Jesus Christ, if the Faith be such as it ought to be: and this
union of its self suffices, to effect that we should also have part in the
fruit of his death, by this one act of Faith. Lord, impute to us thy
righteousness, and grant that being united unto thee by a true and lively
Faith, we may have a share in all thy benefits, and in particular, in the fruit
of thy death: Behold here nevertheless, a second act of Faith, which regards
directly the part that we have in the fruit of his death. The difference of
these two acts of Faith, properly will be only in the distinction of the
objects, which Faith does propose unto it self: in the one it proposes the body
of the Lord, and in the other the fruit of his death; and in one and the other,
there is a real communion with our Savior, but spiritually and by Faith.

But no man, adds the Bishop of Condom, (...). 112.
can conceive what difference there is betwixt participating by Faith of the
body of our Savior, and to participate by Faith, of the fruit of his death.

This is now the second or third time, that the Bishop of Condom will conceive
all; Let us see if he will be of the same mind, upon the Article of
Transubstantiation, which follows immediately after this.

But after all, how can he say, that no man can conceive any difference betwixt
participating by Faith of the body of the Lord, and participating by Faith of
the fruit of his death? for the body of the Lord, and the fruit of his death,
are evidently two different things, and there is no one who cannot easily
conceive, that there is great difference betwixt partaking of the one, and
partaking of the other, whether it be, that it is done by one act of Faith, or
by two; though besides, the manner of partaking of one and the other, be always
the same, to wit spiritually, and by Faith.

Nevertheless, it is here that the Bishop of Condom cries out again in
finishing this Article, Who can but admire the force of truth, etc. And
afterward, How ingenuously do the Calvinists confess unto us the truth? they
would have been strongly disposed to acknowledge, the body of Christ to be in
the Sacrament in figure only, and the participation of his Spirit only, in
effect, laying aside these great words of Participation, of proper substance,
and many others, which express a real presence, and which only cause
perplexities, etc.

Let the Bishop of Condom also in his turn, ingenuously confess the truth: he
has been very strongly disposed, and many other intelligent persons in the
Church of Rome it may be, will be so with him, to confess that there is only
in the Eucharist, a true and real communion of the body of Jesus Christ, as we
do acknowledge, that that which we there have spiritual, is very real, laying
aside that great word of Transubstantiation, as he had laid it aside in the
first Edition of his Treatise; that of concomitance, by virtue whereof the Cup
was cut off from the communion; and many others which imply manifest
contradiction, and which cause much more perplexity.

That which is truly admirable in this place, is, that the Church of Rome
teaches, as we do, a spiritual communion of the body of Jesus Christ, and the
Bishop of Condom himself said the very same but now, in express terms, that in
the Lords Supper there is a communion, pa. 112.
by the which we partake spiritually of the body of our Savior, and of his
spirit altogether, in receiving the fruit of his death; which is properly the
result of our Doctrine: and these words of participation, and of substance,
with which the Bishop of Condom pleases himself, and which he uses for all
that himself, signify nothing more. The only difference that there is betwixt
him and us, is, that we stop here; and that he, besides this spiritual
communion of the body of our Lord, supposes another real communion, as he
speaks, that is, with the mouth of the body, which we cannot allow of. Here, in
another prospect, he insults over us, as if there could not be any other
communion of the body of our Lord, but that only which is had by the mouth of
the body, and that without admitting of that, there can nothing be acknowledged
in the Lords Supper, but the figure of his body, and a participation of the
Spirit, excluding thus this other spiritual communion of the very body of Jesus
Christ, which he but now confessed. Let it be judged by this, and by all the
rest which has been said, as well of our opinions, as of his way of arguing,
who it is that creates perplexities, or that contradicts themselves; whether it
is the Bishop of Condom or us, that use equivocations about words; And Lastly,
if he has so much subject of Triumph upon this Article, as he seemed to
imagine to himself.

XIII. Of Tran. substantiation, of Adoration, and in what sense the Bishop of
Condom says, that the Sacrament is a sign.
The Bishop of Condom will slide along more sweetly upon the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and upon the Adoration of the Host, than he did in opposing
our Doctrine. There he attacqued, and attacqued Adversaries, as he calls them,
to whom they hardly give the liberty to defend themselves, (We may say any
thing against them, they will answer but by halfs.) Here he must defend
himself, and he has against him Scripture, reason, evidence of the senses, and
the common notions of Christianity, imprinted in conscience, which are other
kind of Adversaries, more terrible, speaking, malgre opposition, each in his
order, and speaking so loud, as they put the ablest to silence. The Bishop of
Condom, when he speaks of our Belief, though all things be very simple in it,
is not satisfied, if he cannot conceive even the very manner, whereby the Holy
Ghost does really unite us unto Jesus Christ, notwithstanding the great
distance which there is betwixt us and him, which nevertheless the Roman Church
does perpetually teach, as well as we, and yet it is the only thing in our
Doctrine, which humane understanding cannot well comprehend. Here, where there
are depths of difficulties, the Bishop of Condom will not perceive any at all:
his reason shall not at all molest him, and though there is no dispute of what
God can do, for God can do what he pleases, but of the meaning of his words
only (without looking unto his will) which are the only rule of our Faith, as
well as of our actions, the Bishop of Condom will tell us mysteriously, that
his Faith is attentive unto this infinite power, which is only properly the
object of our Admiration, and of our Adoration.

What the Bishop of Condom speaks touching Transubstantiation, may be reduced
unto four distinct assertions, which yet shall only be touched as we pass,
because this is a pure controversy, which is thoroughly treated of in all our
Books. The first is, pa. 123.
that the appearance of bread and wine ought to continue in the Sacrament: the
second, that the Church of Rome, does not therein acknowledge any other
substance, but that of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, into which the bread
and the wine are changed, and this is it, says he, Ibid. and pa. 124.
which is called Transubstantiation. The Bishop of Condom had abstained from
this term of Transubstantiation, in the first Impression of his Treatise,
having only put it as a title in the Margin to note the Article, or the matter
of Controversy, which he treats of in that place; neither did he formally say
upon this Article, that the bread and the wine were changed into the body and
blood of Jesus Christ; but he adds both the one and the other in the latter:
The third Doctrine is, That the reality does not hinder, but that the Eucharist
may be a sign, as to what it has exterior and sensible; that in the contrary,
the sign does necessarily carry the reality with it. The fourth and last, that
the presence of the body, being certified by this sign, they of the Roman
Church make no scruple to pay it their adorations.

As to the first of these Assertions, because it was agreeable, Pa. 12.
says the Bishop of Condom, that the senses should perceive nothing in this
mystery of Faith, it was not necessary that any thing should be changed
relating to them, in the bread and wine in the Eucharist. The Bishop of Condom
only says, that it was agreeable; and yet he does but say so without proving
it. He looks upon it as a thing established, and that only, because elsewhere
he has glanced on this in passage, that it was agreeable that God should give
us his flesh and blood wrapped up under a strange form, to exercise, says he,
page 84.
our Faith in this Mystery, and to take away the horror of eating his flesh,
and drinking his blood, in their proper form.

But what a reason is this to establish such a Doctrine as this? To exercise
our Faith in this Mystery. There is nothing so strange, which might not be made
pass under such indefinite pretexts of convenience or agreeableness: as if the
Mystery of the Sacrament had not sufficient matter besides to exercise our
Faith, without supposing the change of the bread and wine into the proper
flesh, and proper blood of our Savior, against the formal testimony of all our
senses.

The flesh and blood, say they, would induce horror, if we were to eat them in
kind; and it is certain, that the very thought only of eating humane flesh,
does naturally produce this effect: but it has been already elsewhere touched,
that the coverings, as they speak, may lessen his horror, but not entirely
take it away. And if the Church of Rome be at last accustomed unto this notion,
it is but only in tract of time, and in favor of that mystical and figurative
expression in St. John, Cap. 6.
who faith, to eat the flesh of Christ, instead of saying, to believe in him;
unto which mystical expression, the Church of Rome has made the ^^teral sense
to succeed.

But Lastly, the difficulty is not to prove, that the appearances of bread and
wine do remain, or to show a reason why they remain, but to show, that there is
nothing else but the appearances that remains; for in the first place, Jesus
Christ, and the Apostle St. Paul, who is his instrument, say, that after the
benediction, it is bread and wine: and in the Apostles times, and in the first
times after the Apostles, there was nothing spoken of but only bread and wine:
And in fine, God having given unto us our senses to know all corporal things,
which are their true object, and which depend on their jurisdiction, their
testimony being the foundation of almost all Notions, and the proof which Jesus
Christ made use of, to establish the truth of his humanity, and of his
Resurrection, can the Bishop of Condom, that will understand all, conceive,
that God intended that in an act of Religion, which he established to help our
weakness and unbelief, in presenting figures or outward objects to our senses,
can he conceive, I say, that God intended that there should be in this act of
Religion, a perpetual and manifest contradiction, betwixt the testimony of our
senses, and our Faith, that Faith should continually tell us, that what we see
and touch, are only false appearances of bread and wine, and that on the
contrary, our senses should continually tell us, that they be truly bread and
wine.

pa. 123.
Faith (says the Bishop of Condom) attentive to the word of him who does what
he pleases, acknowledges not here any other substance, but that which is
designed by the same word. This is the Bishop of Condom's second assertion,
which is as it were the support of the former. But it has been already
touched, that the matter in hand is not to know, whether Jesus Christ be true
in what he says, or whether he be able to do what he says: it were the
height of impiety, to doubt of the one or the other; The only point in hand
is, touching the sense of what he has spoken. This may here again be called
giving the change, through favor of the profound regard which ought to be had
for the great authority and power of our Lord. But is not Faith attentive unto
the word of him which says, Joh. 6.41, and 10.11. and 15.5, 8, 12, 10.7.4, 14.
Mat. 26. 1 Cor. 11.
I am the bread which came down from Heaven: I am the good Shepherd: I am the
Vine, the Light, the Gate, a Fountain of living water, etc. and who in the
institution of the Sacrament it self says, bread, and the fruit of the vine;
and who says, Drink ye all of it, and do this holy Ceremony in remembrance of
him, until he come, as the Apostle speaks. And yet for all that, the Faith of
the Church of Rome does not stop at the sound of these words; but she takes
the sense, either in the figure of the words themselves, or in the occasion,
and in the nature of the things.

The Bishop of Condom had before alleged the same reason, and almost in the
same terms upon the point of the reality: and in effect, suppose that these
words, this is my body, may be taken in a literal sense, they could not be at
all alleged for more than the real presence; but that nothing advantageth the
particular Doctrine of Transubstantiation. For these words do not give the
least intimation, that the substance of bread and wine vanish, or that they be
changed into the substance of the body and blood of Jesus Christ; but only
that the bread and wine, of which our Savior spoke, were his body and blood,
in the sense which our Savior himself intended.

Those of the Confession of Ausburg, have this common with the Roman Church,
that they also understand our Saviors words in a literal sense, for a real
presence: but in regard of the manner of this presence, which according to them
is the impanation, or consubstantiation, as they speak, that is to say, that
the two several substances, that of bread, and that of the body of Jesus Christ
are in the Sacrament, they take their argument as well from the name of bread
and wine, which the Scripture gives unto the sign after the consecration, as
from the other Topics, whether of Scripture, or of the senses and right reason.

Further, Transubstantiation being a Doctrine different from the real Presence,
which adds something unto it, and which regards properly the manner of this
Presence (which thing is the reason also, that the Bishop of Condom makes it an
Article distinct) it is necessary that the Bishop of Condom should seek other
reasons for this Doctrine than these words, This is my body; or that he should
say, that he finds Transubstantiation in these very words, by this consequence
which he draws thence, that the bread cannot be made the body of Jesus Christ,
but by this only way of changing one substance into another: in which cases he
abandons his principle, acknowledging that his Faith is not any longer so
attentive to the words of our Savior as not to call his reason to its
assistance, to help him to comprehend not the power, nor the authority of him
that speaks, but the import and entire sense of his words. And in this case
things being brought to this point, behold here a way open to dispute; We have
right to examine, whether the Bishop of Condom draws his consequence well or
ill. When it is said, the Bishop of Condom, we mean the Church of Rome: and
therefore it may yet be truly said here, as well as upon all the other
Articles, that the Bishop of Condom's Treatise, being very far from putting an
end unto disputes and objections, only gives us occasion to make new ones,
upon the most important points of Faith.

The third Assertion of the Bishop of Condom's upon this Article, is, that the
reality of the Eucharist, does not hinder the Eucharist's being a sign. But
this is again to change the terms of the Question. The Question is properly,
Whether if the Sacrament being the sign of the body and blood of Jesus Christ,
that does not hinder its being together the sign, and the thing signified. This
is the reason also, that the Bishop of Condom perceiving that he did not
proceed directly to the purpose, afterward changes the proposition, and
changes it so Strongly on the other side, that he resolves the sign to be a
sign of such nature, as to be so far from excluding the reality, that it
necessarily carries it with it: the reason is this, says he, that Jesus Christ
having said, this is my body, this is a sign that he is present.

We confess we find it difficult to understand this arguing of the Bishop of
Condom's; How can he say that the bread and the wine, which are the signs here
in question, are signs of such nature, that they are so far from excluding the
presence of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, as necessarily to carry it with
them? for this proposition has no foundation in the nature of bread and wine.
And for the reason which the Bishop of Condom adds, that, Jesus Christ having
said, this is my body is a sign that he is present, is it not only to play
with words, and to make therewith but an empty sound, and vain amusement. This
here again is called giving the change, and to prove the Question by the thing
it self in question. The Question is, Whether the bread and wine are together
the signs of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, and the body and blood of
Jesus Christ themselves. We say, that signs, Symbols, Seals, and Pledges, are
not the things themselves whereof they are the signs, Symbols, Seals, and
Pledges; and nothing is more conformable unto nature, and unto reason. The
Bishop of Condom says, that the bread and the wine being the body and blood of
Jesus Christ, as to what they have inward, this hinders not, but that they may
be signs, as to what they have outward, and sensible: but this is only to say
what is in question, and how does he prove it? This speech, this is my body, is
a sign that he is present; but here we treat of the signs of bread and wine,
and this speech it self is not the sign that you would have it to be, but only
by giving it the literal sense, which you give it, and this literal sense
alone, makes our first and principal question.

The fourth and last Assertion of the Bishop of Condom, upon the Article of
Transubstantiation, is touching the adoration of the Host. This Assertion is
without doubt, the most fundamen^al and most important point, that separates us
from the Church of Rome; because it is not only a doctrine, but (...) worship,
and a practice, wherein ^he question is, Whether we are to ^dore, or not to
adore: In which behalf we cannot mistake, without fal^ing into impiety, or into
Idolatry. Nevertheless, the Bishop of Condom ^^sseth swifter than lightning
over ^his point, without giving himself the ^ouble to confirm it by any proof.
All that he says is, pa. 126.
that the presence of (...) adorable an object being certified by the (...), we
scruple not at all, says he, to pay (...) ou^ adorations. This proposition is
conceived in so equivocal a manner, that the adoration may refer to the
^^esence, to the object, or to the sign (...) self: He intends without doubt,
the ^bject believed present under the sign. But why not scruple at all? for
these ^igns do not now certify any thing, ^ut what they certified in the times
of the Apostles themselves, and in all ^he following times of the purest
Christianity. Yet it is certain, that there is not one word of it in the
relation of the institution of the Sacrament, which shows, that the Apostles
did prostrate themselves in receiving of it, nor that they showed any mark of
adoration. Neither does it appear, that after the death of our Savior, the
same Apostles did adore the Sacrament. Acts 2.46.
It is only very plainly said, that they went breaking bread from house to
house.

The Authors of the Office of the Holy Sacrament, who have carefully collected
all the passages of Ecclesiastical Doctors of the twelve first Centuries,
which they thought might favor the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, touching
the Sacrament, have caused to be printed in great letters, all the passages
where there is any word that seems to intimate that at any time, or in any
place the Sacrament was adored; but they have neither found the word adore, nor
the thing signified by the word, in the three first Ages; and no more but the
word only, in three or four places, in all the following Ages, until toward
the Tenth Age. And which is more, in those very places the adoration does not
relate unto the Sacrament, but unto Jesus Christ, believed ^o be in Heaven:
whence they cannot conclude a sovereign adoration of the Sacrament, with
greater reason than they grant we have, when we allege ^o the Gentlemen of the
Church of Rome, an infinite number of places, where their Authors teach the
adoration of Images. If they will have it that in these places, where their
Authors speak of Images, this term of Adoration, does not signify a sovereign
and absolute Adoration, such as is given unto God, but only a veneration or
relative honor, as they speak, why will they not allow, that in those few
places where those other Authors speak of the Sacrament, the adoration,
whereof they speak, may not also be an honor, or ^eneration, which is rendered
unto the sacred Mysteries.

It is true, as the Bishop of Condom affirms, that the Church of Rome not
acknowledging any other substance in the Sacrament, but the body of Jesus
Christ we do not wonder, that those who are so persuaded, pay it their
adoration; but from thence it self, that they believe that adoration is a
necessary consequence of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and that they do
not find this consequence, neither in the Scripture, nor in the practice of the
Apostles, and the times which are not in question; there is much reason to
admire, that this same relation which the Gentlemen of the Roman Church do find
betwixt these two Doctrines, does not at least give them some suspicion of them
both; or rather, that it does not at last incline them to reject both the one
and the other.

XIV. The Sacrifice of the Mass.
The same thing may be said of the Sacrifice of the Mass, which the Bishop of
Condom also regards only as a consequence of the Real Presence, and of
Transubstantiation; for there is nothing like it to be found in the Scriptures,
nor in the first Ages of Christianity. In those first times they preached the
Gospel, and celebrated the Lords Supper, in the very same simplicity wherein it
was instituted: but they said neither Low Mass nor High Mass, nor Mass without
communicants, nor Mass unto such or ^uch an intention, nor for all these
particular ends for which Masses are said at present; nor Lastly, the Mass ^n a
Language not understood by the people. At this time all this is practiced in
the Church of Rome, and all the World knows, that in this Church the Sacrifice
of the Mass, is as the principal and most important part of their Religion.

The propitiatory Sacrifices were distinguished from the Eucharistical
Sacrifices, Heb. 13.15. Psalm. 50.14. Psalm. 4.6.
in that the former were to appease the Deity, and to make expi^ation of sins
by the blood of the Offerings; and the others, to render thanks to God for
blessings received, or to ^rave others. We do not deny, but that the Lords
Supper, or the Eucharist, may be called a Sacrifice, in a large and general
sense, as the Scripture says, a Sacrifice of prayer, and a Sacrifice of
praise, and that Alms deeds (...) a sacrifice: but the Church of Rome which
always forces things unto extremes, will have the Mass to be a true
sacrifice; We think says the Bishop of Condom, that this oblation makes God
become favorable, pa. 130.
and therefore it is that we call it propitiatory. Thus it is that there needs
but a thought and a word to make a propitiatory Sacrifice; and in this sort
Prayer it self, wherein we offer our selves unto God, and believe that we
render God favorable unto us, is a true propitiatory Sacrifice.

We will not here press what the Apostle says, Heb. 9.22.
that there is no true propitiation or remission of sins, without effusion of
blood; We will only observe, that it is a rule of Divine Right touching the
Sacrifices, that not only the Sacrifices, but the Altar it self is of greater
dignity, and of greater holiness than the oblation, and that the oblation it
self is sanctified by the Altar: here they will have a Sacrifice, where it is
known that the man, who is the Sacrificer, Exodus 29.37. Mat. 23.18, 19.
is but a worm of the Earth, the Altar a stone, or Table made by man's hand, and
the offering the proper Son of God, God himself.

If they who have read this part of the Bishop of Condom's Treatise, would
attentively cast their eyes at the same time upon those passages of the Gospel,
and of the Acts of the Apostles, which speak of the manner in which the
Sacrament of the Eucharist was instituted and celebrated, we are persuaded,
that if they never so little keep their minds free, and in a condition to judge
without prejudice, they will find so little agreement of the one with the
other, that it may be said they are two Gospels.

But this will appear yet more particularly, XV. The Epistle to the Hebrews.
if we rightly take the mind of the Apostle, in the Epistle which he writ unto
the Hebrews, the force whereof the Bishop of Condom endeavors here also to
elude.

To which purpose we need only to follow the rule, which the Bishop of Condom
has himself proposed to know whether 2 Doctrines are opposite, which is to see,
if the propositions of the Apostle do sufficiently agree with those of the
Bishop of Condom; For expedition sake, we will here mention only two of the
Apostles, both which speak almost the same thing, to see if the Doctrine of the
Bishop of Condom be conform thereto.

St. Paul comparing the ceremonies and the figures of the Old Covenant, with
the truth which is found in Jesus Christ, and designing to show, how the
sacrifices of the Old Testament were abolished by the sacrifices of Jesus
Christ, he says amongst other things, Heb. 9.^^.
that Jesus Christ is not entered into places made with hands, but that he is in
Heaven, where he appears for us before the face of God. The Bishop of Condom
teaches on the contrary, that Jesus Christ is every hour upon the altars made
with hands, and that it is there, that he appears for us before the face of
God. The Bishop of Condom thinks to take away the opposition, in supposing that
Jesus Christ is present in Heaven, such as he was seen to ascend, vested in his
ordinary qualities, and that he is upon the altars, in another state which they
call Sacram^ntal, or ^n the manner of a spirit; whereas St. Paul speaks one^y
of this first manner of presence in Heaven, and that excludes this other sort
of presence upon Earth.

But in the first place, this is to answer by the thing it self which is in
question. To be able to speak thus, it were necessary to show us clearly, that
the Apostle knew and believed this last sort of presence of Jesus Christ upon
Earth: and in the second place, if the Apostle had believed that Jesus Christ
had been present in the Sacrament at all times, when his Supper was celebrated,
presenting himself for us before the face of God, how could the Apostle have
said so absolutely as he does, that Jesus Christ enters not into holy places
made with hands, but that he is in Heaven, where he appears for us, without
saying, at least something that might have distinguished the two different
manners of appearing at the same time in Heaven, and upon the altars, and that
the one does not at all exclude the other? This cannot be conceived. The other
proposition of the Apostles, is, Heb. 9.25.
that Jesus Christ does not offer himself often, for then must he often have
suffered: The Bishop of Condom on the contrary says, that Jesus Christ offers
himself every day, because that to offer himself, there is no need that he
should dye any more. There is nothing more opposite than these two
propositions, and the reasons upon which they are grounded, both one and the
other: not to offer himself often, because it would be necessary he should dye;
to offer himself every day, because it is not necessary he dye.

It is in vain for the Bishop of Condom, here again to hope to remove this
contrariety, by asserting two manners of offering himself unto God; the one in
suffering death, and the other in putting himself only under the signs of
death, and supposing that the Apostle only speaks of the former, and that he
means Jesus Christ does not offer himself to dye often. For in the first place,
this is again to answer the very thing that is in question. It were necessary,
I say, to have shown, that the Apostle had acknowledged these two different
ways of offering himself, the one in suffering death and the other without
dying: but on the contrary, the Apostle speaks absolutely, and without
restriction, that Jesus Christ does not offer himself often. And what he adds,
that otherwise it had been necessary that Jesus Christ should often have dyed,
does not make a part of the Apostles proposition, but only the reason of his
proposition; otherwise the Apostles proposition would amount unto this, that
Jesus Christ does not dye often, because he does not dye often. If the Apostle
had believed, that Jesus Christ does yet offer himself every day for us, it is
evident, that he would not have said in such absolute terms, that he does not
offer himself often, or that he would have said something that would have
showed these two different manners of offering himself, the one in dying, and
the other in putting himself only under the sign, or under the coverts of
death, as the Bishop of Condom speaks.

It appears, that we must wilfully shut our Eyes to be able not to see, that
all the doctrine of the sacrifice of the Mass, is directly opposite unto that
of St. Paul. Nevertheless the weakness, or the variety of the mind of man is
such, that even from this it self, the Bishop of Condom takes occasion yet to
triumph upon this point, desiring us to make serious reflection upon his
Doctrine, and upon the order, which he says, providence holds in drawing us
insensibly nearer unto the Roman Church.

XVI. Reflections of the Bishop of Condom upon the foregoing Doctrine. pa. 145,
146, etc.
This reflection reduces it self unto this, that the Real presence is the
foundation of the sacrifice of the Mass, of the adoration of the Host, and of
all the other consequences of this Doctrine, that providence has permitted,
that the Lutherans have retained the reality; and that in the last place, the
Calvinists have declared, that this belief of the Lutherans has no poison in
it, neither does overthrow the foundations of Faith, and that it ought not to
break communion betwixt Brethren: so that if the Lutherans do reject the
sacrifice and the adoration, and do not believe Jesus Christ to be present, but
only in the very moment that they do receive the Sacrament, it is because they
do not so thoroughly consider the consequences of the Reality, as the
Roman Catholics do: that our Doctors themselves agree, that the Doctrine of
the Roman Church is more consequent in this point, than that of the Lutherans;
and that in fine, no subtilty of the Ministers can ever persuade people of
right judgment, that maintaining the Reality which is the most important, and
the most difficult point, we ought not to maintain the rest. In the first
Edition it was, that the Ministers could never persuade, that he who should
maintain the Reality, might not easily digest the rest.

The Bishop of Condom has already in the Entrance on his Treatise, objected
against us, what he here again says of the Lutherans, though in another
regard, and we have there also shown the difference betwixt their Error, and
that of the Church of Rome, which is in a word, that that of the Lutherans is
but an error of belief upon one point, and is not followed by any evil
practice; whereas that of the Roman Church draws after it the Sacrifice of the
Mass, the adoration of the Host, which are worships and practices, whereof the
consequence has been already set forth.

We will only add in this case, that besides that the Bishop of Condom's
argument here is not good, and that there is on the contrary an equivocation,
or change of sense upon the word Reality (which makes a kind of Sophisme) the
Reality or the Real presence, such as the Church of Rome believes it, by a
change of the substance of bread into that of the body of Jesus Christ,
immediately after these words this is my body are pronounced, is the foundation
of the Sacrifice of the Mass, and of the adoration of the Host. This is the
sense of the Bishop of Condom's first proposition, upon which we have nothing
to say. God, says he, has permitted, that the Lutherans continue firm in the
belief of the Reality. This is his second proposition, and here the
equivocation begins, because it is not true, that the Lutherans continue firm
in the belief of the Reality, such as the Roman Church supposes it. They
believe not the presence of the body of Jesus Christ, but only in the use of
the Sacrament, as the Bishop of Condom himself affirms, that is to say, in the
moment that they receive it: this is the reason that they admit not the
Sacrifice of the Mass, and adore not the Sacrament, believing that it is not
there that Jesus Christ will be adored, and that it is sufficient, that in
receiving the Sacrament they address their adoration unto Jesus Christ himself,
without circumscription of place, as they speak, that is to say, without
considering him precisely as being in the bread.

The Bishop of Condom goes on, God has even permitted, that the Calvinists
have declared that this Doctrine of the Reality has no poison in it, and ought
not to cause a separation amongst Brethren. This is the Bishop of Condom's
third proposition, where one may see the continuance of the equivocation upon
the word Reality: for it is not of the belief of the Reality in general, that
we have declared that it has no poison in it, and that it ought not to break
communion; but it is in particular of the belief of the Lutherans, in the terms
in which they set it down. "Therefore ought the Calvinists also to maintain the
Sacrifice of the Mass, and the adoration of the Host, as natural consequences
of the Reality. This is the consequence of the Bishop of Condom's argument: but
every one sees that it is a false consequence, and besides the Question. This
falsness is caused by the equivocation of the word, and by the ill manner of
reasoning; for the Reality of the Lutherans which we allow of, is not the
foundation of the Sacrifice of the Mass, nor of the adoration of the Host, as
is the Reality of the Roman Church.

Upon the whole, supposing here again, that the Doctrine of the Church of Rome
touching the Reality, may ^^em more consequent than that of ^he Lutherans, as
the Bishop of Con^^m says that our Doctors do a^ree, that is to say,
supposing that we once believe the Real presence of ^e body of Jesus Christ in
the Sacrament, we have reason to believe, and to practice the Sacrifice of the
Mass, and to adore the Host; if the Doctrine of the Reality it self be an
Error, whether it be understood after the manner of the Lutherans, or after
the manner of the Church of Rome, as it must also be supposed, according to us
it is not a paradox, nor (...) subtilty of the Ministers, to say, an Error
which seems more consequent ^s not more tolerable.

On the contrary, the more consequent an Error is, the more natural also is it
that it leads from the truth. For example, a man that goes out of the right
way, but after some digression, returns back into it suddenly again by another
way, does far less go astray, than he that having once taken a by way, does a
long time go on in a contrary way, how straight soever that way seems to be.
Who can reasonably doubt, but that the Error of the Manichees had been more
tolerable, if they had rested at the belief, that God gave particular marks of
his presence in the body of the Sun, and of the Moon, and that for all that,
they had not adored the Sun, nor the Moon; or, that those that by Error should
believe, that there were some Divinity in Images, but yet would not adore them,
not believing that the Deity would be adored in the Images, were not less
Idolaters, or less faulty, than those, in whom the motions of the heart, did
follow the Error of the mind.

But to conclude, what must be well distinguished here, is, that we do not
receive nor approve the belief of the Lutherans, touching the Reality. In
sum, we do only endure it, and blame them for it, and we have not admitted
them into our communion, but through a spirit of peace, and of charity, when
they have desired to be thereinto admitted, and according to the conditions
mentioned in the Act of our Synod.

N^w although the Bishop of Condom seems only here to demand our
condescendence, to endure also the belief of the Church of Rome, it is most
certain, that in effect he intends all along, that we should receive this
belief, such as it is, and that we should profess it, as it is professed, in
the Church of Rome. In a word, his design is, that the Reality, or
Transubstantiation, is the foundation of the Sacrifice of the Mass, and of the
adoration of the Host; that both the one and the other being consequences of
the Reality, they should no more trouble our mind than the Reality it self; and
that to conclude, we should receive this Doctrine altogether, and not only
swallow it down, but also digest it.

There remains but one Article more of the Bishop of Condom's Exposition, XVII.
The Communion under both kinds.
touching the Eucharist to examine. The title is conceived in these terms, The
communion under both kinds, as if it were the Doctrine of the Church of Rome,
that we ought to communicate under both kinds, of bread, and wine; in stead of
saying, The taking away the Cup, or the communion under one kind, which is
properly the thing meant. It is plain here, that they find it troublesome to
say the thing as it is, because it cannot be said without showing at first
sight, that they have taken away something of the institution of our Lord.

However the case stands, the Bishop of Condom only considers this Article as
a consequence of the Doctrine of the Real presence; a thing which is so far
from being a reason to make us to like it, that it cannot but more and more
increase the just a version which we have for the Doctrine it self, upon which
are built so many evil consequences. Mat. 26, 27, 28.
The Bishop of Condom makes not the least mention of these words of our
Savior, Drink ye all of this, for this is the blood of the New Testament which
was shed for many, which yet are words most essential to this subject, and
which contain not only an express command to all, to drink of the Cup, but
also the reason of the command, which is, that the blood of the Lord was shed
for many.

Let the Bishop of Condom tell us here, why he makes so much reflection upon the
former words of the Institution, and that he makes none at all upon this, as if
they had not not all proceeded equally out of the mouth of our Savior.

What is the reason, that he takes the former according to the letter, and that
he takes not these also so, which are neither less express, nor less clear? And
wherefore, in fine, is his Faith, which is attentive to the authority of our
Lord, when he does but just begin a proposition, and does as yet ordain
nothing, wherefore (I say) is not the same Faith attentive to the same
authority of our Lord, when he does not only propose, but command, and when he
commands that we should all drink ot the blood of the New Testament?

At other times they pay us with this escape, that in the Institution of the
Eucharist, Jesus Christ did only speak to his Disciples, and that that did not
concern the people: but they have at last sufficiently seen, that it was
needful to seek other excuses, because that there, as well as almost in all
other places, the Disciples did represent the body of the faithful, and that
Jesus Christ saying, that his blood was shed for many, he intended that all
those, for whom it was shed, should have part in this Sacrament.

Behold here what the Bishop of Condom puts in the place of it; Jesus Christ,
says he, being really present in the Sacrament, the grace and blessing is not
tied unto the sensible forms but unto the proper substance of his flesh, which
is living and quickening, because of the Divinity which is united unto it.
Therefore it is, that all those who believe the Reality, ought not to be
troubled to communicate under one kind only, because they thereby receive all
that is essential to this Sacrament, with a fullness so much the more certain,
in that the separation of the body and blood not being real, as it has been
said, there is received entirely and without division, him that only is able
to satisfy us.

We need only to observe at the first view, how these expressions are wrapped
up, to discern how wide this Doctrine is from the simplicity of the Gospel; the
Bishop of Condom would say, in a word, that the body is not without the blood,
and that he that believes he receives the body, ought to believe that he
receives the blood also, under one and the same form, by reason of what they
call concomitance, that is to say, that the blood does accompany the body.

But, in the first place, this is constantly to suppose what is in question, to
wit, that the body of Jesus Christ is really under the form of bread, and by
consequence, the reasons which we have against the Doctrine of the Real
presence, do directly oppose this particular doctrine of taking away the Cup.

2. Who has given this right to the Roman Church, to seek for reasons to take
away so considerable a part of the Institution of our Lord?

3. And to conclude, what ground has the Bishop of Condom to conclude as he
does, that the separation of the body and blood is not real; for our Lord does
separate them in the Institution; he says of the bread apart, that it is his
body broken for us; and of the wine apart, that it is his blood shed for us:
and he also commands severally that we eat of the bread, and drink of the Cup.
The Bishop of Condom says, without any more ado, that the separation of the
body and blood is not real, and if any would know how he proves it, he adds
coldly, pa. 132.
as it was said. That is elsewhere, (upon occasion then also) he insinuated by
the way that this separation is mystical and figurative, without giving the
least reason for it, any more than he does here; and it is enough according to
him, to make this separation not to be real, that he insinuate it, without more
ado, with an as it has been said.

Nevertheless, if the bread and wine be really made the body and blood of our
Lord, according to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, by what reason can one
part of the Institution be taken to be real, and the other part pretended to be
mystical and figurative? Or rather, if the separation of the body and blood be
only in the mystery and figure, wherefore will they not also grant, that the
bread and the wine also is but the mystery and the figure of the body and blood
of Jesus Christ? for there is no more reason for the one, than for the other.
Our Savior has said this is my body which was broken for you; if these words
this is my body, ought to be understood in a proper and real sense, there
cannot any good reason be given, wherefore these other words that follow, to
wit, which is broken for you, ought not also be taken in the same sense as
those that went before: but that the first, should be understood in a proper
sense, and they that follow in a mystical and figurative sense is unreasonable.
For as our Savior said that the bread is his body, he says that this body is
broken; it is the same Lord speaks: that is in a word, if it must be understood
that the bread is really made the body of Jesus Christ, it cannot be understood
but that it is also made his body really broken, I mean his dead body, and his
body really separated from his blood. So that what way soever we take the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, it manifestly contradicts it self: for either
the bread is not really the body of Jesus Christ; or if it be his body, it is
his body broken, and in a state of death; which cannot be said without impiety,
because our Lord is risen from the dead, and death has no more dominion over
him. And Lastly, suppose that his proper body were in the Sacrament, in a state
of death, and separate from his blood, this separation being real, it could not
be said, as says the Bishop of Condom, that the Sacrament is received fully,
and without division, under one kind only; nor by consequence that the Cup
ought to be taken away.

The Bishop of Condom not being able to justify this retrenchment, uses two
reasons to endeavor to make it indureable. The first is, that it is not at all
through contempt, that the Church reduces the Faithful to one kind only; but
on the contrary, that it is to hinder the irreverencies, that the confusion and
negligence of the people had caused in the last Ages, reserving unto her self
the re-establishment of the Communion under both kinds, according as it should
be most useful for increasing of peace and unity.

But is not this in some sort to say, that our Savior did not foresee these
Irreverencies, when he commanded we should all drink of the Cup; or, that
foreseeing them, he was so far from preventing them, that he authorized them by
this Commandment.

These Irreverencies were much more to be feared in the Apostles times, and in
the first Ages of Christianity, than in the time when this innovation was made:
for in the first times, the Christians were persecuted, they communicated as
they could from house to house, and communicated at the holding the Feasts
which they called Feasts of Charity. The Apostle complains of disorders
committed in those Feasts, saying, 1 Cor. 11.20.
that was not to eat the Supper of the Lord, and yet the Apostle never thought
of taking away the Cup because of these Irreverencies.

They must be very much prejudicate, who see not the true reason why neither
Jesus Christ, nor the Apostle, nor the Church during the space of above a
thousand years, ever thought of taking away the Cup, and that yet the Church of
Rome at last be thought her self to take it away.

The Bishop of Condom gives this reason himself unawares: in effect, says he,
the taking away the Cup, or the communion under one kind, is a consequence of
Transubstantiation. Before Transubstantiation was believed, there was a great
regard had for the Sacraments of the body and blood of Jesus Christ: but the
Irreverencies were not of the same consequence, nor so scandalous as they have
been, since it was caught that the bread and the wine are no longer the same
which they are seen to be, but that they are the proper body, and the proper
blood of Jesus Christ; for it is well known, that it is only since
Transubstantiation has passed into an Article of Faith, that the Cup also has
been taken away.

Therefore also whatever hopes the Bishop of Condom seems to give, that the
Communion under the Form of the wine may be re-establisht for the benefit of
peace and reunion, in all appearance we are to a wait a long time this
re-establishment, if it be at all to be expected, whilst the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation shall subsist. The benefit of reunion, which hinderd not
but that the Council of Trent did elude this re-establishment in a time, when
it was demanded with so much instance, will never in all likelihood prevail
against the inconvenience of Irreverencie, which will always continue: that is
to say, it will always be a great scandal, ever and anon to see spilt that
which is believed to be the proper blood of the Lord; and the simple reflection
which may be made on this consequence, may alone be capable to open at last the
eyes of the people upon the Doctrine of Transubstantiation it self.

The other consideration which the Bishop of Condom brings for the taking away
the Cup, is this, that he says our own Synods have not judged that in the
Lords Supper we ought to deny the bread unto those, who "by a natural aversion,
cannot suffer "the smell or taste of wine; and that by consequence, the
communion under both kinds is not essential unto the Sacrament, and that it is
in the power of the Church, to give therein only one.

But who sees not the extreme difference, that there is betwixt this useage of
our Churches, and that which the Church of Rome ordains and practices, and that
there can no good consequence be drawn from the one unto the other? Our Synods
are so far from allowing to themselves the authority of taking away any thing
from the Institution of our Savior, or of making any the least change therein,
that they have kept themselves so religiously to his words, as to have made it
a question, whether the bread should be given unto them who only through this
natural aversion, which they cannot overcome, forbear to take the sign of the
wine; and they give not the bread it self, but in the manner which the Bishop
of Condom reports, causing them who cannot drink wine to make a protestation,
that it is not through disrespect, and obliging them to put the Cup to their
lips to avoid scandal.

The Church of Rome on the contrary, takes away the Cup from whole Nations,
that desire it, reseraving his advantage to the Clergy lone, or to Princes, or
other considerable persons whom she thinks good to gratify: and all this
apparently as a new means to increase and confirm her authority over Princes,
and people.

THE SIXTH PART.
Behold now at length, the Question of the Eucharist dispatched: we leave it
unto those, who are pleased to take the pains of reading this Answer, to make
reflection themselves what the importance of the thing requires. I was unwilling
to have insisted so long time upon it, but this Article alone makes us the
moiety of the Bishop of Condom's Treatise: it was impossible to clear all, and
to be shorter. We shall make a speedier dispatch with the three points which
remain, to wit, Tradition, the authority of the Church, and the authority of
the Pope; as well because they are general matters upon which there are express
Volumes, as also because the Bishop of Condom himself passes very lightly over
the Questions of Tradition, and of the authority of the Pope; and that Lastly,
^t is known, that these three Questions will be treated of thoroughly by a
better hand, in a Work which will ^hortly be published, and particularly the
Question of the Church, which is the chiefest, upon which in a manner depend
the two others.

We will confine our selves here to examine in a few words, what the Bishop of
Condom lays down upon each of these three Articles, and we are persuaded, that
we cannot better confirm our Doctrine, in opposition unto that of the Church of
Rome, than by showing how weak and vain are the reasons of a person ^f so much
address and reputation as ^t is.

In the first place, as to Tradition, XVIII. The Word written and unwritten
The Bishop of Condom here again ^akes an indirect advantage in ^he
expressions, in calling it as he ^oth, the unwritten Word; a name that
prejudges the Question, by the thing it self which is in question. He ^ntends
to suppose thereby, that the Traditions of the Church of Rome, which we admit
not at all, are nothing else but the very Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and of his
Apostles, as well as the Holy Scriptures, with this only difference, that the
one was put into Paper by the Evangelists and by the Apostles; and that the
other was committed to the memory of the first faithful, from whom the Church
of Rome pretends that they have been delivered from hand to hand unto our Age;
and by consequence, that we ought to receive Traditions with the same Faith and
submission as the Scriptures: for so it is, that the Bishop of Condom gives us
to understand in two places, pa. 159, and 160. Sess. 4, etc. Can. Script.
and that the Council of Trent it self decides it, in proper terms.

Now we have no thoughts of denying, that what our Lord and his Apostles said
by word of mouth, ought to be of the same authority, as that which the same
Apostles afterward left in writing; that is not at all the question: but we
say, that our Lord having put it into the hearts of the Evangelists and of the
Apostles to write the Gospel which they preached, these holy Doctors being
immediately directed by the Holy Spirit, have not done the thing imperfectly or
by halves; that by consequence at the least they did not omit any thing
essential unto Christian Religion; and that Lastly, their writings do contain
all that is necessary for the Service of God, and for the rule of our manners.

St. Paul, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17
as yet regarding principally the Scripture of the Old Testament, said unto
Timothy, that the Scripture is proper for instruction, Mat. 1^ 3.9.
for correction, for reproof, that the man of God may be perfect and
accomplished unto every good work. By greater reason, both the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament being conjoined, are able to do all this.

The same Scripture of the New Testament, speaks in diverse places against
Traditions, without ever intimating that there were some good, which were to be
distinguished from the bad; and in one only place, which is that whereof the
Bishop of Condom makes mention, Mar. 7.8, 9, 13. Colos. 2.8. 2 These 2.15.
the Apostle exhorting the Thessalonians to hold fast the Traditions which they
had received of him, whether it were by mouth when he was present with them, or
by Epistle which he had since writ to them, says not one word which intimates,
that the things which he had taught them by mouth, were different from those
which he had written unto them: but he gives to understand all along, that it
was one and the same Gospel which he preached unto all, to them who were
present by voice, and to them that were absent by writing.

In sum, whosoever will take the pains with any attention to read St. Paul's
Two Epistles to the Thessalonians, where he speaks unto them of the
instructions which he gave them, and of the manner of his having preached the
Gospel unto them, shall find there nothing at all, no more than in the Gospel
it self, which has the least resemblance to prayer for the dead, to Purgatory,
to the invocation of Saints, to the adoration of Images, nor in fine, to any of
the Traditions which are in question betwixt the Gentlemen of the Church of
Rome, and us.

It were an easy matter here, De Doct. Christ. li. 2. c. 9. and li. 3. cont.
lit. Petili. c. 6. Hieron. ad Hell. vi. pa. 315, and 366. Chrysos. Hono. 3. in
2. ad Cor.
to strengthen our selves with the Testimony of St. Austin, and of several
other Fathers, to prove what we have said, that the Scripture does contain all
that is necessary either for the Service of God, or for the rule of our
actions: but besides that this were to engage in a particular Controversy
touching the judgment of the Fathers, which is not the design of this Answer,
we think that amongst Christians, it were in some fort to prejudice the Dignity
and Divinity of this same Holy Scripture, to doubt that its proper light were
not sufficient to make known its perfection. Only let us see what the Bishop
of Condom produces for the unwritten Word. Jesus Christ (says he) having
founded his Church upon preaching, pa. 158.
the unwritten Word was the first rule of Christianity, and when thereto the
Scriptures of the New Testament were added, this Word did not thereby lose its
authority. We must observe here at first, that this is to speak in some sort
improperly to say, that Jesus Christ founded the Church upon preaching and not
rather by preaching: Preaching is a means, and not a foundation: the means may
cease, the foundation ought to be durable. And, no more is it true, that the
unwritten Word was the first rule of Christianity: It is the Scripture it self
of the Old Testament, which was the first, and the eldest rule, and the
foundation of the Faith of Christians. It is the Old Testament, that not only
contains the Commandments of the Law, which is the permanent and unchangeable
rule of our Duty, as well toward God, as toward men, but likewise all the
figures, all the promises, and all the prophesies touching the Messiah, the
time, and the place of his Birth, and all the circumstances of his death. The
Gospel, as all the world knows, is not the abrogating, but the fulfilling of
the Law; therefore it is, that we see that Jesus Christ and the Apostles,
grounded their preaching upon the Scriptures of the Old Testament. Jesus Christ
continually refers the Jews to the Law, and to the Testimony. It is written,
says he, in your Law, etc. Joh. 5.39, and 46. Romans 1.
Search the Scriptures diligently, for in them ye think ye have eternal life:
And the Apostle St. Paul to the Romans: Paul a servant of Jesus Christ, etc.
separated unto the Gospel, etc. which was promised by the prophets in the Holy
Scriptures; concerning his Son Jesus Christ, etc. who was made of the seed of
David, according to the Flesh: and so he begins his very Epistle to the
Hebrews; God, who at sundry times spoke unto the Fathers by the prophets, etc.
In fine, his first Chapter, and the whole Epistle, is nothing else but one
citation of Exodus, of Chronicles, of Samuel, Job, Psalms, and the other Books
of the Old Testament.

It is besides a very improper manner of speaking, to say, that when the
Scriptures of the New Testament were joined unto the unwritten Word, this word
for all that did not thereby lose its authority; as if the Doctrine of the
Gospel, such as we have it now in writing, were an accessory, or were a thing
different from that unto which they pretend it was joined; or that that which
was not written were more considerable, than that which we have in the Sacred
Books: for this expression of the Bishop of Condom's, that the Scriptures were
joined to the unwritten word, suggests all these imaginations, in stead of
saying the thing properly as it is. He should have said, that the unwritten
Word having been put into writing, or the Scripture of the New Testament having
succeeded preaching, this Divine Word not only not lost its authority, but on
the contrary was corroborated, in that it does not any longer depend on the
memory, nor the will of men naturally subject unto Error.

For upon the main, the Bishop of Condom pretends, that the Holy Scripture
contains only the lesser part of Christian Religion; and that on the contrary,
Tradition does contain the principal part. At least his pretense is, that there
may be some particular Doctrines which are not to be had but by Tradition,
which ought not for their not being in Scripture therefore to lose their
authority.

As for any thing else, the Gentlemen of the Church of Rome are so little firm
to their principle of Tradition, or at least they so well acknowledge, that
Tradition cannot go equal with Scripture, though the Council has been pleased
to determine the contrary, that when they are pressed touching particular
Traditions, which are in question betwixt them and us, there is scarce one, but
they endeavor to support by the authority of Scripture, whether it be by
interpreting it in their sense, or by the consequences which they draw thence.
When they treat of Tradition in general, they maintain it with excess,
comparing it to Scripture, as if it went through all Religion; and when they
treat of their Doctrines in particular, they would make the World believe, that
there is scarce any one amongst them, which is not founded on the very
Scripture.

But if we would know nevertheless, how the Bishop of Condom proves, that the
particular ponits of Tradition are the very Doctrine of the Apostles,
unwritten, it may be at first we would believe, that he had in hand some
Author either of the age of the Apostles themselves, or at least of the
following age, which speaks clearly and in express words, we have received
such or such a Doctrine from the mouth of the Apostles; or we hold it from
those who have received it themselves from the Apostles own mouth: for who can
doubt, but that there should be at least some formal and express Testimony, to
establish by the sole authority of Tradition, a Religious Worship, or any
Important Doctrine, that should bind men's Consciences.

But in conclusion, behold here what the Bishop of Condom gives us in stead of
such a proof: pa. 159, 160.
the certain sign (says he) that a Tradition comes from the Apostles, is, when
it is embraced by all the Christian Churches, without possible finding out the
beginning of it, etc. And a little after, It not being possible, adds he, that
a Doctrine received from the beginning of the Church, can proceed from any
other origin, but that of the Apostles.

The Bishop of Condom indefinitely lays down this Maxim, not daring to apply
the same unto any of the Traditions of the Church of Rome, as knowing that this
character, indefinite as it is, does not suit with them.

To judge rightly of his argument, and of the consequence which he would draw
from thence, this is the order into which we ought to put his propositions.

It is impossible, says he, that a Doctrine received from the beginning of the
Church, should proceed from any other origin but from the Apostles; A Doctrine
embraced by all the Christian Churches, whereof the beginning cannot be showed,
is necessarily from the beginning of the Church: Therefore such a Doctrine
proceeds from the Apostles. Now the Traditions of the Church of Rome, are
Doctrines embraced by all the Christian Churches, without possibility of
showing their beginning; therefore, they proceed from the Apostles. These are
the Bishop of Condom's propositions, in the order wherein they ought to be: and
in this order it is plainly evident, that there is not one of them that is
absolutely true, or rather that is not false, in the terms in which it is
conceived.

In the first place, this proposition is not true, that it is not possible that
a Doctrine received from the beginning o^ the Church, should come from any
other origin but from the Apostles, except it be showed that it was then
received g^nerally of all the Churches, and that the Apostles did not oppose
themselves against it; for the Apostles themselves testify, that in their
times the Mystery of iniquity began to work, 2 These. 2.7. 1 Timothy 1.7.
that there were false Teachers amongst the Christians, and by consequence
false Doctrines: so that it was no way impossible, that these same Doctrines
were not followed, or revived in aftertimes, ^s were many Heresies, which
appeared in the first and second age of Christianity.

But the second proposition is yet less true, that a Doctrine embraced by all
the Christian Churches, whereof the beginning is not to be found, should
necessarily be from the beginning of the Church, or that it should come from
the Apostles, which is the same thing in the Bishop of Condom's sense; for
those that make any reflection upon the manner by which changes come in, either
in the Laws or Customs of States, or in the Worship and Doctrines of Religion,
very well know, that the time and original of these changes cannot always be
shown. Much less therefore should it be said, that these Establishments must
necessarily be from the first foundation of these States or Religion. Who could
show the Original of all the false Traditions of the Jews? Should it therefore
be said, that they were all from the beginning of the Jewish Church, or the
unwritten Word of Moses? Amongst Christians themselves, for example, the use of
giving the Sacrament unto little children, was without doubt generally
observed, De pec. in rit. and remi. ii. 1. ca. 20, and 24. Et l. 3. contr:
Julian: c: 4: S^ss: cap: 4:
because St. Austin openly has taught it as an Apostolical Tradition, that it
was absolutely necessary, and that without it, little children could not be
saved. The Council of Trent says upon this subject, that the Fathers which
followed this custom, ought to show their reasons for it; nevertheless it is
one of those Doctrines, whereof we cannot show the beginning; and for all that
none dares to say at this time, that it was received from the beginning of the
Church, or that it came from the Apostles; otherwise the Council of Trent would
not have dared to abrogate and abolish it, as it has done.

In fine, the third proposition which the Bishop of Condom does suppose in his
Argument, is yet less true than the two former, namely that the Traditions of
the Church of Rome which separate us from her communion, are Doctrines embraced
by all the Christian Churches, without possible showing the beginning thereof.
Can the Church of Rome show any thing near this, of any one of those Traditions
which are in dispute betwixt us? for example, of Purgatory, of the invocation
of Saints, of worshipping of Images, of Relics, of the Cross, of auricular
confession, of Indulgences, of the Pope's Supremacy, of private Masses, of the
adoration of the Host, of the communion under one kind, of religious Worship in
an unknown Tongue; or in fine, of any of the particular Doctrines which
separate us from the Roman Church? For not to speak of the present time in
which it is evidently known, that there are many of the Christian Churches, as
well in the East as the West, which do not embrace all the Doctrines of the
Church of Rome, it is also a thing most certain and notorious, that it is not
in the power of the Church of Rome to show, I will not say of all these
Doctrines in general, but of any one of them alone, that it was embraced, not
only in all times, but scarcely at any time, by all the Christian Churches.

On the contrary, there are a great number of these Traditions of the Church of
Rome, whereof their first beginnings may precisely enough be shown: for
example, the worshipping of Saints and Images, auricular confession, the
communion under one kind, and many others: and of all in general, excepting
that of praying for the dead, whereof there is some mention to be found toward
the latter end of the second Age. Our Authors have very solidly made appear,
that there is no footstep of them to be found in the three first.

Cajetan. Thom. P^r^z. Peron Beat. Rhen. Gab. Biel, Roffen-Lombard, etc. Gab.
Biel, lect. 57. upon the Canon of the Mass, Quia sine du bio Ecclesia habet
Spiritum sponsi sui Christi, and ideo non errans.
The most knowing of the Church of Rome themselves, do not dissent as to the
greatest number of Traditions, as has been noted before, of worshipping of
Saints, of Images, of confession of Purgatory, and indulgences; and they
maintain not these sorts of Doctrines, but by the general Maxim of the
authority of the Church of Rome, which they pretend cannot err,

Behold therefore the Bishop of Condom's argument overthrown in all its parts,
seeing that the Maxim which he lays down is not true, (which is, that all the
Doctrines, embraced by all the Christian Churches, whereof the first beginning
cannot be shown, proceed from the Apostles) and that the application which he
does make is less true, which is, that all the Traditions of the Church of
Rome, are Doctrines embraced by all the Christian Churches, without possibility
of showing their beginning and by consequence this conclusion, whether it be of
the Bishop of Condom, or of the Council of Trent, far from being true and
orthodox, is a very strange principle, that we ought to receive the Traditions
(even those which do separate us from the Church of Rome) with the same
respect, and the same submission, as the Holy Scripture.

XIX. The authority of the Church.
After Tradition follows the authority of the Church. The Bishop of Condom does
not clearly explain wherein this authority consists; nor what he understands by
the Church, which should have this authority; whether this authority should
have any bounds, or whether it should have none, or whether it be the Pope with
the Council, or without the Council, or the Council alone, in which this
authority does reside; for we also have our Churches, and our Governors, and
we believe that we should not only keep order, but all that does conduce for
the maintaining of unity and concord; and the Question here as elsewhere, is
oftentimes but of the more or less.

What the Bishop of Condom says in this case, is reducible to four principal
propositions. The first, that it cannot be, but by the authority of the Church,
that we receive the whole body of the Holy Scriptures. The second, that it is
of the Church, that we learn Tradition, and by Tradition the true sense of the
Scriptures. The third, that it is the Church, and her Pastors assembled, which
should determine controversies that divide the Faithful, and that when once
they have resolved any matter, we ought to submit unto their decisions, without
examining anew that which they have resolved. The fourth and last, that this
authority is so necessary, that after having denied it, we have been forced to
establish it amongst us by our discipline, by the Acts of our Synods, and by
our practice in things pertaining to Faith it self.

As to the first, we agree with the Bishop of Condom, that the Christian Church
is the Guardian of the Scriptures, and that as she has received the Law and
the Prophets from the Jewish Church, so it is from the Chirstian Church, that
the Faithful receive all the Scriptures as well of the Old, as of the New
Testament.

We even acknowledge that the authority of the Church is a lawful reason, which
at first makes us look upon the Scripture as a revelation from Heaven: but we
do deny, not only that it is merely by the authority of the Church, but that
it is principally by her authority, that we receive the Scripture as the Divine
Word.

The Scripture is full of Testimonies which it self gives of its Divinity, and
of the efficacious power which it has upon hearts, by the operation of the
Holy Ghost.

It is indeed somewhat injurious to this the Divinity of the Scripture, and to
its efficacy, and somewhat contradictory, when it is contended that a matter
Divine should not be received, but by dependence upon an humane authority.

It is, as if one would say, that it is yet at this day only by the authority
of the Jewish Church, that Christians have received the whole body of the
Scriptures of the Old Testament, because it is by her hand that we have
received them; though upon the whole, the authority of this peopel, chosen of
God, may be a reasonable ground of the Divinity of the Scriptures.

Truth has its proper character even in humane matters, which makes us
acknowledge it for its self, when once it is set before our eyes, and not for
the authority of those who propose it to us: By greater reason Heavenly truths,
like the Sun, manifest themselves by their proper splendor.

It Is a common speech upon this subject, that a man asleep, being told the Sun
is up, presently believes it is day, upon what is told him; but when once he
sees it is day, he believes it not any longer, because he was told so, but
because he sees it; and he does not so much as dream any longer that it was
told him so.

The Gentlemen of the Church of Rome will not agree, that it is as clear that
the Scripture is the Word of God, as it is clear that it is day, when the Sun
is above our Horizon; and this is it, which the Bishop of Condom gives to
understand in terms positive enough, when he speaks of us, that whatever we
say, he believes that it is principally the authority of the Church, page 16.
that determines us to reverence as Divine Books, the Song of Songs, which has
so few sensible marks of prophetical inspiration; the Epistle of St. James,
which Luther rejected; and that of St. Jude, which might be suspected, by
reason of some Apocryphal Books, which are therein alleged.

But how dare any man rebate, or decry, as I may so speak, the brightness and
force of the Word of God? Why says he absolutely, that the Song of Songs has
so few marks of the inspiration of the Holy Spirit? And to what end here again
proposes he scruples against this Song, and against the two Epistles of St.
James, and St. Jude, which we look upon both in the one and the other
communion, as sacred Books, and that without so much as alleging the reasons,
which have determined as well the Church of Rome, as ours to receive these
Writings as Canoni^al?

For will any say, that, if these Writings had not had any character of
Divinity, the sole approbation of the Church of Rome could give them (...)
light, which they had not of themselves.

For our parts, 2 Timothy 3.16.
we say with the Apostle, that all Scripture is given by inspiration of God:
and if all men do not look upon them in the same manner, or with the same
sentiments, it is not the fault of the Scripture, but it is the effect of the
variety and weakness of the humane spirit, and the wise and free dispensation
of the Spirit of God, which blows where it will, and as it will.

An evident proof, that it is not the authority of the Church of Rome, which
determines those of our communion to reverence the Scriptures, and these three
Books particularly, as Canonical (but that it is their own proper character,
and the grace which we believe that God gives us, to acknowledge this
character) is, that it is well known there are some others, as Tobie, Judith,
VVisdome, Ecclesiasticus, and the two first Books of Maccabees, etc. which the
Church of Rome receives as Canonical, which we receive not as such: and that on
the contrary, we do receive the Epistle of St. James, which the Lutherans
receive not, at least all of them as we do, whatever conformity there may be in
other things betwixt them and us. Again, as a proof that it is not the
authority of the Jewish Church, which determines the one, or the other of us,
to receive the Scriptures of the Old Testament as Canonical, we may take this,
that at this time the Jews not receiving for such, all that the Church of Rome
receives, she does not think her self bound to acquiesce in their judgment.

The Bishop of Condom's second proposition, touching the authority of the
Church, depends in a manner wholly on the former; for he says, that as we
receive the Scriptures from the hands of the Church, so we learn Tradition of
her, and by means of Tradition the true sense of the Scriptures. In good time:
Let the Church then be the Guardian of Tradition, as she is of the Scriptures;
and let her make use of Tradition either for order and discipline, to
facilitate the understanding of Scripture, but let her not make thereof a
title, to impose upon us Worships or Doctrines which do not accord with the
Scriptures, or to make the sense of the Scripture to depend absolutely upon the
interpretation of the Church: as in receiving the Old Testament from the Jews,
the Church did not tie her self blindly to receive their Traditions which
overthrow the Law, nor their interpretation, when it does not accord with the
true sense of the Prophets.

Error, as vice, is for the most part in the extremes: we owe respect,
teachableness and submission, unto all those whom God sets over us to instruct
us; this is not contested: but this is no reason to change this submission into
a voluntary blindness.

Faith being a gift of God, we ought not to change, nor force the use of the
exterior means which God employes to work it in our hearts; but we ought to
use them according to his intention, with a spirit of sweetness and of charity,
to persuade and not to constrain. Otherwise, a blind submission in matter of
Faith, is not submission, but a spirit of servitude, very unworthy of the
liberty of the children of God; and to require such a submission, by what name
soever it be called, is to make an outward society, of bodies, of interest, and
appearance, and not at all a true communion of spirit, and of judgment. pa
162. pa. 165.
The Church, says the Bishop of Condom, does profess that she says nothing
now of her self, that she inventeth not any thing anew in points of Doctrine:
and elsewhere, very far from intending to render her self mistress of her
Faith, as her Adversaries accuse her, she has done what she can to bind her
self, and that the means of innovation may be taken away, seeing she not only
submits to the Scripture, but to banish for ever those arbitrary
interpretations, which make men's thoughts to pass for Scripture, she has bound
her self to understand them, as to what regards Faith and manners, according to
the sense of the holy Fathers, from which she professes never to depart;
declaring in all the Councils, and in all the professions of Faith, which she
has published, that she receives not any Doctrine which is not conformable
unto the tradition of all the foregoing Ages.

The Bishop of Condom does well to say, that the Church of Rome professes that
she invents not any thing; for where be the Innovatours which do not profess
the same thing? But upon the main, is it true that the latter Councils have
always exactly followed the Doctrine of the Fathers, or of the very preceding
Councils? for not to speak of Transubstantiation, of worshipping the Host, and
of private Masses, which according to us are Doctrines and Worships unknown, at
least in the eight first Ages (because the Gentlemen of the Roman Church do not
agree to it) it has already been made appear in another place, that the
worshipping of Images was forbidden by the Councils of Eliberis, of
Constantinople, and of Francfort, and that the same Worship has been
established or maintained by the authority of the second Council of Nice, and
in the last place by that of Trent. It bath also been showed upon the Article
of Purgatory, that that Doctrine, with all its consequences, was put in the
place of the opinion which many of the Fathers of the first Ages had, that
after death the souls did sleep, or did refresh themselves in a place separate
from Heaven. The case is the same as to Auricular confesssion, and of
Indulgences, which have succeeded to the practice of public penance, and
generally as to all the Doctrines, and all the practice, of which we find no
footsteps in the Fathers of the three first Ages, nor in the first Councils,
and which we pretend to have been added at several times unto the Doctrine and
Institution of Jesus Christ, and of his Apostles.

And here to instance yet in two examples of alteration in Doctrine and
practice, which are quite out of all question: Has not the Council of Trent
(which is that the Bishop of Condom takes for the rule of his Exposition)
abrogated the doctrine and use of giving the Sacrament unto little children, of
which we have already spoken? Has it not also declared in express terms, for
confirming the taking away the cup, which was before ordained by the Council of
Constance, that therein little weight could be laid on the Fathers; for it is
to no purpose (so the Council decides) to allege the sixth of St. John for the
communion under both kinds, Sess. 21. de com. cap. 2.
what way soever (says the Council) it be understood, according to the sundry
interpretations of the holy Fathers.

We will not here examine, whether all these diverse changes are for the better
or worse, because it has been already done heretofore, and because we treat
not here of the right, but only of the matter of fact, which the Bishop of
Condom has averred, to wit, that the Church of Rome has bound her self, that
she has taken away the means of innovating, that she submits her self through
all to the sense of the Holy Fathers, and that she does not receive any
Doctrine which is not conformable unto that of precedent Ages.

To conclude, these Expositions seem to intimate, that the Church of Rome is
not so well assured of her infallibility, but that it has been acknowledged
she had need to be secured against her self, by tying up her hands, and taking
away the means of Innovation. And nevertheless, if we will be a little informed
by themselves, what has been the success of all this precaution? Let the
Doctrines of the last five or six centuries, be only compared in general with
the Doctrines and practices of the three first, and even with the following
Ages; the Council of Trent, with them that went before it, without having any
regard, if they please, to our disputes. It will easily appear, whether the
Church of Rome has has kept her self within the bounds, which it is said that
she has prescribed her self; if she has always exactly followed the steps of
those, which went before her; and if in fine, what is here said of her temper
and moderation, be not only rather the ordinary style of those who make
profession of submitting themselves unto Laws, even when they openly trample
them under foot.

The third proposition particularly regards the authority and infallibility of
Synods, or Councils. The Bishop of Condom says, that it is the part of
Pastors assembled to decide controversies, and the Faithful to receive their
decisions without examining them: we all agree to the former part of this
proposition; and we believe also that the way of Synodal Assemblies, is the
most universal outward means, and the most effectual, that God makes use of, to
keep men's minds united in one only Belief.

But as we cannot agree to the infallibility which the Church of Rome
attributes unto them, so neither can we accord, that the Faithful are obliged
blindly to receive their decisions without examining them. John 5.39. Mat.
7.15. Acts 20.29. 1 These. 5.21. Act. 17.11.
The Apostles themselves did not demand so blind a submission to their own
Doctrine: on the contrary, they advised that men would compare it with the
Scripture, that they would distinguish the Wolf from the Shepherd; that they
would examine all, and retain that which was good: and those of Berea were
commended, for that after having heard the Apostles, they compared their
Sermons with the Scriptures.

If it be said that this might take place as to the Doctrine of each Apostle in
particular, and not as to what had been decided by all the Apostles, as that
which the Bishop of Condom alleges out of the 15th. of the Acts, when the
Apostles being assembled upon the controversy which was raised touching the
ceremonies of the Law, they pronounced these remarkable works, It seemed good
unto the Holy Ghost and to us, etc. And that afterward, St. Paul and Silas
went through the Cities, teaching believers to keep the Ordinances of the
Apostles.

In the first place, the Bishop of Condom would do well to put some difference
betwixt those holy men, which had received the Holy Ghost immediately, in form
of fiery tongues, and the Fathers of the latter Councils, of Constance, and of
Trent; of whom the very Romish Catholic Authors observe the passion, the
motives, and the humane interest, that inspirited them.

2. We see, that though the Apostles were fully persuaded of their authority,
as St. Paul speaks particularly of himself, yet they are very far from
thundering out Anathema's for the least matters, as the Council has done, at
every word, against all those that will not admit even of mere
School-distinctions, and Figures of Rhetoric. We see the Apostles found their
judgment upon the Holy Scriptures, and having concluded upon it, they only say
with the greatest sweetness in the World, If you do these things you will do
well.

3. Nor were they at all concerned even in this dispute, about essential points
of Faith, but only about ceremonies of the Law, which were already silently
abrogated by the Gospel, and which the Apostles would maintain but for a time,
to give the Synagogue an honorable burial, and to maintain union betwixt the
Jews, and the other people which had newly embraced the Doctrine of the
Gospel. In sum, very soon after, St. Paul himself preached, that people might
eat indifferently of all sorts of meat; and it is known, that in process of
time, the usage established by this Ordinance of the Apostles was insensibly
abolished.

4. It does not appear, that the Apostles did publish their decision with an
absolute injunction to obey it: but they sent Paul, Barnabas, and Silas, to
instruct the Faithful to keep this Ordinance; that is to say, in all
likelihood, to show them the motives and grounds thereof: which does not
import, that it was forbid them to examine it.

Lastly, we may retort against the Gentlemen of the Roman Church, what the
Bishop of Condom afterward objects against us, which is, that their practice
agrees not at all with their Maxims: for it is not true, that they believe the
Councils to be infallible in all things, nor that they always receive all
their decisions, either with examining them, or without examining them. For
example, they have not held to those of the Councils, whereof we have spoken,
which forbad the worshipping of Images; and the decisions of those Councils
have not hindered, but that other Councils have ordained the contrary. It is
known, that the Gallican Church has not yet, to this day, received all the
decisions of the Council of Trent, as to points that regard Ecclesiastical
Order and discipline, which notwithstanding are much more of humane
Jurisdiction, than the very matters of Faith.

The fourth and last proposition of the Bishop of Condom's touching the
authority of the Church, is, that wherein he objects against us, that this
authority is so necessary, that after having decried it, we have been obliged
to establish it in the very matters of Faith it self.

This proposition contains two accusations which destroy each the other, that
which makes them the less credible. The one is, that we have decryed the
authority of the Church; the other, that we have established it without any
bounds. In sum, nothing is worse grounded than the first of these
accusations: for it is not true, that we ever denied that Order should be
observed in the Church, nor that we have ever written or spoken against the
just authority of those whom God calls to be Pastors and Governors of the
Faithful. Our confession of Faith, our discipline, the Acts of our Synods, in a
word all that the Bishop of Condom himself ^eports, which is what is most
ancient, and most authentic amongst ^s since the Reformation, manifestly
destroys this accusation; and the Bishop of Condom does not allege any thing
which shows the contrary.

Our Doctors have preached and written against the excessive authority of the
Court of Rome, against the Sovereignty which we believe the Popes have
generally usurped over Bishops (which yet have the same ^haracter, and the same
dignity as ^hey have) over all the Clergy, over the people, over the Councils,
and ^ver Princes themselves; under pre^ence of the spiritual Sword. We ^ould
have spoken against the absolute power that Popes attribute to themselves, of
assembling or not assembling Councils, because that Ecclesiastical History
gives us assurance, that in the first and best Ages of Christianity, it was the
Emperors that assembled them. In fine, we could have again exclaimed against
the abuse of Indulgences; and in a word, against all those points, whereby the
manner of the Government of the Church is become so widely different from that,
wherein it was governed by the Apostles and St. Peter himself, of whom the
Popes style themselves successors; but in all these very things, those of our
communion are the only persons, nay the first, that have neither spoken nor
written, nor again and again exclaimed against the abuses and enterprises of
the Court of Rome.

The Liberties of the Gallicane Church, the quarrels of our Kings with the
Popes, the concordates, the Remonstrances of Bishops, the Acts of Parliaments,
the decrees of the College of Sorbon, the appeals unto Councils, Finally, the
Writings of a great number of Catholics, even in these last times, clearly
enough show, that we are not the only men, nor the first, nor the last, which
have cried down the excessive authority of Popes.

Let us proceed now to the second accusation, which is, that after having
decryed this authority, we have been constrained to establish it amongst our
selves. We have no mind to say, that there is not any Order established amongst
us; but the Bishop pretends, that we give this infallibility and authority unto
our Synods, which we will not acknowledge, neither in the persons of Popes, nor
in the Assemblies of Councils: and he means the same afterward, that we have
given it even to excess, and with a kind of abandoning our right. To this
purpose, he reports, in the first place an Act of the Synod at Charenton in
1644. upon the case of those who were called Independants. Secondly, an Article
of our discipline in the title of Consistories. Thirdly, the Form of Letters
Missive, which are given to those who are deputed to go to the Synods, which
was drawn up a the Synod held at Vitre in 1617. Fourthly and Lastly, a
resolution that was taken at the Synod of St. Faith in 1578, upon occasion of
an overture of accommodation which was proposed betwixt those of our communion,
and those of the confession of Ausburg, which are called Lutherans.

This is yet another passage of the Bishop of Condom's Treatise, wherein he
uses his utmost endeavors, and where he hopes to find the greatest
advantage. When he treats of his own belief, that is soon passed over; he says
but a word, in clouded terms, he scarce proves any thing, and makes himself no
objection; and if happily it be taken notice of, that he uses to do so, he will
say, that it is because he makes only a bare exposition, and that he has
proposed to himself, neither to speak all, nor to prove what he speaks. But
when once or twice he is come unto some points of those of Christian Religion,
where there seems to be some difficulty in our doctrine, as well as in that of
the Church of Rome, then it is that he displayes all the subtilty of his
arguring; then it is that he enlarges and insults over us, as if we only could
hang down our heads. This is the part of a feeble Enemy, which keeps himself
enclosed, and only makes some small sally at certain times.

The first difficulty which the Bishop of Condom here creates us, is no
difficulty: The Synod in 1644. does censure the Independants, because they
would not acknowledge the authority of Assemblies and Synods, and it gives the
same reason which is cited by the Bishop of Condom, that this proceeding is so
prejudicial to the State, as well as to the Church, that it opens the door unto
Irregularities and extravagancies, that it takes away the means of remedy, and
that in fine if it might have place, it would produce as many Religions, as
there are parish^s, or particular Assemblies. This plainly imports, that in the
communion of our Churches, we love Order, and that we acknowledge the authority
of Assemblies, and Synods, as a means conform to the practice established by
our Savior, and by the Apostles, and very proper to preserve the purity of
Faith, and to maintain unity. But this implies not any wise, that we have
attributed a kind of infallibility, or a sovereign and absolute authority unto
our Synods, such as the Church of Rome attributes unto Popes, and unto
Councils, which is the only thing in question. It is as if one should say,
that in acknowledging the just authority of Magistrates, for maintaining of
Laws, and the service of the Prince, we did allow, that the Magistrates are
above the Laws, or have right to give what Orders they please, how contrary
soever those Orders may appear to be against the service of the common Master,
so that at no time, and in no case, the people might forbear the observance of
these Orders, to continue faithful unto their Sovereign.

The Independants fault was not, in that they admitted of nothing but the Word
of God to be a rule of Faith: they did not absolutely reject Synods themselves;
for afterward in 1653. they held an Assembly numerous enough in London, where
they composed their confession of Faith. Their fault was chiefly in this
regard, in that they would not submit to have amongst them a constant and
permanent rule of having conferences and Synods, whereby they kept the door
open unto all sorts of confusion, as well in State as Church, voluntarily
depriving themselves of one of the best outward means, which God has given to
men, to prevent corruption and Schisms.

But, says the Bishop of Condom, it is principally in matter of Faith, that
the Synod would establish a dependence, inasmuch as the greatest inconveniency
that it observes, whereinto the Faithful might fall by independency, is this
very point, that Schisms might be formed, or as many Religions arise, as there
were parishes. But if this consequence were good, it might also be said, that
Faith and Religion do depend on the civil Magistrate, because if the people
were not restrained by the authority of the Magistrate, they would live each
according to their own fancy, even in matters of Religion it self. Faith and
discipline mutually hold hands: Faith works a love of order and discipline;
order and discipline serve to keep up the purity of Faith. But they are,
nevertheless, things very different; and it cannot be said for all this, that
Faith depends upon order, or upon the Orderers, whether they be civil or
Ecclesiastical.

To conclude, we do not at all deny, but that even in matters of Faith, we
ought to depend upon the guidance of Synods and of Pastors: on the contrary,
we do recommend teachableness, deference, and submission; the Question even
here is, but of the more or less. The point in hand is to know, whether the
Popes or Councils be infallible, and by consequence, whether we ought to depend
blindly on their power, so that at no time, nor in any case, we may refuse to
submit to their Bulls, and to their Decrees: and we have made evident, that
there have been many times and occasions, upon which the Church of Rome her
self has not wholly received all the Bulls, nor all the Decrees of Popes or of
Councils.

The second thing that the Bishop of Condom objects against us in this case is,
that Article of our Discipline, where it is said, that the Consistories should
endeavor to appease the differences which may arise upon any point of Doctrine
and Discipline; and that in case of appeal unto a National Synod, the full and
final resolution should be there made by the Word of God, unto which if the
Gainsayers should refuse to acquiesce from point to point, with an express
disowning of their errors, they should be cut off from the Church. From whence
the Bishop of Condom draws this consequence, that we do not attribute the
authority of this last judgment to the Word of God taken in it self,
independently upon the interpretation of the Church, because the appeal of
indifferent persons was received, who had in their judgment applied that very
word.

The difficulty is here only as it may be seen, upon the more or less of the
authority which should be attributed unto the judgment of Synods, or of Popes,
and of Councils. Neither this rule, nor the consequence which the Bishop of
Condom draws from it, speak any thing but what we have already all along
acknowledged, that order and dependence is requisite, and that Pastors and
Synods are appointed to govern the Church, to teach the Word of God, and to
promote the understanding of it. But this infers not at all, that we attribute
infallibility unto our Pastors, nor to our Synods, as the Church of Rome does
to Popes, and Councils; nor that the people are obliged to receive their
decisions without examining them, or to give a blind obedience unto them The
Article says, that those who have any scruple shall be heard in the Synod with
all holy freedom, and that the scruple or difficulty shall be there resolved by
the Word of God. It is not possible to find a temper more just and equitable to
retain, on the one side particular persons in a just moderation, and to leave
to God and his Word the supreme and absolute authority over our consciences.

It may be, that this moderation it self is not without some inconvenience, and
that it would seem, that the opinion of the infallibility of Popes, or of
Councils, and the sovereign and absolute authority that is attributed unto
them, are as a strong rampire to retain the people within bounds.

But, in the first place, an inconvenience in a Government is no sufficient
reason, that another should be good and just, if it be not so of it self. 2.
Where is there any order and form of Government either in Church or State, but
that there is some inconvenience? There is much more without comparison, in
attributing infallibility and an absolute dominion unto Popes, and to Councils,
because when it so happens, that Popes or Councils fall into any error, as it
ought to be supposed in this part of the Question that it may so happen, and as
we are convinced by experience that it has happened diversetimes, the evil is
almost without remedy. Error has the force of authentic and irrevocable Law,
it renders it self more general, more durable, and by consequence more
difficult to be reformed; and when once the guides are blind, then there will
be a necessity to fly to particular persons, unto whom God gives sufficient
light, strength, and courage to take the part of the Truth. But that it might
not be said, that this is only a supposition accommodated unto the particular
case of the Reformation of our Fathers, it is known, how hard it was to root
out Arrianism, when it was supported by the authority of the Episcopal chair of
Rome, and of the Council of Arimini; that it is principally unto the zeal and
courage of St. Athanasius, that the glory of restoring Christianity in its
purity is due, and that in fine, if God had not made use of this holy man, and
of others that seconded him, the Arrians might have fortified themselves, so
that they might have mastered the Councils, and Truth might have groaned longer
than it did, under the oppression of those Heretics.

3. In fine, it is not absolutely true neither upon the whole, that the
infallibility and authority which is attributed to Popes and Councils, is
either a stronger or a surer means to restrain the people, than is the
temperament of our Discipline. For experience shows, that for more than an Age,
since our Churches of France have been governed by this order, there has never
been any difference amongst us, either in doctrine or in discipline, which has
not been decided without any trouble; whereas it might be said, that the
excessive authority of Popes and of Councils, far from hindering of division,
has very much contributed unto the divisions of the East against the West, and
of the West against it self; which are the two Schisms, the most considerable
and unfortunate that could fall out in the Church. The sincere persons of the
Church of Rome do acknowledge yet to this day, that it is the too great height
with which the Popes, and the Council of Trent did affect to make Articles of
Faith of all that was disputed in the very Schools, and to anathematize those
that would not receive those Doctrines, that has put an obstruction well nigh
invincible to the peace and reunion of Christians. And not long since again,
amongst Roman Catholics, we have seen that the authority of Popes supported by
that of Princes, has scarce been able in some way to hinder, that the
differences which had stirred up so much eagerness upon points of Doctrine and
Discipline, had not caused yet greater scandal. But after all we daily see,
that this authority of the Pope has only the power to change the outward
appearances, but the unity of minds is wanting: so true is it, that it is only
the knowledge of Faith and charity, which are the solid grounds of an holy
union of hearts, and of thoughts.

The Bishop of Condom does yet make a third difficulty, upon the form of the
Letters, which we give unto our Deputies, when we send them to the Synods. The
Form is conceived in these terms, which are reported by the Bishop of Condom.
We promise in the presence of God, to submit our selves to all, that shall be
concluded and resolved in your holy Assembly, to obey and execute it to the
best of our power, being persuaded that God will reside there, and will direct
you by his Holy Spirit in all truth and justice, by the Rule of his Word.

Every one at the first light perceives, that, as this Form is conceived, it
is so far from supposing that the Synod cannot err, or from attributing an
absolute authority unto it, and independent upon Scripture, that it does
precisely suppose the contrary. It cannot be sufficiently wondered at, how the
Bishop of Condom could have so much mistaken himself herein, as he has done;
for he thinks that there is something more in it, than in those two other
places, of our discipline, and of the Synod of Charenton, which he had
reported, to show that we yield a blind submission unto our Synods. His reason
is, because there is submission given unto what shall be resolved in the Synod,
before it be known that it has spoken according to the Scripture. The Bishop
of Condom takes for an absolute power, that which is only a condition, and a
limitation to the power of the Synod. Religion requires amongst us, that we
should presume God presides in these Assemblies, and the rules of justice and
decency, yea even custom, permit not that we should explain our selves
otherwise. But upon the whole, every one sees that the sense of this Form is,
as if one should say, we promise to submit our selves unto what you shall
resolve, if, as we hope of you through the grace of God, you take his Word and
his truth, for the rule of your thoughts and conduct, and thereby make appear,
that it is indeed his Spirit that presides in your consultations, and governs
you, and that you do not proceed by canvasing and Cabals, or by humane motives
and interests, as the Roman Catholic Authors testify it was done in the
latter Councils of Constance and of Trent.

If it be, says the Bishop of Condom, a persuasion founded upon an humane
presumption, can any man in conscience promise to submit, himself to what shall
be resolved? And if this persuasion has its foundation in a certain belief of
the assistance of the Holy Spirit given unto the Church, the Catholics in this
case demand no more. We answer hereby, that it is properly neither the one nor
the other; and that it is not worth the labor to make upon it a double-horned
Argument, for so we commonly call dilemma's: this persuasion is a judgment of
charity, which makes us hope well of the intentions of those that are deputed
unto these Assemblies; and that is sufficient to warrant our promising to
acquiesce unto what they resolve, always provided that they have Truth, and
the Word of God, for the Rule of their consultations.

Upon which it is to be observed, though it may be too long to insist upon what
is so clear in it self, that our Synods in the whole are made up only of
diverse Deputies, which have all of them their Letters in the same Form, almost
after the same manner as have they which are deputed unto the Provincial
Estates: so that things being equal amongst them, it cannot be said that this
condition, and this limitation, can wound the dignity or just authority of
these Assemblies.

These Letters missive, are properly nothing else but proxies, or if the term
please better, in some measure resemble Letters and Commissions which Princes
give to their Ambassadors, or their Envoys, the ordinary, style whereof is,
that they have entire trust and confidence in the integrity, fidelity and
ability of them whom they send, giving them full power, etc. Nevertheless with
this condition understood all along, that they govern themselves by their
orders and instructions, and that if they conform themselves thereunto,
whatsoever they shall conclude shall be confirmed. The difference betwixt these
sorts of Letters of deputation, and proxies in matters of business, and the
Commissions of Princes, is only in the quality and style of them who speak;
Princes speak as Princes men of business like men of business, and Churches in
a style pious, and Christian: so that these Letters missive not only give
merely a limited and conditional power, but the resolutions themselves which
are made by virtue of this power, though conformable to the Scripture,
according to the condition expressed in the Letters, pass not for authentical
decrees, till they are brought unto the Churches, and the Churches have as it
were ratified them by their acquiescence: and when it falls out that any
Church, or any particular persons find any difficulties therein, the business
is remitted to further consideration in the following Synods; because it is a
constant principle of Christianity, according to us, that Faith is a firm
persuasion, and by consequence, that men's minds must be cleared and rendered
capable, as far as may be, of the truths which are taught, that is to say, made
to taste the Doctrine with a certain sweetness, and not have the belief imposed
by constraint, and absolute dominion.

What we have now said of these Letters missive, serves for answer to the
Bishop of Condom's last objection touching the resolution taken up at the Synod
of St. Faith; for there is throughout the same foundation, or rather the same
pretense. The Bishop of Condom strains himself more on this matter, than on the
others, and again insults over us here, as if we were of bad Faith, and of
little accord amongst our selves. Let us see what the matter is.

In the year 1578. there was an overture of reconciliation made betwixt those
that are called Lutherans, and our Churches of France, by means of a Form of
confession of Faith, which was to be general and common unto all the Churches.
The Churches of this Kingdom were desired to depute good men, authorized by the
Church, with power to treat, accord, and decide all the points of Doctrine, and
other things which might concern that Union. Upon this proposition the Synod
decreed, that if the confession of Faith proposed, were sent time enough, it
should be examined in each Provincial Synod; and in the mean time, the Synod
deputed four Ministers with Letters, and ample proxies of the Ministers and
Elders, and of Mounsieur the Vicount of Turenn: and in case they should not
have time enough to examine this confession of Faith in all the Provinces, they
remitted it unto the prudence of those Deputies, to accord and conclude of all
points, which should come under deliberation, whether of Doctrine, or any thing
else that might concern the good, the union, and the ease of all the Churches.

This is in sum the resolution of this Synod, as the Bishop of Condom reports
it; and it is plain here, that there is nothing that is not agreeable to reason
and custom. In the mean while he proceeds, with a kind of admiration. To this
head does the false squeamishness of the Gentlemen of the pretended reformed
Religion come: they have now thus and thus often upbraided to us, as a
weakness, that submission which we have for the decrees of the Church, which is
nothing else, say they, but a society of men, subject to error: and mean time,
they have not feared to commit their Faith into the hands of four men, with so
large abandoning their own judgment, that they have given them full power to
change the very confession of Faith, which they propose at this day to all the
Christian World, and that as a confession of Faith, which contains nothing but
the pure Word of God, and for which they have said, at their presenting it to
our Kings, that an infinite number of persons were ready to shed their blood.

To this head in fine, is the Bishop of Condom's evil reflection come: they
have, says he, thus and thus often upbraided to us as a weakness, the
submission which we have for the decrees of the Church.

In the first place it had been just, that the Bishop of Condom would have been
pleased to have told us, at least somewhere, what we are to understand by the
Church. It is a great name indeed, and for which we have a true and sincere
respect: but is not this to abuse names, and to neglect the things, as those
who cried always the Temple, the Temple. If they will have us to render
submission, let them tell us at least to whom we should render it. The Question
is to know, in whom this infallibility and this absolute and supreme Authority
resides, of whom we should receive these final judgments without examining
them. Is it the Pope or the Council that is infallible, and unto whom we must
thus blindly submit? The Pope either above the Council to approve of it, and to
give it all its authority; or only in the most eminent place of the Council
for order amongst the Councils themselves? Is it all the Councils together,
that are infallible, and whose decisions we must follow, or only those
Councils, which have determined according to the allowance of the Roman Church?
Those of Constantinople, and of Francfort, which prohibit the worshipping of
Images, or the second Council of Nice, which in express terms enjoins the
adoration of them; or in fine that of Trent, which only says to serve and
worship, and give unto them the honor that is due? And as to this Council of
Trent it self, ought we to take all together as they do in Spain, in Italy, and
Germany, or reject all which is contrary to the just Liberties of the Gallican
Church, as is done in France? And in fine, how can we be assured, that the
Spirit of God presided in some of their Sessions, and not in all, that they
have erred in one point, and that they are infallible in another.

These are not questions made at pleasure, or School questions, as the Bishop
of Condom would insinuate, to palliate the profound silence that he keeps upon
all these things: neither are they like many other questions, really useless,
whereof nevertheless the Council has made so many Articles of Faith. These are
important matters, which ought not only to be known for curiosities sake, but
which are to be practiced, and by consequence well understood to regulate our
conscience. The Bishop of Condom proposing to himself to make a complete
Exposition of his Belief, one would think it had been more agreeable to his
design, to let us have understood it a little plainer, and more openly, than to
have conceald all the difficulties throughout, and only endeavored to create
doubts upon some points of ours: for the positive, clear, and sincere proposal
of a Doctrine, does persuade it much better, than do Disputes.

Let us return notwithstanding to what the Bishop of Condom imputes to us; they
(says he speaking of us) upbraid to us our submission to the Church. Yes, a
blind submission, without examining any thing, as the Bishop of Condom
proposes; or rather, a slavery directly contrary to the Spirit of Christianity;
a submission, in fine, of body rather than of mind, which tends to the plunging
men into that gross ignorance from whence Christianity had delivered them: for
as to a free and voluntary submission, and with knowledge, such as the
Scripture requires, being very far from blaming it, we teach it, we preach it,
and God be praised, we practice it.

But you your selves also, says the Bishop of Condom, have this weakness, and
blind submission, which you upbraid to us. When persons are charged with
Opinions, which do openly contradict one another, if the proof be not clear, it
destroys it self: Now what is the Bishop of Condom's proof? You have, says he,
put your Faith into the hands of four Ministers, so far leaving it to them,
that you have given them full power to alter your confession of Faith. These
are the Bishop of Condom's words, and not ours; this is a commentary upon the
decree of the Synod, or a consequence which the Bishop of Condom draws thence,
aggravating the terms, and not at all the sense, nor expressions of the decree
it self. The decree gives power to agree and conclude upon all points, which
shall come under consideration, and not to change the confession of Faith.
These are different terms: and though it might be presumed, that such
reconciliations are never made, without using some temper, which may content
men's minds on the one part and the other, and that this overture of
reconciliation was founded upon the project of some confession of Faith, which
was to be common, yet to restrain some opinion which was not essentially
necessary, or even to change or sweeten some expression, would not be to change
a confession of Faith.

In all likelihood, the Bishop of Condom will not disapprove of this design,
for therein lies all the subtilty of his Exposition, to sweeten what he can,
and to let alone what he cannot sweeten. The difficulty is only in keeping a
man's self within just bounds, not too much to weaken the sense in sweetning,
and not to loose too much by silence; that is to say, that men abandon not
Worships or Doctrines which do visibly tend to the glory of God, nor change the
nature of a Doctrine by reducing it unto sweeter terms. It belongs to the
Bishop of Condom himself, and to those who shall read his Treatise, to judge
whether he has kept himself within these just bounds; as it would have
belonged unto our Churches to have judged whether their Deputies had kept
themselves, if it had happened that they had entered into conference with the
Lutherans. To conclude, as it is princ^pally upon the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, that we have differed from the Lutherans, so upon that it self we
agree, both they and us, upon the foundation, and admit not of any Article that
destroys it, according to the principles which are common to us with them. It
would seem, that if the Lutherans could not entirely have accorded to our
Doctrine, they would have reduced theirs unto what the ablest amongst them do,
which is, not to determine the manner how Jesus Christ is really present in the
Sacrament. We believe, say they, his presence, and we feel therein his
efficacy, but we are ignorant here of the manner. And in this case it may
plainly be seen, that they approached nearer unto us, than we did to them, in
admitting them hereby to our communion, without having made for all that* on
our part, any essential alteration in our confession of Faith.

But some will say, how comes it to pass that you speak here so moderately of
the Lutherans? Your first Reformers were not at all so reserved: it is very
well known, how far the sharp words, which they wrote one against another, did
proceed. They, whose institution you follow, found that our Doctrine of
Transubstantiation was more consequent, than the real presence of the
Lutherans, and testified in some sort a greater aversion for that of the
Lutherans than for ours. Whence comes it then to pass that you have admitted
them into your communion? The consequence would conclude, and why will you not
admit us also? But the Church of Rome does not so take it; she concludes, why
do you not come unto us, though the sequel of the Argument does not admit of
it. However the case stands, piety and charity require that Christians should
be moderate: if it appears, that we are more moderate herein than our first
Reformers, it is not, that we do presume to have more piety, nor more charity
than they, but it is, that commonly divisions are fiercer in their first
beginning, than in process of time; and greater betwixt persons that are
nearer, than betwixt those who are at the greatest distance. This very thing
that they of our communion seemed to have more heat against the Lutherans upon
the particular point of the Reality, is a sign that they were the better united
one with the other in all the other points. We pretend not wholly to excuse
this heat, nor the other failings unto which the first Reformers might be
subject: We have a customary saying amongst us, that we canonize not any.
Wherefore, without equalling them unto the Apostles, unless it be for what
there was humane in the one and the other, might it not be said of our
Reformers, what the Apostles themselves said of themselves, that they were men
subject to like passions with us. All the World knows what is usually said upon
this subject, that Paul and Barnabas those blessed Apostles, were so sharp in
words to each other, that they came even to a provocation and a quarrel (for
the Scripture term amounts to so much) and that it must needs be that they
parted asunder. And if the Example of Saints, which the Gentlemen of the Roman
Church have canonized themselves, affect them more, it is known how Stephen
Bishop of Rome, did excommunicate St. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage; Firmil. Ep.
ad Cypria. Hieron. Ep. ad Theoph. Alex. Cum. oper. Theoph.
how St. Jerome was incensed against St. Chrysostom, and many other Examples
of discord amongst great persons.

But not to instance so far back in the Ages past, we have seen in our days
how far contention has proceeded betwixt persons esteemed the most pious and
eminent of the Roman Church upon points of Doctrine. The circumstances of the
times wherein our Reformers lived, and their temper, if any please, may
possibly in some measure excuse the too much heat, wherewith it may be thought
they defended themselves, whether against the Church of Rome, or against their
own Brethren; if it be supposed in the main, that their intentions were upright
and sincere: as also the like temper, and other circumstances, may excuse the
heat which has appeared betwixt these two parties, if it be granted, upon the
main, that this heat was a right zeal.

After all, it is but upon the sole point of the Transubstantiation of the
Gentlemen of the Roman Church, and the Consubstantiation of the Lutherans, that
some of ours may have said, that the Doctrine of the former is more consistent,
that is to say, that if the Reality of the presence must be believed, it would
seem here is more reason, according to the speculations of the School, to
believe that this presence is effected by the way of change of one substance
into another, than by the way of impanation, or by the co-existence of two
substances of the Body of Jesus Christ, and of the Sacraments one with the
other: and that supposing, that the Body of Jesus Christ was really present,
there would be more reason to adore him in the Sacrament it self, than not to
adore him there at all. But upon the whole, these indeed are only speculations
of the Schools, and private Opinions: and as these consequences of the
Lutherans, taking them aright, are only consequences which no ways engage
those, who only admit the Lutherans into their communion; so it plainly
appears, that when the heat of dispute leaves the mind in an entire liberty in
this regard, we have been able to admit them into our communion, without its
being any reason that we should pass unto that of the Church of Rome; which
joins unto Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, private Masses, the
adoration of the Host, and the taking away of the Cup, as inseparable
consequences of this Doctrine: not to speak again here of the Service in an
unknown Tongue, and the other worships and practices which separate us from her.

However the case stands in this regard, this being the state of things betwixt
us and the Lutherans, it is evident that our Churches entering into conference
with them, exposed not themselves unto any essential alteration in our
confession of Faith; so far were they from putting it into the hands of
Compromissaries, whether we regard the thing it self, or the form of the power
which they gave unto their Deputies: for as to the thing, when any difference
is treated of, the power which is given, how ample soever it be, regards only
the difference it self, and extends not it self unto other things, which are
not in dispute. For Example, when Princes give power to their Ministers to make
Treaties of peace, and of alliance, we do not say, that they put in compromiss
the fundamental Laws of their Kingdoms. There was so little to be feared on our
side in our reconciliation with the Lutherans, that it was seen we made no
difficulty to admit them into our communion, as soon as some amongst them
desired it of us. And as to what concerned the power it self, that could not
expose us any thing the more; for besides what has been said of the state of
our difference with the Lutherans, the Synod knew before hand the plain state
and foundation upon which the reconciliation was to be made, that is to say, in
a manner the very sense and form in which it was judged, that a confession of
Faith might be made, that might be common with us, and the Lutherans. It is
well known, that on such occasions, the power is relative, and as it were
restrained, unto the memoires and instructions which are given to the Deputies.
If it falls out that they abuse it, they who gave it, are acquitted upon their
disapproving what they have done: the shame of the disapprovement falls
properly upon them; there is no blame at the most, but only of the bad choice
that was made of their ministry. In a word, what removes all difficulty in this
regard, is, that these sorts of accords, howsoever the Deputies conclude, must
be approved and ratified by those who granted the power, before it can be said
that they have truly consented.

If the project of this reconciliation had further succeeded, and that a Form
of confession had been agreed upon, it had been necessary according to the
practice of our Discipline, that all that had been accorded by the Deputies at
the conference, should have been sent and communicated to our Provincial
Synods, to the end, that the Deputies of Provincial Synods, might afterward
have met in a National Synod: there all would have been maturely considered,
with a full liberty of advice; and suppose that it had been found, that the
Deputies had yielded unto something at the conference against the judgment of
our Churches, it would not only have been disapproved, but blamed and
censured. If on the contrary it had been found, that they had done their duty,
as it ought to be presumed they would, that the Form of confession, whereupon
they had agreed, had contained all the essential fundamental Articles of what
is believed amongst us, and that there had been no Article in this Form of
confession, which had destroyed our fundamental Articles, in this case we
should have praised God for so full and happy a reunion; The Synod would have
approved and ratified it: they would have framed an Act, that should have
contained the motives, the grounds, and principal reasons of their decree, and
the Deputies of Provinces would have been enjoined to obtain also the final
acquiescence of the Churches by their silence.

Let it now be judged, whether there be any thing in all this, that in the
least tends to establish that infallibility, and absolute dominion, which the
Church of Rome attributes either to Popes or Councils, which is the only thing
here in question, whether there be the least pretext to accuse us, as the
Bishop of Condom does of a feigned niceness, and of an abandoning of our
Belief; or whether this be not a trick of expression, not so equitable as
should be, to cast a foul insinuation on a great body, without any ground.

XXI. The authority of the Pope and Episcopacy.
There now remains only for finishing this Answer to the Bishop of Condom's
Treatise, that we speak a word in particular touching the authority of the
Pope, and of Episcopacy. This is again one of those places, where the Bishop of
Condom is as it were upon thorns. In the first Impression of his Treatise,
after having said, as in passage, that God had instituted the Primacy of St.
Peter, pa. 165
to preserve unity, he adds, This is the reason that our confession of Faith
obliges us to acknowledge the Church of Rome as the Mother and Mistress
[Magistram] of all other Churches, and to render a perfect obedience to the
Sovereign High Priest, Successor of St. Peter, and Vicar of Jesus Christ; And
it is true, that the profession of Faith made by Pius the IV. in execution of
the Decree of the Council, does contain the same thing in so many words.

But in the second Edition, the Bishop of Condom recalls what there was
strongliest spoke in the former, to wit, these terms of Mistress, Sovereign,
Vicar of Jesus Christ, and perfect obedience which is due unto him, whether it
be that he would not engage to maintain these expressions in the extent of
them, or whether he was loath to anger us; or in fine, for some other reason
that he had. Now behold what he has put in stead of what he took away. We
acknowledge, New Edition (...)
says he, this same Primacy (speaking of that of St. Peter, which we have said
that he supposed) in the Successors of the Prince of the Apostles, unto whom
is due, for this reason, the submission and obedience, which the Holy Councils
and Fathers have always taught. So that in stead of explaining to us the
Doctrine of the Council, as he promised he would do by his Exposition, for all
the instruction and all the light he will give us, he remits us to the Fathers and
Councils, and keeps himself yet in terms more general, more obscure, and more
doubtful, than the profession of Faith of the very Council it self.

It is true, the Bishop of Condom here again covers his silence with this
pretext, that as to things which are disputed of in the Schools, though the
Ministers incessantly allege them to render this power of the Pope odious, it
is not necessary to speak of them, because, says he, they are not of the
Catholic Faitb.

But in all likelihood, by these things which are disputed, the Bishop of
Condom here only means the abuse of dispensations, and of Indulgences, the
power of deposing Kings, and to absolve Subjects from the Oath of Allegiance,
and such other matters, as are truly odious: but for those things which
precisely regard the submission that the Popes pretend due, whether in matters
of Faith, or of Government Ecclesiastical, though they are disputed as well out
of the Schools, as in the Schools, if the Bishop of Condom avers that they are
no more of the Catholic Faith, we demand no more herein; it may be said, that
the greatest part of the authority of the Popes, contains nothing of great
moment.

As to what remains, it were easy to show in this place, that the Fathers and
Councils, unto whom the Bishop of Condom refers us, have not always taught,
that the Church of Rome was to be acknowledged as the mother and mistress of
all others, nor the Bishop of Rome as Sovereign High Priest, sole Head, and
only Successor of the Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ, nor
that in this quality, the submission and obedience, which he at this day claims
of all the World, is due unto him. Those who are but the least verst in
History, and judge without prejudice, do well know, Did. 22. ca.
Constantinopolitanae.
that it is only the pre-eminence of the City of Rome, once the chief City of
the World, and the Seat of the Empire, which has given occasion to the
exalting the Holy Chair as they speak, not only above other Episcopal Chairs,
but above Kings and Emperors themselves.

It might also be showed very clearly by the Scripture, that the very pretended
Primacy of St. Peter, upon which the Authority of the Pope is grounded, is not
it self founded upon any thing; for St. Peter had no more but his function of
an Apostle like the rest. It is said in the Eighth of the Acts, that the
Apostles which were in Jerusalem, sent Peter and John to Samaria; a passage
which does not intimate, Gal. 2.9. Gal. 2.11.
that St. Peter did attribute to himself any dominion over his Fellow
Laborers. The others are called pillars of the Church as well as he: St. Paul
says himself, that he withstood him to the face; and if it were true, that St.
Peter had some primacy amongst the Apostles, either because of his age, or of
his zeal, as indeed it appears he spoke first on several occasions, who sees
not that it can be at most but a primacy of order and rank in his own person,
such as there must needs be in all Assemblies, and which would make no more for
the Bishop of Rome, than for those of Jerusalem, and in general for all the
Bishops and Pastors of the Church? but this is also one of those
Controversies, upon which there are whole Volumes written; and the Bishop of
Condom passing so lightly over this matter, as he does, this is not a place
neither to search deeplier into it.

We have only to add for a conclusion, that we are so far from abolishing the
Episcopal Government which was in force in the Apostles times, as the Bishop of
Condom imputes to us, that our Churches maintaining as they do, an holy Union
betwixt themselves, living in a great deal of simplicity under the governance
of our Pastors and Synods, are a true Image of the ancient Churches of
Jerusalem, of Corinth, of Ephesus, of Galatia, of the Colossians, of the
Thessalonians, and of Rome it self, all founded by the Apostles, affecting not
at all any superiority one over the other, but all being equal amongst
themselves, united by the Bonds of the same Faith, and of the same charity,
under the governance of the same Apostles, and under one sole Spiritual Head,
Jesus Christ. The word Bishop, as it is known, signifies only an Overseer, and
no more than that of a Pastor, or Minister; the Apostles are indifferently
termed one and the other. It is known that in Germany, and England, the name of
Bishops is retained, and a kind of Hierarchy which we do not disapprove of,
being moderate as it is. And in fine, God is our witness, that we love peace
and union, as the Bishop of Condom de-fsires; but a true union of hearts and
judgments with knowledge; and, as God himself has commanded, that we should
love, Peace with Truth.

FINIS.
A TABLE Of the chief Points.
THE FIRST PART.
I. THE Design of the Bishop of Condom's Treatise page 50. II. The Bishop of
Condom 's first general proposition, that those of the pretended Reformed
Religion acknowledge, that the Church of Rome does embrace all the Fundamental
points of Christian Religion page 58. III. The Bishop of Condom's second
general proposition, That the Church of Rome does teach, that Religious Worship
is terminated on God only page 69.
SECOND PART.
IV. Of Invocation of Saints page 67. V. Of Images and Relics page 109.
THIRD PART.
VI. Of Justification page 134. VII. Of the merit of Works page 153. VIII. Of
satisfaction, Purgatory, and Indulgences page 156.
FOURTH PART.
IX. Of the Sacraments page 171. Baptism page 179. Confirmation page 191.
Penance and Sacramental Confession page 195. Extreme Unction page 213.
Marriage page 217. Orders page 219.
FIFTH PART.
X. Of the Eucharist. The Doctrine of the Church of Rome, touching the Real
presence of the Body of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, and the manner in which
the Church of Rome understands these words, This is my Body page 221 XI. An
Explication of these words, Do this in remembrance of me pa. 249. XII. The
Exposition which the Bishop of Condom makes of the Doctrine of those of the
Reformed Religion upon the Reality page 261. XIII. Of Transubstantiation, of
Adoration, and in what sense it is that the Bishop of Condom says, that the
Eucharist is a Sign page 308. XIV. Of the Sacrifice of the Mass p. 324. XV. Of
the Epistle to the Hebrews page 327. XVI. The Bishop of Condom's reflection,
upon the precedent Doctrine pa. 332. XVII. The Communion under both kinds pa.
55.
SIXTH PART.
XVIII. Of Tradition, or the Word written, and the Word unwritten. page 355.
XIX. Of the Authority of the Church page 370 XX. The judgment of those of the
P. R. Rel. upon the Authority of the Church page 389 XXI. Of the Authority of
the Holy Chair, and of Episcopacy pa. 426.
FINIS.
A Note on line 17. page: 38.
Because the Roman Creed does not use genitum twice, but unigenitum and natum I
did not think fit to render genitum and natum b^th by one English word: nor yet
to render ex patre natum born of the Father; for we say in the Apostles Creed
born of the Virgin Mary: nor proceeding from the Father, that being said
properly of the Holy Ghost. I therefore have said brought forth. Against which
if any take exception, I declare, let the Roman Church mean what She will by
Natum, I mean the same by brought forth. For I meant to express her Latin words
by English ones, as strictly answering, as I could. Indeed in so great a
mystery all language must needs be improper.

Errata insigniora.
Page: 11. l: 23. dele that. P. 25. l. 12. it lege them. P. 32. l. 11. d. that.
P. 89. l. 5. leg. that it is. p. 132. l. penult fasten lege. soften. p. 138. l.
28. leg. The error. p: 157. l. 11. for leg. before. p. 158. l: 21. del. not.
p: 182. l. ult. lege. in which. p. 274. l: 4. leg. this death. p: 279. l: 20.
And it is also. leg. But it is.


