AN APPENDIX TO A COURSE OF Chemistry. BEING Additional REMARKS To the former
OPERATIONS. TOGETHER WITH The Process of the Volatile salt of Tartar, and some
other Useful Preparations.

Writ in FRENCH by Monsieur NICHOLAS LEMERY.

Translated by WALTER HARRIS Doctor of PHYSIC.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1680.

THE PREFACE.
READER,
THE Course of Chemistry, to which this is an Appendix, was received so well,
that I shall forbear using many reasons, why I now cause this to be Published.
I am sure all such as have more in them of the Physician than Chemist, and
whose designs are Truly and Methodically to Cure, by having laid a Solid
Foundation for Physic by good Principles, and who do not expect as many
Miracles from a Spirit, or Salt, as some Women boast of from a simple Receipt
for the Ague, or the like; such Rational Physicians, I dare say, will gladly
enough receive some hints of this Appendix. The Gentleman, though a Chemist to
the purpose, and one that has spared no manner of pains to find out the
Mysteries of this Art, yet is so extremely Candid, as to speak of Chemical
Remedies, like a third person unconcerned, any further than real truth lies at
stake. He makes few Panegyricks of the Remedies herein, or before mentioned,
and discourses of them so, as to search out their nature by nothing but matter
of fact, and rejecting all Notions that his hand cannot touch, or his eye see.
This present Supplement is the effect of his working Brain, since the first
Edition of his Book, of which the Translation was made, the Author having since
sent me two other Editions, out of which I have collected these Additions, for
your further Curiosity. One thing particularly is here taken notice of, which I
can never repent the reading, nor the being an instrument in making it better
known; it is, that diverse things do by Calcination and Distillation not only
receive an impression of fire, but even fiery parts into their composition to a
very great quantity, nay to a considerable augmentation of their weight and
substance.

If you Calcine Lead in a Crucible, although you see a great many Vapors arise
out of the matter during the Calcination, yet the Calx being at last weighed,
will be found considerably heavier than the Lead was at first, which the wit of
man can never explicate, but by admitting the reception of fiery parts into the
Calx, see p. 33, 34.

Calcine four ounces of the common Regulus of Antimony, stirring it all the
while with a Spatule; there will rise up a vapor for an hour and halfs time,
or thereabouts, and when it fumes no longer, weigh it, and there will be two
drachms and a half more than the Regulus weighed at first, see p. 60.

Distill in a Retort the Burning Spirit of Saturn out of Salt of Saturn, and let
the Salt you distill be six ounces, you will thence draw an ounce and six drachms
of liquor, and there will remain in the Retort six ounces and six drachms of
matter. Now nothing in nature can here make this Addition of two ounces and a
half, but the entrance of Fire, fire imbodied into the matter, see p. 35. of
this Appendix.

The instances here mentioned may suffice to prove, how that subtle, dangerous,
and too active Principle, Fire, does predominate in abundance of Remedies, that
are commonly used. I shall add one word concerning the manner of the
Distillation of Acid Spirits, by which we may the better guess at their Nature
and Capacity. A Retort is placed so in a Furnace, that the Fire may
Reverberate, or beat back again upon the vessel, great fires are kindled, and
continued for 2, 3, 4 days together, they are made as exceeding violent as Art
can make them, the Retort and the Ingredients in it, if you look into the
Furnace, do all appear of a live coal, they turn into as true a fire as the
Wood it self, and there seems to be not the least difference but in the Figure,
and thus by the violent force of this most active, vigorous, searching, but
destructive Principle, Fire, the acid Spirits are driven out into a large
Receiver, in White or Red clouds, and there having room to play a while, they
at last condense into fiery Spirits, or a spirituous fire. These Spirits, when
the vessels are cold, are taken out, and stopped up carefully (hardly any thing
but glass stopples will serve the turn) and though they are fixed Spirits, the
fire contained in them will needs tend upwards, and afterward, as occasion
serves, these nimble Spirits are not only used for Dissolution of Metals (which
they do well for) but are given Christians inwardly, too too often, nay, by
some Chemical Practisers, especially such as love Chemistry so dearly, that
they are in continual hopes of the Philosophers stone, these same Spirits shall
be given with as much freedom, and as little regret of Conscience as a draught
of Small beer.

Now does it not deserve serious consideration what these Spirits are made of,
what is the nature of fire taken inwardly, and what miraculous effects must
needs happen from these elaborate, and so powerful remedies! Nature is a tender
thing, and must be used very gently if you would help her, she is a composition
of flesh and blood, and uses wonderful moderation in every thing she does;
offer her any thing injurious or distasteful, and she is never quiet till she
has thrown it off; a draught of Milk and water will do her good to the very
heart, when her functions are disturbed; and she pants for burning heat. I know
you may force her to be conpented with Acid, cooling, (and yet fiery) Spirits
given in Juleps, or the like, but whether they are really agreeable and
beneficial to Nature, we may have no small reason to doubt.

I know the common universal practice of the world now-a days will plead more
for Acids than any thing I can say against them. Yet this is plain to my
understanding, that all Big-worded Remedies, and such as are most popular, have
their certain Fate, they have their beginning, their time of flourishing, and
their Period. Once Spirit of Salt was all in all, every body must be dropping
it into their drink. Now it is almost forgot; other Master pieces in Quackery
have come in its place. Who would have thought lately, that Rabels drops
(supposed to be Oil of Vitriol sweetened) should so soon be no more talked of?
One would have thought at first, that this wonderful Monsieur would have
spoiled utterly every Physicians practice, and that they would have had no more
to do, he so Monopolized the whole Art by his Remedy. And yet we see he is
returned long since for France, and Physicians are just where they were before
his coming.

I would not be understood, by what I have said, to condemn the use of Natural
Acids, the Acid Ferment of the stomach speaks their excellency sufficiently,
and want of Appetite is immediately assisted by them; and besides all, Natural
salts, of which Aliments are full, are known to be Acid, and there is no other
salt in nature, but the Acid, as is at large proved in the following Treatise.
So that Acids have their use, and benefit beyond question. But it is the
frequent and continual use of Artificial Acids, such as are drawn by fire, and
become of a fiery nature, that I presume to tax and question. A Citron in a
Fever may be of greater help and comfort, and allay the boiling Heat, and
resist the prevailing malignity, more than can be thought. The Juice of
Lemmons, not that crude Juice, which is commonly vended, and of which the Syrop
is too too often made, but the Juice of good Lemmons; and so of Oranges, might
be put into Juleps to give them an Acidity, instead of Spirit of Vitriol, and
no harm done. But a few drops, forsooth, of that suspected Spirit are more
gentile, and neat, and, for the great honor of Chemistry, are grown into
common use, almost as much as salt for our meat.

Natural Remedies will prevail, when we have tried as many pretty conceits as
we please. Nature will provide us Herbs and Roots, when Chemists, and
Chemistry, as to great part of it, are dead and buried, and have undergone the
same Fate that all particular Remedies of Hectors, and great Boasters have
hitherto done, by the wise disposal of all-seeing Providence. They dye commonly
with their Masters, or if they do outlive their thread of time, they soon
decline more and more, till they come to lose all their Esteem.

Nevertheless upon urgent occasions, when Symptoms are exceeding violent, and
are not to be conquered with ordinary means, Acid Spirits may, and perhaps
ought to be used. As in a Pox or Gonorrhea, when Defluxions are violent, and
Symptoms accidentally high, when the Patient is almost in despair, and
frightened with unusual Symptoms, we must have recourse to Mercury, let us say
what we will, and exhibit that quantity which otherwise we should not, if the
person had been rightly treated at first; as we are forced to use Actual
Cauteries, to prevent Gangrenes, and burn to the purpose, when there is a
necessity for it: So in cases of the like nature, the disguised fire in Acids
may be given inwardly, with safety enough. Pestilential Fevers, where the
Blood is wholly fluid, and the Fibers that gave it consistence, and made it
condense, when grown cold, are destroyed by the Subtle Malignity, may perhaps
require better or stronger Acids than Vinegar can give.

Having spoken thus much in reference to Acid fiery Spirits, it may well be
enquired, whether or no in the Distillation of such Spirits, there is any
addition of weight, as there is most sensibly in the instances forenamed. To
which I Answer, that Acid Spirits come forth with such Heat and Violence, that
it is almost Impossible to lute the Junctures so exactly well, as not to lose
some of them, they are so exceeding fiery, and of so piercing a nature, that
some of them will break out, do what you can. How will a room smell of Nitrous
Spirits, while they are a Distilling! they will try what Lungs you are made of,
let the Receiver be never so big or thick. And this is the reason, that the
Ingredients weigh no more than when they were first put in; for as fast as the
fire comes in through the Retort, some Spirits break out at the Junctures.

To prove the nature of these Spirits to be as Hot as I say, I could here
instance an Experiment of this Author. 'Twas in short this: he Distilled
Vitriol three days and three nights together, and there came forth an Acid
Spirit, as it uses to do; when the vessels were cold, he found in the Receiver
nothing but a Mass of salt, or Oil of Vitriol congealed. This salt was so
exceeding Caustic, that if he offered to touch the least part of it, it burnt
like fire, and he was fain immediately to put his hand in water; and when he
threw a little of it into the water, it made just such a hissing noise as
burning coals do; it likewise made the water very hot, hotter than common Oil
of Vitriol will do. See p. 94, 95.

And now I have done with Acids, it will be expedient to speak something of
Alkali's. Knife and Sheath go together. Alkali salts, whether they be made by
burning Plants into Ashes, or by Calcination in a Retort or Crucible, and so
making of them a Lixivium, etc. they all lose the nature they were endowed with
at first, and from Natural Acid Salts become Porous; the fire by opening them
drives out the Acid part, and leaves them full of Pores, ready to receive, and
make an Ebullition with any Acids they shall afterward meet with; they are
partly the remaining terrestrious, and fixed part of what they were, and partly
an additional supplement of fire.

Now there are Natural Alkali's (though not Alkali. salts) which perform the
good effect of Alkali's, such as Perle, Coral, Crab's-eyes, etc. and these may
be used to answer the Indication of sweetning Acids, without any need of having
recourse to those productions of fire, to wit, Alkali salts, unless there be
extraordinary occasion; as I said before concerning the use of Natural Acids,
unless the greatness of Symptoms required the Artificial.

Speaking to this purpose to a most Ingenious Physician, he was pleased to ask
me, whether I did not Roast, and Boil the meat that I eat, or whether that did
terrify me from eating my meat. But I think there is a great deal of difference
between a warmer sort of Infusion, as Boiling is, and heat at a distance, which
in aleasure tract of time dries, and prepares meat to be fit for the Stomach,
which insinuates gently, and which loses the destructive quality of fire, by
reason of the distance, as is the manner of Roasting; there is a vast
difference, I say, between these Heats, and turning Ingredients into a Coal
fire, as is done both in Retorts and Crucibles in the making of Artificial
acids and alkali's. And as for meat, I cannot much approve; and few Physicians,
I think, do, that which is Broiled on the Coals, and so nearly partakes of the
Impression of fire; it digests ill, I am sure, and breeds Melancholic
unwholesome nourishment.

Chemical Digestions are of most excellent use, to draw out the True and
Natural virtue of things; they are made in a Sand-heat, or else in a Balneum,
mild and tender ways of opening bodies; and the Remedies lay no such force
upon Nature, as upon the Disease. Remedies were at first ordered by Nature so
well, as to need but little of our help, they were intended to help those poor
harmless souls, who knew no better than to make an ordinary fire to keep
themselves warm by, and these could gather a proper Herb to heat, or boil in a
little water, and there often came rare feats of it too.

Volatile Spirits and Salts do rise with a gentler fire, and may for that good
reason claim preference to all Fixed Alkali's, whether Spirits or Salts. Upon
great occasions they will seem to work Miracles, raise Dead to Life, and when
the mild flame of the Blood, (in which Life is said to consist) seems to be
quite extinguished, these Volatile Spirits shall light it again a-fresh, and
add new vigor to the languishing efforts of Nature.

But these Volatiles too must be given with great caution, either the humors
must be Prepared, or the Spirits very low,, or else they may Translate the
humors to the Brain, from the parts below, and give the Disease a Nobler Seat
than it had before.

The Spirit of Sal Armoniack is an excellent thing, and though it is derived
from Urinous, and seeming uncleanly Principles, yet if well drawn and rectified
from Phlegm, has oftentimes great effects, and especially if Cohobated upon
Castor and Amber, will yield to few Volatiles, unless that most Noble nay Royal
Preparation of Goddard's drops, Prepared by that Ingenious and Learned
Physician, Dr. Goodall; who upon enquiry into the nature of those Medicines,
has been so free as to acquaint me, that they are separated with that moderate
and gentle degree of fire, that the Balneum, in which the Glass bodies are
placed, are never to exceed the heat of humane blood circulating in the
vessels, or that of an Egg, upon Incubation: by which means there is a most
exact, and even Natural separation of the Volatile and Spirituous parts, from
the fixed and Phlegmatic. Whereas if this mild degree of heat were not
observed, he says the Principles would be confounded together. After this, the
several Principles, with which this Noble Preparation is endowed, are by much
labor, and proper degrees of heat, both in their repeated Sublimations,
Rectifications, and Circulations, made all with a gentle fire, advanced to that
degree of Volatility, that I have reason to esteem it one of the best Nervous,
Cephalic, and Hysteric Medicines, that is used in Chemistry, and much more
effectual than others to answer all those Indications in our Art, where
Volatiles, or Diaphoreticks are thought to be useful. Of this Preparation there
are several sorts, differing secundum magis and minus, being Impregnated with
one or more of the Original constituent Principles, in a higher or lower
degree; so that they may be the better suited to variety of Constitutions, and
answer very different Indications.

Perhaps some will say, I Prevaricate with my Design, in Prefacing such
Cautions to a Book of Chemistry, and making great part of Chemistry a little
too much suspected; and especially considering what I said in praise of this
Art before the COURSE OF CHEMISTRY. But I would have it considered, that I
never thought this sort of Remedies of much use in Fevers, and that Chronical
distempers might possibly find some greater relief from those Active Medicines,
especially after the trial of others, by virtue of that Maxim, a mitioribus ad
fortiora progrediendum. These things may require some longer Discourse, and
perhaps I may urge them further hereafter, when I may speak more at large
concerning Remedies, and give some Practical Observations upon them. What I
have now said, is not intended to discourage from using them upon very great
occasions; only if plain things will do, what need we puzle? where we can use
safe, and innocent Remedies, such as are Natural, and in the way of Nature,
easily Prepared, why should we Neglect them, for sake of such as are, or may
prove dangerous? For my part, I shall never so pin my Practice to the Authority
of any one, no nor many Great Names, that I must forfeit the use of my own
Reason, and Observation. What does good, I Will follow, though a silly Ignorant
should teach me; what does bad, I Will avoid, though never so Magisterial.

THE OPERATIONS Added in this APPENDIX.
OTher Precipitates of Mercury, Page 56 Remarks. Page 57 Chap. 13. Of the Stone
Haematites, Page 68 Sublimation of the Stone Haematites, Page 69 Remarks. Page
70 Valatile Salt of Amber, Page 99 Remarks. Page 100 Soluble Tartar, Page 108
Remarks. Page 109 Chalybeated, or Martial Cryftals of Tartar, ib. Remarks. Page
110 Soluble Tartar Chalybeated, Page 111 Remarks. ib. Volatile Salt of Tartar,
Page 122 Remarks. Page 124 Chap. Of Myrrh, Page 132 Tincture of Myrrh, Page
133 Remarks. ib. Oil of Myrrh per Deliquium. Page 134 Remarks. ib.
AN APPENDIX TO A COURSE of CHEMISTRY, CONTAINING The easiest manner of
performing those Operations that are in use in Physic.
ADD to Page 6. Line 26. In the Remarks upon the Principles of Chemistry.
Nothing but the Oil, can properly be said to be Inflammable, and the Oil is so
much the more so, as the Salts, with which it is closely united, have been more
or less spiritualized. For that which I call Spirit in the Oil, is nothing but
an Essential or Volatile Salt; this Salt is not of it self Inflammable, but
serves to Rarifie and Exalt the parts of the Oil to render them the more
susceptible of Motion, and consequently of Flagration; after the same manner as
when Saltpeter is put to mix with some Oily substance, this Oily matter fires
much more easily than when it is alone; though Saltpeter of it self is not at
all Inflammable, as I shall prove hereafter. We have Examples of the truth of
what I say in Spirit of Wine, Oil of Turpentine, and all other Inflammable
Liquors; for they are only Oils subtilized and refined by the Volatile Salts
they contain. Sticks, and other parts of Vegetables have a great deal of Salt
much like to Saltpeter; this Salt being straightly united with their Oil makes
them the more apt to flame, than if it had not been a part. The Fat of Animals
is full of a Volatile Acid falt; Wax, Rosine, and all other matters that are
inflammable, are impregnated with an Acid Salt, Essential or Volatile.

I say the Salt which causes the flagration of Oils, must be either Volatile or
Essential, for if it were a fixed Salt, 'twould have a contrary effect, it would
allay in some measure the quick motion of the parts of an Inflammable body; and
this we see happens when Sea Salt is flung into the fire, it serves to put it
out. Common Sulphur yields us another instance of the same kind: consisting of
one part Sulphurous or Oily, and another Saline or fixed Acid, which plainly
appears in the opening of it, the Oily part fires, and would soon rise like
other Oils into a great White Flame, but that the Acid part being a load to its
activity hinders it from rising, and so forces it to cast but only a small Blew
Flame; and a proof of what I affirm may be had from mixing Saltpeter with
Sulphur; for the Volatile Salt of Salt peter does Volatilize the Salts of
Sulphur, and causes a White flame to burn violently, as I shall show hereafter
in the Operation of Salt Polychrest.

Add to Page 7. Lin. 22. Is it not likely enough that the bottom of the Sea, or
its shores, may be much like the surface of the Earth we inhabit, and that
there may be Mountains, Rocks, different sorts of earth, and consequently
inexhaustible Mountains of Salt in a Million of places at the bottom of the
Sea, whence it receives its Brackishness?

And it may be there are Waters, which after taking Salt from several earths,
do at last discharge themselves into the sea through an infinite number of
subterranean channels, which do much contribute likewise to making Seawater
salt.

That which confirms me in this opinion is, because there are Lakes in Italy,
Germany, Egypt, the Indies, and many other places, which are as Salt as the
Sea, and can have no other cause but that their waters have happened to run
through Mines of Salt.

I doubt not but many will be apt to object against my Opinion, that the Sea
being of so prodigious boundless an extent, all the Salt I have spoken of,
would not be able to salt it as it is; but if they please to consider, that
this great extent of the Ocean may meet with Mines of Salt in abundance of
places, and what is once dissolved can never be separated from it, I am
persuaded their doubt will soon vanish. Add to what is said, that Seawater
does not contain so great a quantity of Salt as is commonly imagined: and this
is easily proved, if you take the pains to evaporate some of it over the fire,
or dissolve salt in that water; for it will receive a considerable quantity
into it, which is a certain sign, that the water was not so salt before, as it
might have been, for if it had been impregnated with as much as it could,
'twould have dissolved no more.

Therefore we have good reason to believe, that the Sea, which may be called a
large Lake, becomes Salt through the Mines that are therein, and the Salt
Currents that in several places empty into it.

Add to Page 7. Lin. 30. It may be objected that Saltpeter is found in places
where no Acid liquor can be thought to come; but no body can doubt but that
there is an Acid in the Air; which though a very insensible body, is able
enough to enter into Stones and Earths, the truth whereof is seen every day in
Earths that have lost their Salt as much as could be drawn by Art, which upon
being exposed some time to the open air get new additions of Salt, and increase
their weight considerably. Now the liquor that I speak of, which runs in some
places of the earth, receives its Acidity from this Acid Spirit of the Air,
which condenses in some places better than in others, by reason of the
coolness, or some other disposition it finds there.

I conceive therefore that Saltpeter is formed in Stones and Earths by the
Acid Spirit of the Air, after the same manner as Sal Gemme in Mines by an Acid
liquour, and that this Aerial Acid entering insensibly into the body of Stones
produces a Salt at first much like Sal Gemme; but afterward new Acid Spirits
still coming and mixing with it makes it of a middle nature between Volatile
and Fixed. And it is for this reason that a great deal of Saltpeter is taken
from old ruined buildings, for the Stones there continuing a long time exposed
to the Air, receive greater quantity of Spirits than other stones; it is
likewise to be found in Cellers and other places where the Sun casts no heat,
because the Spirit of the Air does there easily condense by reason of the
coolness and moisture.

Add to Page 8. line 3. All Earths being impregnated with an Acid Salt, as I
have said, it is not hard to conceive how that the Salt of Vegetables is
communicated to them from the earth wherein they grew. Their Growth must needs
have proceeded from a Salt juice of the Earth they grew in, which having opened
the Seed through the Fermentation it caused, infinuates and filters it self
into the Fibers that constitute the Plant; and the leaving grounds Fallow some
years, is in order to preserve and retain the Salt that is continually
increased in them by the Acid Spirit of the Air. Likewise Dung, and other
matters, which are said to fatten and fructify Lands, do so by nothing else
but their Salt. Neither need we wonder at the barrenness of Sandy and stony
soils, for that the Acid of the Air cannot unite and fix with them in
sufficient quantity to render them fertile. Nevertheless it is worth
observation, that there are Lands which remain barren too through too great an
abundance of Salt they contain, and for this reason in Egypt they are forced to
temper their grounds with Sand after the Ebbing of the River Nile, to make them
Fertile; because the Earth, 'till that is done, is so full of Salt, that its
pores are quite choked up with it. So that instead of causing any Fermentation
in the Seed, the Salt fixes and depresses it, that it cannot have its motion
free enough to rarifie, and raise a stalk; but now when Sand is mingled with
it, it is able to divide and extend the Salt, which not having then such power
of fixing the Seed, it Ferments and rises into a Plant. Whence it may be seen,
that too much Salt is as Offensive to the Earths fertility, as too little, and
that it is the same thing with other Fermentable matters as it is with Earths,
they come to ferment by means of a moderate quantity of Salt mixed with them,
for if you add too much, the Fermentation will be spoiled.

Again, every kind of Salt is not fit to fertilize lands, it must be a Volatile
Salt, or approaching to the nature of Saltpeter, to serve for Vegetation; a
Salt too fixed would rather spoil it, and it has been observed that places which
should fructify, have brought forth nothing, when Sea Salt has been sprinkled
upon them; the reason of which is for that this Fixed Salt hinders the
Fermentation that was necessary to produce fertility.

Nevertheless it sometimes happens, that the Ashes of Vegetables, though full
of a fixed salt, do serve to fertilize; and this Country men are well
acquainted with, who in some places where they find their Lands too lean and
barren to yield any thing without assistance of Art, do use at certain seasons
of the year to burn Fern and Turfs upon them, and spread about the Ashes. Now
it is by reason of a Lixivious salt in the Ashes, that the Lands are hereby
improved.

But this happens for the same reason as I said before, for the fixed salt of
Vegetables that lies in the Ashes is very Porous, as I shall prove hereafter;
and so does very well mix with the Spirits or Acid Salts of the Air, and turns
easily into Saltpeter, as when the Spirit of Saltpeter mixed with an Alkali
salt, makes a good Saltpeter.

As for sea salt, possibly it might happen, that if it were left in the Earth
for some considerable time, 'twould impregnate with the Spirit of the Air, and
so being at length Volatilized would render a place fertile. But because it is
a very compact body, and its parts closely united, the Volatilizing of it would
be a tedious business, and so the present requisite Fermentation failing, the
place would remain barren too long to gratify our expectations.

It Is very likely that the Volatile or Nitrous salt meets in the Earth with
some Sulphurous or fat matter, that is continually raised by the Subterranean
heat toward the Surface of the Earth, and unites with it. This mixture of a
Volatile salt and Sulphur together may much contribute toward explicating the
manner of Vegetation; for just as the mixture of Sulphur and Saltpeter does
excellently dispose to an Exaltation by heat, which will not happen while they
are separated; so the Bituminous or fat part of the earth mixing with
Saltpeter, which all Earths have, the subterranean heat exalts them much more
easily, than if the Salt were alone. And now let us see what happens from this
Exaltation to the production of Plants.

Some part of this Sulphurous salt, meeting with seed in the earth proper to
grow, does enter into the seed, and cause a Fermentation, that is to say,
suppling the parts of the seed, disposes it to open it self. Now it is very
certain, and what has been sensibly demonstrated by Microscopes, that each
grain of seed contains in little the whole Plant with all its parts. Wherefore
this opening the body of the seed is by reason that the sulphurous salts
entering at the pores of the Root of this small Plant, and by their Volatile
quality insinuating all along the Fibers which constitute the Plant, do orderly
display before us what was before but very confused in respect of us.

These salts do never enter at the head of the Plant, and so descend to the
Root, though often the Root of the Seed lies uppermost, and the head or stalk
downwards, because the Pores of the stalk are not of such a Figure as is proper
to receive them, whereas those of the Root have a proper contexture.

The Volatility of these Salts does also cause the stalk, though seated
downwards, to rise upwards, and follow their tendency, which is always up; and
this is that which by extending and enlarging the Fibers of the Plant, makes it
grow to that height which their nature requires.

It Is probable that this fat part of earth insinuating with the salt, as I have
said, does make the Oil of a mixed body; for we find that those matters which
help best to fertilize, are full of Volatile salt and Oil, as Dung, Urine, and
Plants corrupted.

It Is fit to observe here, that the salt does act after another-guise manner
than the Oil in hindering the Fermentation or corruption of the matter it is
mixed with; for it does not only stop the pores, and hinder the air from
entering, but fixes it likewise by its hooked parts, that it can neither have
motion nor rarefaction, for which reason it is that Meat is salted in order to
keep it sweet, and does thereby remain firm and compact for some time.

Three kinds of salt are drawn from Vegetables, an Acid salt called Essential,
a Volatile, and a Fixed salt. The first is like Saltpeter, and sometimes like
Tartar, according as it contains more or less earth; this salt is drawn from
the juice of the Plant, as I said before; for after expression and purifying
this juice, it is set in a vessel in some cool place a few days without
stirring, and the salt shoots into Crystals all about. This Acid salt may be
said to be the true salt that was in the Plant, because the means that are used
in drawing it are Natural, and such as cannot change its nature; but this cannot
be said of those others, because the violent fires that are used about them
make impressions of another nature, and their effects are very different, so
that the fire seems to alter and disguise them, as I shall show in the
following discourse.

The second salt, or the Volatile salt of Plants is usually drawn from seeds or
fruits Fermenting. While it remains in the Vegetable, it differs from the
Essential salt only in this, that being driven up higher by Spirits, it becomes
more Volatile. The Fermentation that is caused in fruits by beating and
bruising them, does very much assist in Volatilizing the salt; for it sets the
particles at work, and disposes them for an easier separation; but it happens
that in the great circulation, or continual motion this salt is in, it unites
so strongly with the Oil that Fruits and Seeds are full of, that they cannot be
separated by Crystallizing the juice, as they can in drawing them from other
parts of the Plant. We must therefore have recourse to the help of fire. The
Fruit or seed which contains the Volatile salt, as I shall prove in its proper
place, is Distilled by a Retort, and Water comes forth in the first place, then
an Oil, and lastly a most keen ill scented Salt (that easily flies away) upon
increasing the fire to purpose, is driven into the Receiver. Now it is plain
that fire has changed, or else added some thing to this salt; for when 'twas in
the Plant, it had no manner of smell like that it gets by distillation. But to
show there is a strange Alteration in this salt, as soon as it is mixed with an
Acid, there presently appears an Ebullition, or Effervescency, which remains
until the Acid has thoroughly entered into the salt. Which circumstance does not
happen to it in its Natural being, it is this Ebullition that gave it the name
of a Volatile Alkali, to distinguish it from a Fixed Alkali, of which I shall
speak hereafter. The Chemists will needs have this Volatile Alkali to be in the
Plant, just the same as when it is drawn; that is to say, they make this a
different species of salt, lying hid under the Acid, until it is laid open by
the force of fire. But this opinion is founded on no credible experience, for
Anatomize the Plant how you think fit, without using fire, and you shall never
find any other but an Acid salt. Doubtless 'twill be said, that all other ways
of diffecting Plants even into their salts, prove too weak without the
assistance of this grand dissolvent fire. But if we consider impartially how
fire acts, we shall be forced to acknowledge that it rather destroys, and
confounds the greatest part of the bodies it opens, and does not leave them in
the natural state they were in before, and especially when it is driven with
that force which is necessary to draw this salt. So that I see no reason why
the Species of things should be multiplied without necessity, by admitting many
kinds of salts in Plants, and I conceive with much more probability, that the
Volatile Alkali salt is a part of the Acid Essential salt I spoke of, which
having been first disposed to a Volatile nature, and afterward driven by the
force of fire, draws along with it a portion of Empyreumatical Oil, that gives
it such a disagreeable smell, and some terrestrious calcined matter, with which
it is so strongly united, and which changes its nature, by breaking the Saline
points, and rendering them Porous, so that any Acid liquor being cast upon it,
enters into the Pores and violently divides the parts, whence follows the
Effervescency. Perchance likewise this Calx or Calcined earth may have retained
igneous particles, and so the edges of the Acid beginning to open the Pores of
Salt, these little igneous bodies being in a violent motion do strike about,
and break open all their small prisons, and from thence it may be, the violent
Ebullition happens. Such as are prejudiced with the Sentiments of ancient
Chemists, will relish very hardly this new Opinion of mine; but I am persuaded
if any one will take the pains to examine the matter near at hand, and make
some Experiments on the salts of Plants, he shall find my Discourse come near
enough to truth.

The last salt or the fixed salt of Plants remains united with the earthy part
after Distillation of the other substances; the matter is taken out of the
Retort, and calcined in an open fire, for to free it from the soot that
blackens it; afterward the salt is drawn by a Lixivium as I have shown before.
This salt is called fixed, in comparison with others, because this cannot sublime.

The Chemists do assure us, but with little foundation for it, that in
Terrestrial bodies, in Metalls, Corals, Pearls, and generally in all bodies
that Ferment with Acids, there is an hidden Alkali in them, which is one of the
Principles of Fermentation, wherefore they give them the name of Alkali's; but
because no manner of Salt can be drawn from them, to prove their Opinion, and
they have no other rational Argument to persuade me, they must give me leave to
think otherwise than they have done, and I conceive that the contrary to what
they have established will serve me better to explicate the truth.

Following therefore the Principle I have laid, I believe that those
Terrestrial bodies are themselves Alkali's, rather than that the Ebullition of
Acid and Alkali proceeds from a salt supposed to be contained in them; and
further that the salts are never Alkali's 'till they have undergone the force
of fire, and been reduced into a Calx. I have proved, speaking of the nature of
Volatile salt, that the fire did very much change the substances of things; and
as I have shown there is good reason to think there is but only one species of
salt in Plants, and the Volatile salt is but a change wrought by fire, I shall
proceed upon the same Principle, and affirm that there is no fixed Alkali salt
in Plants, but that by Calcination the fire has fixed a part of the Acid
Essential salt with the earthy part that has served to break the keenest of its
points, and rendered them Porous, like a Calx. It Is by reason of these Pores
that this kind of salt grows humid and melts so easily when exposed to the Air;
and the Terrestrious parts do turn it into an Alkali, for if they were not
mixed with it, 'twould continue still an Acid salt, and opposed to Alkali. But
to clear up this point the better, we must consider as nicely as may be the
nature of an Acid and an Alkali.

Whenas the nature of a thing so obscure as that of salt, cannot better be
explicated, than by admitting to its parts such figures as are answerable to
the effects it produces; I shall affirm, that the Acidity of any liquor does
consist in keen particles of salts, in motion; and I hope no body will offer to
dispute whether an Acid has points or no, seeing every ones experience does
demonstrate it, they need but taste an Acid to be satisfied of it, for it
pricks the tongue like any thing keen and finely cut; but a demonstrative and
convincing proof that an Acid does consist of pointed parts is, that not only
all Acid salts do Crystallize into edges, but all Dissolutions of different
things, caused by acid liquors, do assume this figure in their Crystallization;
these Crystalls consist of points differing both in length and bigness one from
another, and this diversity must be attributed to the keener or blunter edges
of the different sorts of Acids; and so likewise this difference of the points
in subtilty is the cause that one acid can penetrate and dissolve well one sort
of mixed, that another cannot rarifie at all: thus Vinegar dissolves Lead, which
aqua fortis cannot: Aqua fortis dissolves Quicksilver, which Vinegar will not
touch; Aqua Regalis dissolves Gold, whenas Aqua fortis cannot meddle with it; on
the contrary Aqua fortis dissolves Silver, but can do nothing with Gold, and so
the rest.

As for Alkali's, they are soon known by pouring an Acid upon them, for
presently, or soon after, there rises a violent Ebullition, which remains until
the Acid finds no more bodies to rarifie. This effect may make us reasonably
conjecture that an Alkali is a terrestrial and solid matter, whose pores are
figured after such a manner that the Acid points entering into them do strike at
and divide whatsoever opposes their motion, and according as the parts of which
the Alkali is compounded, are more or less solid, the Acids finding more or
less resistance, do cause a stronger or weaker Ebullition. So we see the
Effervescency that happens in the dissolution of Coral is very much milder than
that in the dissolution of Silver.

There are as many different Alkali's, as there are bodies that have different
pores, and this is the reason why an Acid will Ferment one strongly, and
another not at all; for there must be a due proportion between the Acid points,
and the Pores of the Alkali.

The nature of Alkali's being thus established, there will be no need of flying
to an imaginary salt in Plants for explication of the Effervescency; and 'twill
be easily conceived that if an Alkali salt is full of a terrestrial matter that
renders it porous like other Alkali's, it must cause an Ebullition. That which
I said, speaking of Volatile salts, may here be added, that the Igneous
particles breaking out through the Pores of the Alkali salt, where they became
imprisoned in the Calcination, do much contribute to the raising this
Effervescency. And really when the Acid Spirit of Vitriol, or Aquafortis is
cast upon an Alkali salt, there happens as strong an Ebullition, as when this
liquor is flung into the fire.

The Fermentation that happens to Dow, to New Wine, and such like things
differs from that I now spoke of, in that it is more gentle, and slow; this is
caused by the Acid Natural salt contained in them, which expanding and exalting
it self by its motion, does rarifie and raise up the grosser and sulphurous
part that endeavors to allay its motion, from whence it comes that the matter
swells up.

The reason why an Acid does not make Sulphurous things Ferment, with so much
noise and suddenness as Alkali's, is, because that Oils consist of pliant parts
that yield and make no resistance to the points of Acids, as a piece of Wool or
Cotton will yield and give way to needles that are thrust into it. Thus
methinks two sorts of Fermentations may be admitted of, the one of an Acid with
an Alkali, which may be called Ebullition, and the other, when an Acid does by
little and little rarifie some softish matter, as Dow, or clear and Sulphurous,
as Must, Syder, and all other juices of Plants. This last sort may rather be
called Fermentation.

It Is further remarkable that the Acid and Alkali do so destroy one another in
their conflict, that when as much Acid has been by degrees poured as is
necessary to penetrate the Alkali in all its parts, it is then no more an
Alkali, nor can it be so again, though you wash it to carry off the Acid,
because it has no longer that disposition of Pores which is requisite in an
alkali; and the Acid breaks and loses its points in the contest especially when
the alkali is pretty compact and solid; so that if you would recover your Acid
again, you will find it has in a manner lost all its acidity, and retains only a
sharpness. But the Sulphur or Oil consisting of supple yielding parts does only
receive some Acid impression, and no such close union, so that it can be drawn
from Sulphurous bodies much the same as when it was mixed.

The Salt of Animals does differ but little from the Volatile salt of Seeds and
Fruits, both which are drawn in a Retort; they have the same kind of smell,
taste, and other virtues. The Volatile salt of animals keeps dry a longer time
than the others, because it carries away with it more fixed salt than those
others. As for fixed salt, animals do yield but a very little of it, and in some
animals you shall find none at all; it is drawn as the fixed salt of Plants;
they are both alkali's.

There is no salt that can be called alkali, to be found in the parts, or
humors of animals, until they have passed the fire; a Saline serosity may be
observed in them, but that salt is acid; and it proceeds doubtless from the
Aliments that are taken for nourishment. Now as I have shown that there is only
an acid salt in Earths and Vegetables, so I may say the same of Animals, and
the rather because no other kind of salt can be found in them in their Natural
state; the alkali salts that are drawn from them, are only several mutations of
an Acid salt, made by fire, which mingles with them earthy particles after the
manner I have spoken of treating of the Alkali's of Plants. But it is
observable, that whereas there is a greater proportion of Spirits in Animals
than Seeds, these Spirits do serve to exalt all the Salt; which is the reason
that less fixed salt is to be found in Animals than Plants.

As for what many do say that Choler causes an Effervescency like an alkali,
when an acid is cast upon it, it is a mistake through want of right Observation,
for no Ebullition at all happens for some time. Nevertheless I will not say,
that an Acid produces no Fermentation in Choler, Blood, and other parts of the
body, for it does very often really do that; but that is no more than uses to
be done in New Wine, Beer, and other liquors of the like nature. I have already
explicated this sort of Fermentation.

We should not omit speaking of the Coagulation that is made in Milk after a
Fermentation caused either by Heat, or some Acid put into it.

Methinks here is no need at all of supposing an Alkali salt, that ferments
with the Acid of this liquor, as many suppose for explicating this Effect,
since if we consider but the natural composition of Milk, we shall find nothing
but a Creamy substance swimming on the Serum, and mixed only superficially with
it, by the intermixture of some salt; so that it is in a fitting state of
separation, as soon as the salt gains a little more motion than it had, whether
it be by Fermentation, or by increasing its activity by an acid of its own
nature. Thus when the Heat of the Summer, or fire has stirred up the acid that
is in the Milk, or else some acid is poured into it, the edges of the acid do
cut and divide the Creamy part, to gain a free motion in the Serum, and
separate into Curd all the Butter and Cheese. Now there is no strangeness in the
Precipitation of the Curd, especially when an acid has been poured upon the
Milk, for besides the weight it gains by thickning, some part of the acids do
mix with it, and increase its weight; for according as the acid that was
mingled is stronger or weaker, the Curd does Precipitate more or less.

Perhaps some will say, for as much as acid is always the cause of Coagulation
in Milk, there is no great likelihood that a salt of the same nature should be
the instrument of uniting the several parts of Milk.

But it must be considered, that although there is an acid in Milk (as no body
can doubt, seeing it sowres of it self, when stale) this acid is as it were
tied up in the ramous parts of the Oil, so that there it loses all its motion
and cannot come to action but by rarifying the Oil, and making it fit to mix
with the serous part; it is the due proportion of this salt, Oil, and serum,
that makes the Butter and Cheesy part of Milk.

Now I hope I have said enough to establish what I have affirmed, that there is
no salt in nature besides the acid, out of which all other salts are made, and
that the Alkali salt has no Natural existence in mixed bodies. My discourse will
be the better conceived of, speaking of the Operations of Chemistry, and you will
find that by this Principle, which I may call the most Natural and disengaged
of all that have been laid 'till now, I shall be able to give account of many
Phaenomena's that have never been explicated by common Principles.

Add to Page 19. lin. 1. Of Minerals.
Whatsoever is found Petrified in the Earth, or on its surface, is called
Mineral.

Petrification is made by a Coagulation of acid or salt spirits, that are found
in the pores of the Earth.

This Petrification differs according to the diverse dispositions, or different
nature of the Earth, and according to the time that Nature uses in its
perfection.

The growth of Minerals proceeds from an accumulation, or from several veins of
congeled Waters, that do as it were glue together, and these veins are the
cause that all the adjacent parts have their Sinus, and meetings a travers one
another, and not running directly downwards.

These Sinus, like so many joints, are of great help to Laborers to cut in the
Quarries; for by those cavities the stones are in great measure separated
beforehand, whereas 'twould be extreme hard working them out, if nature had
not so concurred.

The growth of Minerals is very different from that of Vegetables, and Animals;
for whereas the former does happen through an agglutination of congeled waters,
as I have said; the latter is performed by means of juyces that insinuate and
spread in the vessels and fibers, that Animals and Plants do consist of.

Metals do differ from Minerals in being malleable, which the others are not.

They are counted seven, Gold, Sylver, Iron, Tinn, Copper, Lead, and
Quicksylver, this last is not malleable of it self, but is so mingled with the
others; but because this is thought to be the Seed of Metals, it is numbered with
the rest.

Astrologers have conceited that there was so great an affinity and
correspondence between the Seven Metals before named, and the seven Planets,
that nothing happened to the one, but the other shared in it; they made this
correspondence to happen through an infinite number of little bodies that past
to and from each of them; and they suppose these corpuscles to be so figured
that they can easily pass through the pores of the Planet and Metal they
represent, but cannot enter into other bodies because their pores are not
figured properly to receive them; or else if they do chance to get admittance
into other bodies, they cannot fix and stay there to contribute any nourishment;
for they do imagine that the Metal is nourished and perfected by the Influence
that comes from its Planet, and so the Planet again the same from the Metal.

For these reasons they have given these seven Metals the name of the seven
Planets, each accordingly as they are governed: and so have called Gold the
Sun, Sylver the Moon, Iron Mars, Quicksylver Mercury, Tinn Jupiter, Copper
Venus, and Lead Saturn.

They have likewise fancied that each of these Planets has his day apart to
distribute liberally his Influence on our Hemisphere; and so they tell us that
if we work upon Sylver on Monday, Iron on Tuesday, and so of the rest, we shall
attain our end much better than on other days.

Again they have taught us that the seven Planets do every one govern some
particular principal part of our bodies; and because the Metals do represent
the Planets, they must needs be mighty specific in curing the distempers of
those parts, and keeping them in good plight. Thus they have assigned the Heart
to Gold, the Head to Sylver, the Liver to Iron, the Lungs to Tinn, the Reins to
Copper, and the Spleen to Lead.

Thus you see in short what some of the soberest Astrologers do fancy
concerning Metals, and they draw consequences from hence, which 'twould be too
long here to relate. I have told you what the soberest among them say; for
nothing can be so absurd as what some of them would have us believe.

It Is no hard matter to disprove these conceits, and show how groundless they
are; for no body ever yet got near enough to the Planets, to satisfy himself
whether they are really of the same nature with Metals, or whether any
Effluviums of bodies do fall from them to us.

Nevertheless some can conceit that these things are proved by Experience; but
in truth there is nothing to confirm their Opinion, and we find it every day
plain enough, that the Faculties and Virtues are utterly false, which they do
attribute to the Planets and Metals; the Metals indeed are of good use in
Physic, and excellent Remedies may be drawn from them; but their effects may
better be explicated by Causes near at hand than the Stars.

Add to Page 19. Lin. 10. Gold is found in Mines in several places, both in
Europe, and other parts of the World; it is usually attended with Water and
very hard stones, such as are extreme hard to dig; there are likewise several
stones that contain particles of Gold, such as are called Golden Marcassites,
the Lapis Lazuli, and Lapis Armenus.

Covetousness that has always prevailed on the minds of men, has not forborne to
possess the Chemists in hopes to make Gold; they have conceited that the
production of Gold was the End that Nature always aims at in all her Mines, and
that she is hindered in her design, as often as she produces other Metals which are
called Imperfect.

And upon this fancy they have spared no time, nor pains, nor cost, in exalting
and perfecting these other Metals, and turning them into Gold; this is that
which they call the Grand Operation of all, or the search after the Pholosphers
stone.

Some of them to compass their End do make a mixture of Gold with such other
matters as serve to purify them from their grosser parts, and work their
Preparations with great fires, others do put them a Digesting in Spirituous
liquors, in imitation of Nature that always uses a gentle Heat in her
Operations, and so do reduce them into a state of Corruption, to draw thereby
their Mercury, which they think to have the aptest disposition to turn into
Gold. Others again do search after the seed of Gold, in Gold it self, and these
make no doubt to find it there, as the seed of a Vegetable is more likely to be
found in the Vegetable it self than otherwhere; in order to this they open the
body of Gold by proper Dissolvents, then set it a digesting either by a
Lamp-fire, or the heat of the Sun, or that of Dung, or some other degree of
Fire, to be kept all along at an equal height, and such as is nearest to a
Natural heat, and this to draw out the Mercury of Gold; for they are persuaded
that if they could once obtain this same Mercury, sowing it in the Earth, it
would bring forth Gold, as certainly as a seed does a Plant.

Another sort of these men do take wonderful pains to find out the seed of Gold
in Minerals, as in Antimony for example, thinking there is a sulphur and Mercury
in it as like to those in Gold as can be. Others hope to find it out in
Vegetables, and things that come from them, as in Honey, Manna, Sugar, Wine,
Rosa solis, Rosemary, spleenwort. And others are hot after it in Animals, and
in their Gums, Blood, Urin. But the most Curious and delicate of all, who think
all the rest but Fools in comparison with them, do hunt after the seed of Gold
in the Sun, and in the Dew; for the wisdom of Astrologers has found out that
the Sun is a Body all of Gold melted in the Center of the World, and Coppel'd
by the fire of the stars that environ it about, nay they dare affirm that this
same Gold when it was a purifying did sparkle as Gold does in the Coppel.

I should never make an end of this subject, if I should speak of the labors,
and pains, watchings, vexations and frettings, and especially the cost these
unfortunate men do plunge themselves into, in following their several fancies;
they are so extremely prepossessed with the conceit of becoming Rich all of a
sudden, that they are altogether incapable of any sober admonition, and they
shut their ears to any thing than can be said to disabuse them; so that all
other Philosophers, that are not besotted with their fantastical opinions, are
by them thought and called Profane, reserving to themselves the name of the
only True Philosophers, or Philosophers paramount.

But the saddest consideration of all is, to see a great many of them, who have
spent all the flower of their years, in this desperate concern, in which
nevertheless they pertinaciously run on, and consume all they have, at last
instead of recompense for their miserable fatigues, reduced to the lowest
degree of Poverty. Penotus will serve us for an instance of this nature, among
thousands of others, he died a hundred years old wanting but two, in the
Hospital of Yverdon in Switzerland, and he used to say before he died, having
spent his whole life in vainly searching after the Philosophers stone, that if
he had a mortal Enemy he did not dare to encounter openly, he would advise him
above all things to give up himself to the Study and Practice of Alchymy.

Though I deny not absolutely, that some certain Artist, by a particular
method, might have got the way of making Gold heretofore, nor that some body
may be as lucky in time to come; yet there is more appearance of Impossibility
than Possibility in the case, because of the small knowledge that any of us
have of the Natural Composition of this Mixed; for seeing that Gold as well as
Sylver is drawn from Mines environed with Waters, it is very probable that
these Waters do bring along with them some Saline Principles that congele and
incorporate in Earths of a particular composition, and whose Pores are disposed
in such a manner as it is impossible for Art to imitate. Nevertheless in order
to make Gold, a perfect knowledge of the Salts that the Waters of the Mines do
convey, is very requisite, as well as the disposition of the Matrixes or Earths
in which they do congeal. Thus we see that working after Gold is working in the
dark, and Alchymy seems very well defined by one thus: Ars sine art, cujus
principium mentiri, medium laborare, and finis mendicare, an Art without any
Art, whose beginning is Lying, middle is nothing but Labor, and whose end is
Beggary.

Gold taken inwardly is thought to be a most potent Cordial, because
Astrologers tell us it receives its Influence from the Sun, which is as it were
the Heart of the World, and by the communication of those Influences to the
Heart, it serves to fortify and cleanse it from all impurities; upon which
ground a great many Operations have been invented in order to open this Metal,
and separate its Sulphur from its Salt. Moreover this Operation by way of
bravery is called Aurum Potabile, because this Salt or this Sulphur dissolving
in a Liquor, can be taken by way of Potion: And because this Aurum Potabile can
be thought to be distributed into all parts of the body, they fancy it can
drive out every thing that interrupts the Functions of Nature, that it can free
him that takes it from all fear of any Diseases for a long time, and can
prolong life.

But this Opinion is built upon a weak foundation, and Experience does not
confirm any of these great effects; for what assurance can one have or what
Evidence is there, that the Sun is such a great friend of Gold, or that it
bestows more Influences on it, than other mixed bodies; it is a thing that can
never be proved, and we see that the Sun casts it light and heat in general
upon all bodies, without making any difference. Who can understand, that the
Pores of Gold are so disposed, as to have a greater facility of retaining the
Suns Influences, than other Metals or things? This will be full as hard to
prove as the other.

But though we should grant the Astrologers this supposition concerning the
Suns Influence on Gold, the consequence they draw from it, that therefore it
Fortifies the Heart, would be never a whit the truer; for all that we are able
to apprehend in Gold is, that it is a most compact and weighty body, the union
of whose Principles is extraordinary close; which is proved from hence, that no
Art can instruct us to dissolve it Radically, so as to separate its salt, and
its sulphur. This Gold being beaten into the thinnest Leaves that can be
imagined, and taken inwardly receives not the least change in our bodies, and
is voided the very same it was before, excepting when Quicksylver has been
taken beforehand, for it unites with that, as I have said.

Wherefore we must conclude, that if Gold has received more Influence from the
Sun than other Metals, yet it is never the fitter to dissolve in our Bodies,
nor to produce those rare effects that are talked of.

I know that stories are told to prove, that Gold does communicate virtue to
the bodies of those who have taken it, and that it loses in the body some of
its quantity; and among other stories it is said, that several persons, who had
fed upon Capons, nourished with a Paste made of a mixture of Vipers and Gold
together, have been cured that way of several Diseases; but there is a great
deal more reason to attribute this effect rather to the Vipers than Gold; for
we know by experience that Vipers taken inwardly without any thing else, do use
to produce diverse sensible effects, whereas we observe none at all in Gold,
when it is given alone.

As for the Loss of Gold in bodies, they prove it by their gathering together
all the Excrements of those Capons, and Calcining them, for they could obtain
again but the fourth part of the Gold that was used in the Paste the Capons had
fed upon. But this proof is as weak as the former; for the Excrements of the
Capons being full of a Volatile Salt, that Salt may have Volatiliz'd and
carried away the greatest part of the Gold during the Calcination, after the
same manner as we see several Volatile liquors to sublime Gold. I know well
enough by my own Experience, that there are such Volatiles as are able to carry
away Gold; for having one day mixed three ounces of Gold with about three
pounds of matter consisting of diverse Volatile Ingredients; I put the mixture
about a month afterward into the Coppell, and the Gold appeared very
resplendent in the middle of the mixture; but blowing, as we use to do, in its
purification, I was astonished to see it Exalt away by little and little into
the air, until there was not a grain of it left.

Thus no body can be assured that Gold did nourish those Capons; but besides,
though some of it should be dissolved in the body, as it does in Aqua Regalis,
which is very hard to conceive; though some of it should exalt, nay though some
should plainly glitter in the Chyle, here is no proof nevertheless that it
produces such wonderful effects.

Now although I have asserted that Gold taken alone does not receive any change
as for health, yet I value very much several preparations of Gold made with
Spirits; for it is these Spirits that give certain determinations to Gold
according to their nature, and make it operate as it does. When I speak of
Aurum Fulminans, I shall give an instance of what I now say.

Add to Page 29. The last line of the Remarks upon Aurum Fulminans.
We need not fear lest Aurum Fulminans taken inwardly, and heated by the
stomach, should cause such a Detonation there, as it does when set over the
fire in a spoon; for so much the more moisture as comes to it, so much the less
noise does it make. Now it cannot be questioned, but there is liquidity enough
in the stomach, besides the liquid vehicle it is usually given in. There is no
need then of calling in the acids of the stomach, as some do, to unite with the
salts of Aurum Fulminans, and drive them out of the body of this Metal: for
besides that the most clear and disinterested Explications and such as fall
most under our sense, ought always to be preferred, 'twould be too hard a
matter to maintain that; it is true if you wet Aurum Fulminans with the spirit
of Vitriol, or Salt, or Sulphur, the Fulmination is thereby hindered, but this
happens from the acids fixing by their weight the Volatility of those Salts
that remain in the Pores of the Gold.

In the Chapter of Gold I could reckon up several other Preparations that have
been invented, but because they are out of use, I shall not swell this Book
with an account of them.

Add to page 51. Remarks upon the Magistery of Bismuth.
You must use a large Bolt-head to dissolve the Bismuth in, because the great
Ebullition that happens, as soon as Spirit of Niter is cast upon it, requires
room to move in. You must likewise have a care, as much as you can, of
receiving the Vapors at your Nose or Mouth, for they are very offensive to the
breast.

This quick and violent Ebullition proceeds from the acids quick penetration of
the large pores of Bismuth as soon as thrown upon it, and the acid violently
divides all that opposes its motion. It happens also that the Bolt-head grows
so hot, that one cannot endure ones hand upon it, because the points of the
Menstruum do chafe against the solid body of Bismuth with such force, that you
may observe from thence much the same heat, as when two solid bodies are rubbed
against one another. Add to this, that the great store of igneous particles
contained in Spirit of Niter, may much increase this heat.

If the Dissolution becomes turbid through some impurities in the Bismuth, you
must pour into it about twice as much Water and filter it; for if you should go
to filter it without Water, it would coagulate like salt in the Filter, and not
pass through. This Coagulation proceeds from the acid spirits of Niter that are
included in the particles, of Bismuth, which finding too little liquor to swim
in and disperse, do gather together into Crystals, when the dissolution is cold.

This Magistery may be made by pouring in great quantity of Fountain water
without any salt, into the dissolution, but it is made the quicker, when you
use salt, and the Precipitation is the better because salt does encounter and
break some of the acids that water alone was not able to weaken sufficiently.

Now some difficulty appears here in conceiving how plain water alone comes to
precipitate Bismuth, Lead, Antimony, which the acid had dissolved, and yet can
do nothing at all to the Precipitating Gold, Sylver, or Mercury, without the
assistance of some salt or other body; I do imagine that the former having
large Pores, Acids can stick so close in them that water may force them out;
but Gold, Silver, and Mercury, having finer Pores in comparison than the other,
do retain acids so very closely that the weak impulses of water alone can make
no separation; some more active body is requisite to do it.

The Augmentation which happens to Bismuth when made into a Magistery, does
come from some part of Spirit of Niter that remains still in it,
notwithstanding the Precipitation and Lotion.

Add to page 52. Chap. Of Lead.
Lead serves to Purify Gold and Sylver, and may be said to act in the Coppell,
much after the same manner as the white of an Egg does in Clarifying a Syrop;
that is boiled in a Basin; for as the gross and terrestrious impurities of a
Syrop do stick to the white of an Egg by reason of its glutinous nature, and
are driven to the sides of the Basin in the stirring, so do the Heterogeneous
parts that were mixed with Gold and Sylver, stick unto the Lead, and by the fire
are driven to the sides of the Coppell like unto a Scum.

Add to page 53. Remarks upon Calcination of Lead.
There happens an observation in the Calcination of Lead, as well as several
other things, which very well deserves some reflection. It Is that although the
Sulphurous or Volatile parts of Lead fly away in the Calcination, which loss
should indeed make it weigh the less, nevertheless after a long Calcining it is
found, that instead of losing it increases in weight.

Some trying to explicate this Phenomenon do say, that as long as the violence
of the flame does open and divide the parts of the Calx of Lead, the acid of
the Wood or other matter that burns, does insinuate into the pores of this
Calx, where it is stopped or fixed by the Alkali; but this reason will not hold,
when it is considered that this Augmentation comes to pass as well when Lead is
Calcined with Coals as Wood, for Coals contain only a fixed Salt that rises not
at all.

It Is better therefore to refer this effect to the disposition of the pores of
Lead in such a manner, that part of the fire insinuating into them does there
remain imbodied, and cannot get forth again, whence the weight comes to be
increased.

If you would revive this Calx of Lead by way of Fusion, its parts do squeez
and express the igneous particles that were enclosed, and the Lead does thereby
weigh less than it did when reduced into a Calx, for by this means the
Sulphurous parts are separated and lost.

Add to page 60. Remarks upon the Burning Spirit of Saturn.
If you use six ounces of Salt of Saturn in your Distillation, you will draw an
Ounce and six drachms of liquor, and there will remain in the Retort six ounces
and six drachms of a blackish and yellow matter; and if you put this matter
into a Crucible, setting it in the fire, 'twill melt, and you will regain four
ounces of Lead, and half an ounce, or it may be six drachms of a yellow earth
colored like Litharge of Gold.

It Is evident from this Operation that an ounce and six drachms of the more
Acid parts of Vinegar are sufficient to impregnate four ounces and two drachms
of Lead, to reduce it into Salt; but the strangest thing that happens to it, is
the great change that Acids do give it, insomuch that it is not to be known
again in the least.

The Augmentation that the Lead in the Retort does here receive, is as plain as
may be; for six drachms are taken out of it at last, more than were put in of
Salt of Saturn, besides an ounce and six drachms of liquor that were drawn out.
So that we must necessarily conclude, that the four ounces and two drachms of
Lead are grown increased two ounces and an half.

It Is probable enough that the more rarefied the Lead becomes, the more capable
'twill be of igneous particles; for although the Salt of Saturn is not suffered
to remain long in the fire, yet the Lead increases apace. Possibly it may be
that as fast as the Acids go out of it, igneous bodies enter in their place,
and open likewise the Pores of Lead by their nimble motion; but these Pores
must needs be so disposed as to shut again like valvules, and hinder the return
back of those fiery parts.

When this Calx is Calcined in an open fire in a Crucible, without stirring it,
the parts of Lead close together and expel the fiery particles, so that the
Lead revives as it was before, and recovers its Natural gravity.

The matter when shut up in the Retort would never be able to revive, let the
fire be made never so strong, because the igneous particles would find no
liberty to get out.

The Yellow earth that is found in the Crucible seems to be of a Golden color,
it is a terrestrious and bituminous impurity that the Lead is separated from.
There should be indeed but two drachms of it, because four ounces of Lead are
drawn off, wherefore the Augmentation must needs be from the fiery parts that
remained in it as in a Calx.

Add to page 61. Chap. 6. lin. 7. Of Copper.
Because Copper contains in it a Corrosive quality, I would advise no body to
use it inwardly.

Copper takes Rust very easily, for if you leave but a drop of Water some hours
upon a piece of it, it creates a Verdegrease. Have a care of drinking water,
that has lain in Copper vessels, for it always dissolves some portion of it,
which appears easily from the taste it leaves in it.

'Twill not be altogether amiss to make mention here of an effect that is no
less strange than usual. It Is that Water or any other liquor that is heated or
boiled in a Copper vessel for a whole day together, savours not at all, or not
so much of the Copper, provided it is not removed off the fire all the time, as
other Water warmed in a like vessel, and put from the fire but an hour; for
whereas water alone can dissolve something of the Copper, it would seem that
being aided with the heat of the fire, it should partake of its nature the more
easily. Now in my opinion this is the most rational explication that can be
given of this matter.

Every body may perceive that when the water begins to heat in a Basin or other
Copper vessel, that is set over the fire, little Atoms do rise at bottom like
the stirring of a powder, and these Atoms do increase according as the water
receives more heat, so that at length they make it boil a high; these little
Atoms can have no other cause than the fiery particles, which passing through
the Basin, do drive the water upwards apace, and rarifie its parts; for this
reason it is that the water is not able to dissolve any of the Copper, for being
continually raised upwards, it can make no impression upon the bottom of the
Basin.

Perhaps some will tell me, the liquor might take the impression of the Copper,
at the sides of the Basin; but it is easy to imagine that though there don't
pass through the sides so many fiery particles as do at the bottom, there do
pass nevertheless enough to hinder the liquor from sticking to or dissolving
any particles of the vessel.

But now on the contrary the Basin being removed from off the fire, and the
motion of the igneous particles being quite ceased, the liquor impregnates of
the Coppery nature with ease, nay and so much the more easily as the fire has
rarefied the metal, and rendered it the more proper for dissolution.

Every thing seems to confirm this Opinion, for if any liquor is put boiling
over a strong fire in a Copper vessel, 'twill not impregnate in the least, but
if you place it upon a small fire, and leave it so for some time, then because
there will not pass enough fiery particles, to cover all the surface of the
vessel, and raise up the liquor, 'twill take some taste of Copper; but this
taste will not be so strong as if you had left it the same length of time in
such a vessel off the fire, after it had been warmed.

Liquors that are full of Salts do take the impression of Copper much more
easily than those that are not. Thus Confectioners do take notice of what I
have mentioned; for though they boil their Confections in vessels of Copper for
a considerable time, they find 'em taste nothing of the Copper, but they know
that if they should leave them but half an hour in the vessel taken off the
fire, they would be tainted with a most loathsome Copper taste.

We may learn from this Discourse, not to use a Copper vessel, when we have a
mind to boil or heat a liquor gently, and when we do think fit to use it, to be
sure to keep a good brisk fire underneath, and not to let what we have boiled,
cool afterward in a vessel of this nature.

Another difficulty does here offer it self on this subject, and it is to know
why a Kettle that has been taken off the fire, is not so hot at bottom as at
the sides, so that as soon as it is removed from off the fire, one may touch it
at bottom without burning ones finger, which cannot de done at the sides without
present scalding.

The reason of which is, that the fiery particles tending upwards through the
bottom of the kettle, which is flat, in a direct line, don't make any stop in
passing through, having but a little distance to conquer before they come into
the liquor; but those that rise on the sides, finding a longer space to make
upon the kettle, do many of them stop in the pores of the Copper.

It Is not the same thing in Kettles that are made in another form, whose bottom
is Globular, because the fiery particles rising up in an indirect line, do find
more to do to pass it through, than in a flat bottom, and so by consequence
more of them do stop in the vessel it self.

Yellow Copper is a mixture of Lapis Calaminaris and Copper, and vessels that
are made of it give less impression to liquors than the others.

Add to page 68. lin. 6. Chap. Of Iron.
Iron is found in many Mines in Europe, in form of a Stone or Marcassite, which
much resembles the Loadstone, but this last is more heavy and brittle than
Iron. The Loadstone is also found in Mines of Iron, and may be reduced into
Iron by a strong fire. Iron for its part does easily acquire the virtue of the
Loadstone, as every body knows, so that these bodies do seem to differ only in
the figure of their Pores, as has been very well observed by our Modern
Philosophers.

Iron in the stone is melted in large Furnaces made on purpose, both to purify
it from some earth, and to bring it into the Form we desire. Having continued
some time in Fusion, it Vitrifies as it were, and much resembles an Email of
several colors; and it enters indeed into the composition of ordinary Emails,
with Lead, Tinn, Antimony, Sand, the Sapphire, the Stone of Perigord, (a
Province in France) Gravelled ashes, and the ashes of a Plant called Kali.
Although Mars does contain an Acid Vitriolick Salt, yet it ceases not being an
Alkali, for it ferments with Acids; and no body needs wonder at this effect,
when they consider there is more Earth than Salt in this Metal, and this Earth
confining this Salt within it, retains Pores enough to receive the Points of
Acids when thrown upon it, and so do the office of an Alkali; for as I have
said speaking of the Principles, it is sufficient for a body to be called an
Alkali, if it has its Pores so disposed as that the Acids may be able through
their motion violently to divide whatsoever stands in their way.

Mars is almost always Astringent by Stool, by reason of its Terrestrious
parts, and Aperitive by Urine, not only by reason of its piercing Salt, but
also because when the body is bound, the humidities do more easily filter by
way of Urine.

Add to page 70. The last line of the Remarks upon Opening Saffron of Mars.
Seeing some persons have pleased to contradict the Remarks I have made upon
the Effects of Mars, and particularly concerning the preference I have given
Iron to Steel for Physical uses, I have thought it not convenient to end this
Chapter, before I have laid down and Answered all their Objections.

First then they say, that because the different substances of Mars cannot be
separated, as those of Animals and Vegetables can, it is in vain an Aperitive
virtue is attributed to its Salt.

Answer. I grant all the substances of Mars cannot be separated so easily as
those of Animals and Vegetables; but because we find Salts to be Aperitive, and
commonly Remedies that are so, are full of Salts, and that water in which Rust
of Iron has steeped for some time, is proper to open by way of Urine, it seems
to me rational enough to attribute this effect of Mars principally to its Salt;
for if the water has carried off any taste or penetrating quality from Iron,
there is nothing at all in Mars that is able to contribute such a virtue to it,
besides the Salt therein dissolved.

Secondly, they say, the Earth and Salt of Mars being united and in a manner
inseparable, cannot act but by consent of both, and receive together jointly
the good or bad impressions, that may happen to them.

I Answer, there is no reason to think the Salt of Mars absolutely inseparable
from the Earth, for the water in which this Metal has steeped or boiled, after
Filtration does contain a Vitriolick taste, and Aperitive quality. Now it is the
effect of Salt to dissolve imperceptibly in Water and drive by Urine, as I have
said; but if any body would take the pains to steep and boil gently the rust of
Iron a good while in water, then Filter it, and so Evaporate the liquor over a
small fire to a Pellicule, he will by Crystallization or by an entire evaporation
of the humidity, gain a small quantity of Salt; and it is probable enough there
was much more in the water, as may be collected from the strong taste it had of
Mars, but it being of a pretty Volatile nature, if fumed away in the
Evaporation. I do not say nevertheless that the close connection of Earth with
the Salt of Mars is altogether unuseful for this effect; on the contrary, I do
conceive that this Earth rendering the Salt more heavy than otherwise it would
be, does help to drive it forwards, and causes the Mars sometimes to penetrate
as much by its gravity as by its Salt; but we must attribute the principal
virtue to the Vehicle which is Salt, since without that, the Earth would be a
dead matter, and would have no more action than other Earths bereaved of their
Salts.

Thirdly, They object, we must not think the hardness of the parts of Steel
above Iron, whose Pores are more open, does render it less proper for all sorts
of Preparations, seeing Spirit of Vitriol, and many other Acids are found to
dissolve with the same ease both Iron and Steel.

I Answer, that if Corrosive Spirits do dissolve Steel, they can dissolve Iron
more easily; and whereas a smaller quantity of them can operate upon Iron than
Steel, a better effect does thence follow.

Fourthly, It Is objected that the solidity of Steel may be an advantageous
circumstance to it, for the better fixing the dissolving Juices that are in the
stomach, and that for Metals the pure are to be chosen before those that are
not so.

I Answer, that instead of the solidity of Steels being helpful to the stomach,
it is certainly of great prejudice to it, as well as to those other parts it is
distributed into; for the juices that are found in the stomach being but weak
dissolvents, are not able to penetrate nor rarifie this metal, if it is too
hard; so that they leave it crude and indigest, heavy and incommodious to this
part: Wherefore it passes away by Stool, without any good effect, as often
happens. But now if a little of this Steel does happen to pass along with the
Chyle, it rather causes than takes away Obstructions, for by insinuating into
small vessels, it stops in the narrow passages, and causes grievous pains.

For what is said concerning the Purity of metals, it is of great use to
Tradesmen, for they by Purifying metals from their more rarefied and Volatile
parts, do make them the less Porous, and so the less liable to suffer prejudice
from the Air or time. Thus Steel is much fitter for Vtensils than Iron, because
its Pores are closer laid together, and it takes not rust so soon as Iron; but
in Remedies it is not the same thing, for those metals that are more Rarefied,
and are easilier dissolved in the Body, are such as we find best effects from,
for the reason I have given. So that what Workmen call Purity, is often but an
impurity in Remedies.

Fifthly, They say, if one would hope to find a distinct Salt in Mars, 'twould
be more likely to find it in that which is Purified, than in the Faeces which
are separated from it, and which are indeed but the Impurities of Iron, that
Steel is made of.

I Answer, there would be some reason to think that Salt might be more easily
found in Steel than Iron, if in the making of Steel, Iron were simply Calcined,
without adding Nails and Horns of Animals in the Calcination; for then it might
be said that the Sulphur of Iron being in part evaporated, its salt would be
the more Soluble: but we must consider that the Volatile Salts which come from
these parts of Animals, being piercing Alkali's, do destroy the Acid salts of
Iron, and do thereby render the Steel more compact, and unfit to take rust,
because the salts which by their motion did rarifie the metal, are fixed, and
as it were mortified, and have not the capaciay of acting as they did. This is
the reason why a Plate of Steel that has infused in Water will not give so
great Impression to it, as a Plate of Iron Calcined, of the same weight,
infusing the same time, will do.

Another thing remarkable in the Calcination of Iron to turn it into Steel, is
that it is thereby deprived of its more Volatile salt, which should have most
effect with it, in hopes to free it from Impurities, and that which is called
the Scories, is the better part of Iron that has been rarefied by its salt.
Thus for the same reason that some are pleased to call the rust of Iron its
dross, the whole metal may deserve the same appellation, all of it being
capable of rusting, if it is but laid in the open air.

Add to page 92. To the end of the Remarks upon Reviving Cinnabar into
Quicksylver.
I could attribute the invention of this discourse to my self, being the very
first that thus treated of this matter in France, and maintained it in public
meetings; but I am not possessed with that vanity of Authors, I leave it to
those that love it: I had no affectation to make a Book on purpose concerning
it, but have only mentioned it as a thing incident to the Subject I treated of.
I shall only say by the by, that those who make pretense of first finding it
out, have happened to make their complaints a little too late, having Printed
their Book a year after mine, and three years after I held a Public Discourse
of it at Monsieur Launay's, not to speak of what I taught a long time before in
the first Courses of Chemistry that I showed.

Those who desire to be further instructed upon this Subject may read Monsieur
Blegny's Book Treating of Venereal distempers. 'Twas Translated into English 3
or 4 years ago, and Printed for Mr. Burrel the Bookseller under S. Dunstans
Church.

Some thinking to invalidate what I established in the first Edition of my
Book, do say that mercury cannot be absolutely called an alkali, because the
alkali that is in mercury is but one part of its Composition, and is not to be
separated from its other parts.

To Answer this difficulty you need but only read in the Remarks that I have
made upon the Principles, how it is I do explicate the nature of an Alkali, and
you will find that although the name Alkali comes from the Salt of a Plant called
Kali, that is, soapwort, yet all bodies that cause a sudden Effervescency with
Acids are called Alkali's, without any need of their containing any Alkali salt
within. So that I have no occasion to enlarge this Book without reason, by
Answering all the little Objections that have been made to me upon the
supposition of Mercury's being a pure Alkali. It Is likely enough that those who
have raised them, have not read with Attention what I have said in my Remarks
upon Mercury. For there are Solutions enough. I shall speak nevertheless to
some of the Principal ones.

First, It is Objected that if Mercury is an Alkali, and the Venereal venom an
Acid, this same Acid should certainly fix it, whereas the Dissolutions of it
that are made by the Juyces, do only serve to increase its Volatility, and
render it Corrosive, instead of being at all sweetened by it.

I Answer, it is as false to say, that Mercury is Volatilized by the Acid
Juices of the Venereal venom, as it is that Mercury mixed with Acid Spirits to
render it Corrosive, should be Volatilized by the same Spirits. On the
contrary, Mercury alone does easily Volatilize by the heat of the body, and
nothing but Acids are able to fix it at all. I thought I had sufficiently
explicated my self as to this when I said that sometimes Mercury, finding not
in the body enough Acid Spirits to fix it, does pass by Transpiration.

As for the Corrosive nature that Mercury receives, we must attribute it to the
Disposition of its Pores, and the abundance of Acid points it impregnates with,
and seeing it will not sweeten the Acidity of Salt and Vitriol, with which it
is mixed to make a Sublimate Corrosive, why should we expect it to sweeten the
Acid juices of the body? I do not pretend nevertheless that it never Dulcifies
at all; for I do conceive it may destroy much of their force by dividing and
breaking their points, when the Acids are but few, as does happen in Mercurius
dubois.

Secondly. It Is Objected that if the venom of the Pox were an Acid, it might
then be Cured by the use of Alkali Salts, either fixed or Volatile, as by
Crab's-eyes, Perles, Corals, and such like bodies as are wont to kill and
sweeten Acid humors.

I Answer, we often find that Volatile salts do give some ease to those that
are troubled with the Venereal distemper, whether it be by opening the Pores,
and so making the subtler part of it perspire away, or that by being Alkali's,
they do absorbe some part of it. For this reason some do use to give their
Patients the Volatile Salt of Vipers several mornings together, but these
Alkali's are in truth of too weak a nature to carry off such an Acidity, after
they are impregnated with it, as Mercury is able to do without losing its
nature. They are Nets of too fine a make, to catch such keen and active bodies;
if these Salts do destroy some part of the Acidity, they destroy themselves
likewise in the conflict, that they can have no further operation, wherefore
there is need of a more powerful Volatile Alkali than these Salts are, to
eradicate the Acidity of Venereal Poison.

As for Fixed Salts and Alkali bodies, as Perle, Coral, Crab's-eyes, whereas they
have no Volatile quality in them, and their tendency is wholly downwards, it is
very uncertain whether ever they reach to Venereal tumors which commonly rise
in the Joints, by reason of the long way they have to pass thither, and the
Juices they have to encounter in their passage, which may in all likelihood
change their nature; but suppose they were carried to those Tumors with the
same qualifications they were taken with, they would only serve to weaken a
little this Acidity, without being able to carry it off, and so they would only
give a little ease, without removing Radically the Ferment of the Distemper, as
Mercury is able to do.

It may be further asked why Sublimate does not fill the substance of the Brain
with Ulcers, as well as it does the Mouth.

I Answer that this Sublimate being in the Brain, finds it self so clogged with
a Mucilaginous moisture, that it is fain to lose there some parts of its
Acidity; so that it can do nothing else but cause a Fermentation, which makes
the Phlegm purge away through the Salivating vessels, and this it is that causes
the Spittle of those who have a Flux, to be so sharp and stinking.

This sharp Phlegm may also, as it passes in the Mouth, increase the number of
Ulcers, for the mouth is as it were the sink of the whole body upon this
occasion.

Add to page 94. the beginning of the Remarks upon Sublimate Corrosive.
Not half the Spirit of Niter is requisite to dissolve a pound of Mercury, as
is for the same weight of Bismuth, though the Pores of this last are larger,
and its parts more disposed for division; the reason of which is, that Mercury
being a Volatile, and the parts very little united together, it divides almost
of it self, and is much more easily born up by Acids, than would a body that
has union in its parts, and whose tendency is downwards, such as Bismuth.

This Operation may be done if one will, by only mixing crude Mercury with Salt
and Vitriol, without the trouble of dissolving it with Spirit of Niter; but
there is a great deal of time requisite to incorporate them together, for to
make the Quicksylver quite disappear. Again there is a fume that rises up to the
Nose that is very unwholsom. Now that which is aimed at in dissolving it, and
reducing it into a white Mass, is only to fit it the better for mixture.

Add to page 96. the end of the same Remarks.
Those who have thought fit to Criticize upon what I have said about the
effects of Mercury, would methinks, have spoken more to the purpose than they
have done, if they had objected to me a difficulty that I have made to my self
since the first Edition of my Book. It Is this, If the Mercury that is given in
order to raise a Flux, does join with the Acid salt of the humors, and so makes
a Sublimate Corrosive, after the same manner as it is made in the Mattress, when
it is mixed with Salt and Vitriol; this Sublimate of the body cannot be perfected,
as long as there is any watery humor in the part, wherein Mercury is mixed with
Acids; just as none of it can be made in a Mattress, until all the Phlegm that is
in it, is evaporated away. Now it is not to be conceived, that there should
ever happen such a Desiccation to the body, for it would be Corroded by Mercury
loaded with Acids, before it could Sublime.

To answer this Objection I say, That although I have made a comparison between
the sublimation of mercury that is made in the body, and that which is done in a
Mattress; nevertheless there is this difference between them, that the first is
not only made with Salts extremely Volatile, but is likewise assisted or
carried on by the motion of the humors with all their humidity up to the Head,
whereas this other is made with Fixed Salts, whose Acidity is so strongly rooted
in the Earthy part, that it cannot be separated from it, without a very
considerable fire.

Nor must we think that the Mercury in the body is loaded with as many and as
strong Acids, as that in the Mattress; for if it were so, it would carry
destruction, and cause a Gangrene, wheresoever it came; but it is enough, that
its Pores are in part impregnated with them, sufficient to diminish a little of
its Volatility, and cause those prickings and pains which do happen during the
Salivation.

Add to page 97. The Remarks upon Mercurius Dulcis.
The sweet Sublimate that is made in a Mattress, loses half an ounce each
sublimation; so that an ounce and a half is lost in 3 times when the Operation
is done.

Six drachms of Scories and light earth are found at bottom and consequently
there is but two drachms of matter carried off each Sublimation. But if you
would try this Operation in Viols, and sublimate would lose half an ounce more,
as having a larger aperture to fly out at, than in a Mattress.

Add to page 101. The Remarks on White Precipitate.
The Dose of White Precipitate must be less than that of sweet sublimate,
because it contains more Acid Spirits; but if you would Sublime this
Precipitate all alone in a Mattress, over a gentle fire, you would obtain a
Sublimate quite as sweet as the other; because the fire having acted upon it
breaks most of its points, and then it may be given in as great a Dose as
ordinary Mercurius Dulcis.

The Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack containing an Alkali Salt, does much help
the Precipitation, for its agility carries it into every recess of the liquour,
where the Sea Salt, whose parts are not of so active a nature, was not able to
go: which is proved from hence, that if you make use only of Sea Salt dissolved
in water to make this Precipitation with, it will then happen that if after
pouring off the clear liquor, which swims upon the Precipitate, into another
vessel, you drop the Spirit of Sal Armoniack into the liquor, there falls a
considerable quantity of Mercurial Precipitate, which may serve like the other.
If instead of the Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack you would use the Oil of Tartar
made per Deliqium, the Precipitate would then be Reddish.

Add to page 102. The Remarks upon Red Precipitate.
Many Authors have thought they could increase mainly the Redness of this
Precipitate, by Cohobating it, or distilling Spirit of Niter three times upon
the white mass; but I have found by experience in both these ways of Operation
that these Circumstances are to no purpose.

The white Mass which remains after Evaporation of the humidity is a mixture of
Mercury with a great many Acid Spirits, for it weighs three ounces more than
the Mercury did which was dissolved; it is extreme Corrosive, and fiery, if
applied to the flesh, but according as it is Calcined in order to make it Red,
the edges of the Spirit of Niter which caused the Corrosion do pass off, and
fly into the Air; whence it comes to pass, that the more we desire to increase
the Redness in the Calcination, the less it weighs, and the less it corrodes.
Some Surgeons observing this effect do choose the Precipitate that is not so
Red as usual, when they would make a quick Eschar.

If you still continue the fire some hours under the Red mass, it will sublime,
and still retain its color; this sublimate is not so Corrosive as the other;
which makes me think that the points of Spirit of Salt are necessary to make a
sublimate very Corrosive. The reason why it will sublime, is because the
Mercury being discharged of a great many Acid Spirits, that held it fixed, has
power to rise with those that remain. But because these remaining Spirits do
moderate a little its Volatility, it makes a stop in the middle of the Viol.

Some do put Red Precipitate into an Earthen Pot, and pour upon it Spirit of
Wine well Rectified, then fire it, and when the Spirit is consumed, they add
more, and burn it as before; they repeat Spirit of Wine, and burn it six times
together, and then they call this Preparation Arcanum Corallinum. The Spirit of
Wine by burning does carry off some edges of the Precipitate and joins it self
to the rest, so that this Precipitate is sweetened and rendered fit to be taken
inwardly.

If by way of curiosity you pour Spirit of Vitriol upon common Red Precipitate,
such as I have described, a Dissolution will soon follow, because Spirit of
Vitriol joining with the Spirit of Niter that remained in the Precipitate, an
Aqua Fortis must happen from their union, which is able to dissolve
imperceptibly the parts of Mercury; but this Dissolution will happen without
any Ebullition, because the Mercury has been already rarefied by an acid, so
that the Spirit of Vitriol does only dissolve them without making any
commotion. The Dissolution is clear like other Dissolutions of Mercury, without
any manner of appearance of Redness, and the same Preparations may be made with
it as are used to be done by the Dissolution of Quicksylver in Aqua fortis.

If instead of Spirit of Vitriol you pour Spirit of Salt upon the Red
Precipitate, it turns presently into a curious white, because the Spirit of
salt breaks the force of the Spirit of Niter that was in the Red Precipitate;
and the same thing must happen here as when Spirit of salt is poured upon the
Dissolution of Quicksylver; for although Red Precipitate is a Dry body, yet it
is nothing else but a mixture of Quicksylver, and Spirit of Niter.

As for the sudden change of Color, it is indeed somewhat strange, that a
matter which is grown Red by Calcination, should in a minutes time turn so
exceeding white.

This Effect can be attributed only to the dislocation which the Acid Spirit of
salt does cause in the parts of Red Precipitate, and to the disposition it puts
them anew into, so that their Superficies is put into a capacity of Reflecting
the Light in a right line to our eyes, to give the appearance of a white
color; for if by means of another sort of liquour or else by fire and some
Alkali body, the Disposition of the parts of your Precipitate is again changed,
it will obtain some other Color, or else it will return and revive into
Quicksylver.

If you pour the Volatile spirit of Sal Armoniack upon Red Precipitate, it
turns into a gray powder, but if you throw a great deal of water upon it, it
becomes a milk, though none of the whitest. The same thing happens, when you
drop Spirit of Sal Armoniack into the dissolution of Quicksylver made with
Spirit of Niter; for soon after the Effervescency is over, a gray powder is
seen to Precipitate, and if you add to it water, it becomes a milk of the same
whiteness as the other.

Common Red Precipitate therefore is subject to the same alterations as the
Dissolution of Mercury, the Red color giving no particular impression to it;
which truly is a good proof that Color is no real thing, but wholly depends
upon the modification of the parts.

Other Precipitates of Mercury.
Mix 7 or 8 ounces of Sublimate Corrosive powdered, in a glass or marble Mortar
with 16 or 18 ounces of warm water, stir them about for half an hour, then let
the liquor settle, and pour it off by Inclination, filter it, and divide it
into 3 parts to be put into so many Viols.

Pour into one of these Viols some drops of the Oil of Tartar made per
Deliquium, there falls immediately a Red Precipitate.

Drop into another of these Viols some Volatile spirit of Sal Armoniack, and
you have a white Precipitate.

Pour into the last of these Viols about a spoonful of Limewater, you have a
Yellow-water that is called Phagaedenick-water, or a water for Ulcers, because
it is good to cleanse and heal Ulcers, the Surgeons do very frequently use
it, especially in Hospitals; if you let the liquor settle, 'twill let fall a
Yellow precipitate.

To obtain these three Precipitates, you have only to pour off the water by
Inclination, wash them, and dry them apart.

Red precipitate may be used like that I described before, but it is not so
strong; it is the truest Red precipitate of any.

White precipitate has the same virtues as the other.

Yellow precipitate may be used in Pomatums for the Itch, half a dram or a
dram of it is mixed with an ounce of pomatum.

The Sublimate which remains at the bottom of the Mortar, being dried may be
used in pomatums for the Itch like Yellow precipitate.

Remarks.
Sublimate being mercury loaded with Acids, common water is able to dissolve
some of it, because these Acids do rarifie it, and make a kind of salt of it;
but because there are not Acids enough in it to dissolve all the mercury, the
most compact part of it remains at bottom, the liquor is filtred to clear and
purify it the more, it is as clear and transparent as Fountain water.

If by further way of Curiosity, you should drop into the Viol of Red
precipitate, that I now described, some spirit of Sal Armoniack, and would
shake the liquor a little, it would presently turn white, and your precipitate
would be white; but if instead of Spirit of Sal Armoniack you would use spirit
of Vitriol, an Ebullition would rise in it, and the Red liquor would become
clear and transparent as common water.

Because the Oil of Tartar is an Alkali salt dissolved, it breaks the edges of
the Acid which held up the mercury imperceptible, and served as Swimmers to it
in the Water, so that this mercury having nothing left to bear it up, must
needs precipitate by its own weight. The same thing happens when the Spirit of
Sal Armoniack is thrown upon the other part of the Dissolution of sublimate
Corrosive. For this spirit being in like manner an Alkali, produces the same
effect as the Oil of Tartar.

But although Alkali's do all agree in this that they all break and destroy
Acids, nevertheless there is always some difference in their action.

And this evidently appears in those differently colored precipitates, for
this diversity can be attributed only to this, that they having in several
manners wrought upon Acids, do dispose and modifie the parts of the
precipitated body, so as they may be capable of making different Refractions of
Light.

These precipitates are no longer poisons, though they come from sublimate
Corrosive, and there is the same reason for it as there is for the
precipitations; for seeing that which gave the Corrosion was an Acid, when this
Acid is destroyed by such powerful Alkali's as are the spirit of Sal Armoniack,
and Oil of Tartar, that which remains must become sweet.

When spirit of Vitriol is thrown upon the liquor of Red precipitate, there
rises an Ebullition, because the Acid does penetrate the Alkali salt of the Oil
of Tartar, and this Alkali being destroyed, the Acid dissolves what was
precipitated before, whence it comes that the liquor clears up, and turns into
poison as it was before.

If you would again pour Oil of Tartar, then spirit of sal armoniack upon it,
there would happen new Red and White precipitates, which might again be
dissolved, and the liquor made clear again, by adding to it spirit of Vitriol,
but a greater quantity of Spirit must be used than before.

Add to Chap. 9. Of Antimony.
Although nothing but a Metallic substance mixed with Sulphur can be perceived
in the analyzing of Antimony; nevertheless considering its Figure, somewhat
like that of saltpeter, and its Emetick quality, which can proceed from
nothing but some punction of the stomach, there is reason to think it contains
an Acid salt; but because the edges of this Salt are sheathed in a great deal
of sulphur, it cannot exert its activity, without opening a way for it, either
by salts which divide the sulphur, or by Calcination which carries off its
grosser part. Notwithstanding it is not to be understood that the Emetick
faculty of Antimony does consist in this salt alone; for if it were alone, it
would no more produce this Effect than other Acid salts do, but it is assisted
by the sulphur, which serves for a Vehicle to exalt it toward the upper
Orifice of the stomach. Thus Antimony may be said to Vomit, by reason of the
Saline sulphur it contains.

Add to page 109. The Remarks upon Common Regule of Antimony.
If by way of curiosity you would Calcine four ounces of Regule of Antimony
powdered, in an Earthen cup unglazed, stirring it all the while with a Spatule,
there will rise up a vapor for an hour and a halfs time, or thereabouts, and
when the matter fumes no longer, it turns into a gray powder, that weighs two
drachms and a half more than the Regule did at first.

This Augmentation of quantity is the stranger, for that the fume which
ascended from it during the Calcination, should seem rather to have diminished
its weight. It must be therefore, that a great many fiery particles have entered
into it, in the room of that which fumed away.

This Fume proceeds from some grosser sulphur, that remained in the Regulus,
and indeed it smells strong of the sulphur.

Add to page 112. to the Remarks upon Regulus of Antimony with Mars.
After the first Purification, ten ounces of Regulus, and thirteen ounces of
scories do remain; after the second Purification, nine ounces and a half of
Regulus do remain; after the third, eight ounces and two drachms of Regulus;
and after the fourth you will have seven ounces, and six drachms of Regulus.

The Star which appears upon the Martial Regulus of Antimony when it is well
Purified, has given occasion to the Chemists to reason upon the matter; and the
greatest part of these men being strongly persuaded of the Planetary
Influences, and a supposed correspondence between each of the Planets, and the
Metal that bears its name, they have not wanted to assert, that this same Star
proceeded from the impression which certain little bodies flowing from the
Planet Mars do bestow upon Antimony for sake of the remaining Iron that was
mixed with it; and for this reason, they wonderfully recommend the making this
Preparation upon Tuesday rather than another day, between 7 and 8 a clock in
the morning, or else between 2 and 3 in the afternoon, provided the weather be
clear and fair, thinking that day which is denominated from Mars to be the time
that it lets fall its Influences most plentiful of any. They have likewise
conceited a thousand things of the like nature, which 'twould be too much
trouble to relate here.

But all opinions of this kind have no manner of probability, for no bodies
Experience did ever evince, that the Metals have any such correspondence with
the Planets, as I have maintained otherwhere; much less can they prove that the
Influences of the Planets do imprint such and such Figures to Metals, as these
men do determine. It would be no hard matter for me here to show how little
reason or foundation there is in discourses of that nature, and how very weak
and uncertain are the Principles of Judicial Astrology; but this would be too
long a Digression for this place, and serve only to swell this Book with things
that may be found treated of at large elsewhere, and particularly in the
Epitome of Gassendus made by Monsieur Bernier.

My fancy therefore shall not soar so high as these men's do; and though I may
seem dull and mean in their eyes, I shall not search in the Celestial Bodies
for an explication of the Star we now contend about; seeing that I can find it
out in causes near at hand. There have been who gazing too earnestly upon the
Stars above, have not perceived the stone at their feet, that causes them to
stumble.

I say then that the Star which appears upon the Martial Regulus of Antimony,
does proceed from the Antimony it self; for this Mineral runs all into Needles;
but because before it is Purified, it is loaded with sulphurous and impure
parts, which make it softish, these Needles do not appear but confusedly. Now
when it is Purified with Mars, not only a great many of the more sulphurous
parts of Antimony, and such as are fittest to hinder its Crystallization, are
carried away, but also there remains the hardest and most compact part of the
Iron, which makes the Antimony firmer than it was. So that the Purification
does serve to lay open the Natural Crystals of Antimony in form of a star, and
the Iron by its hardness does expatiate these Crystals, from whence it comes
that the Martial Regulus of Antimony is harder than the other Regulus.

The Crystals then do appear in form of a star in the Martial Regulus of
Antimony, because they were so Naturally in the Antimony before. This star does
not appear exactly the same in the common Regulus of Antimony, let it be
Purified never so much, because its parts have not the same tension as those of
the other.

Add to page 116. lin. 28. in the Remarks upon Crocus Metallorum.
The strong Detonation which happens when the matter is fired, is not caused
from the accension of Saltpeter, as people generally do imagine, for want of
due reflection. I shall prove in its proper place that it cannot flame at all,
and that by its Volatile parts it serves instead of a Bellows or Vehicle to
rarifie and exalt the sulphurs of Antimony.

A Liver of Antimony is prepared with equal quantities of Antimony, Niter, and
Sea Salt decrepitated; and because these salts do give it a Red color like
unto the Opale, this Preparation has been called Magnesia Opalina; it is less
Emetick than the other, by reason of the addition of sea salt, which fixes the
saline sulphur of antimony.

Several other ways of preparing the Liver of antimony have been invented; but
I am well enough satisfied in having given you the best of all, and the easiest
to prepare.

If you use ordinary saltpeter in this Operation, you will obtain eight ounces
and two drachms of Liver of antimony; but if you use Purified saltpeter, you will
get but six ounces and a half.

This difference of quantity proceeds from the nature of saltpeter, for the
more Volatile parts this Mineral salt contains, the more apt it is to carry off
some parts of the antimony. Now Purified saltpeter is much more Volatile than
the common sort, wherefore the Liver of antimony, where it is used, is in
lesser quantity.

The Liver of antimony that is made with common saltpeter is the Redder, and
comes nearer to the color of an Animals Liver, than that which is made with
Purified saltpeter; this happens through the fixt-salt which is in this
Preparation more than in the other; for common saltpeter contains much fixed
salt, as I shall show in its proper place; this salt does likewise make the
matter the heavier.

As for the virtues of, these Livers of antimony, the difference is not very
great, but only that which is made with Purified saltpeter is a little more
Emetick than the other.

I cannot pass by here the false imagination of some men, who think that
Preparation of the Liver of antimony, of which half a dram, or two scruples
may be given, is much better than that whereof 3 or 4 grains perform the same
effect; for there is no doubt but the taking so great a quantity of antimony
will give an impression to the stomach, that a lesser quantity is not able to
do. Furthermore, seeing these Preparations do commonly open the antimony but
little, or half fix the saline sulphurs, it is to be feared lest some salt they
may meet with in the Stomach, should open them too much, or Volatilize them,
and so produce unhappy consequences.

Add to page 141. Chap. 11. Of Quicklime.
When the stone, that Quicklime is made of, is grown red hot in the Furnaces,
the Workmen have a special care to keep up the fire at an equal height, until
the stone is quite Calcined; for if the flame which has begun to burn among the
stones, should be suffered to lessen for a while, and so the heat be checked
before the end of the work, they would never afterward be able to make
Quicklime with those stones any more, though they should be at the charge of
burning fifty times as much Wood as is commonly required; and this, because in
that interval of heat the Pores of the stone, which were begun to be opened, do
close and shut, and the matter sinks down in a lump to the destruction of the
whole. And then again the Flame cannot rise in it any more, for it finds none of
those interstices, or spaces between, which were frequent before, for it to
pass through. The matter therefore is rendered incapable of receiving the fire
any more, because all the small cells that were useful for it, are shut up and
destroyed in this confusion.

It Is Objected, that if igneous bodies were they that caused the Corrosion of
Quicklime, Tiles, Bricks, and all Stones that are not of the nature of
Limestone, and Iron, Copper, Silver, Gold, and many other bodies should be as
Caustic as Quicklime, after having endured the fire as long if not longer
than it.

But this does not follow, for Tiles, and other Calcined stones have not the
Pores disposed like those of Quicklime, to retain fiery particles; and if some
metals are found to impregnate with them during their Calcination, they are
known to retain them so well by the solidity of their parts, that neither the
heat nor moisture of the flesh are able to draw them out of the places they are
fixed in, to cause a Corrosion upon the part. It is easy here to give you an
example; for if you take the Calx of Lead that increased its weight in the
Calcination, as I have said before, and steep it in water, the water will not
act at all upon it, and the Calx may be taken from the water in the same weight
it was put in; you must melt it by fire, if you would separate the igneous
bodies: but now as for common Quicklime, a small matter of moisture is able to
separate the tender parts of the stone, and drive out the fiery particles in
abundance.

It Is said likewise that the boiling of the water which happens when flung upon
quicklime, must not be imputed to fiery bodies, seeing neither spirit of Wine,
nor Oil, when thrown upon it, do hear or sti^ as all, although they are both of
them Inflammable bodies, nay on the contrary they are observed to quench the
hear that uses to happen to quicklime when water comes to it.

I Answer that these effects do proceed from this, that Oil, spirit of wine,
and other Sulphurous liquors of the same nature, instead of separating the
parts of quick lime, as water does, do rather hinder any separation from being
made, by stopping up the Pores.

That which withdrew me from the Sentiment of those who will have all the
effects of quicklime derived from its salt, was, that I could never find any
of it, though I sought after it with care enough, for some through a mistake do
take a certain Bituminous scum, which often swims upon the Limewater, for a
Salt.

Neither can I be of the opinion of those who will needs have an Acid to be in
quicklime, which being drawn out by the water, and meeting an Alkali, does
cause the Effervescency which is observed, when water is poured upon
quicklime; for although according to appearance an acid does enter into the
Natural composition of the stone that quicklime is made of, this acid has lost
its nature, no^ only by breaking its poi^^^ in its strict union with earth at
the Petrification, but also in the violent Calcination that is given to this
stone to reduce it to a Calx. So that we may here say, the same thing happens
to the acid which enters into the composition of the stone, as I have said did
happen to the salt of Vegetables and other mixed bodies, which though naturally
an acid salt, changes into an alkali by means of its union with earth, and the
fiery particles in time of the Calcination; there is only this difference
between them both, the acid of the stone is mixed with more earth than the salt
of Vegetables.

Add to page 152. chap. 13. Of the stone Haematites.
The stone Haematites is called the Bloud-stone; either from its stopping
blood, or from its red color. It is commonly found in iron Mines, and it
contains something of that metal, the best is that which is clearest, and has
blackish rays. It is prepared by grinding it on a marble with a little
Plantain water, it is Desiccative, and astringent; it is used for spitting of
blood, and other Haemorrhagies, the dose is from fifteen grains to two
scruples, it is also used outwardly in Unguents.

A little acid spirit that partakes of the nature of Iron may be drawn from
this stone, by distilling it like Vitriol in a Retort; this spirit is a very
good Aperitive for all Obstructions, the dose is to an agreeable acidity.

Sublimation of the stone Haematites.
Powder and mix together equal quantities of the stone Haematites and sal
Armoniack, put this mixture into an Earthen Cucurbite, or glass one luted at
bottom, set a Head upon it, and fitting to it a small Receiver, and Luting well
the Junctures, place it in a Furnace, over a very small fire at first, to warm
the vessel, then increase your fire by little and little, until it is very
strong, continue it in this condition for some hours, or until the heat of the
head lessens, then let the vessels cool, and unlute them; you will find in the
head, and at top of the Cucurbite, Yellow Flowers drawing toward Red, and in
the Receiver a Volatile, Vrinous, Yellowish spirit; keep the spirit, and the
Flowers apart in bottles well stopped. They are both of them very good to procure
Sweat, and to open Obstructions: they may be used in Malignant Fevers,
Apoplexies, Palsies, and in the Scurvy, in Bolus, or in proper liquors; the
dose of the Flowers is from six grains to four and twenty, and of the Volatile
spirit, from twelve drops to two scruples.

In the bottom of the Cucurbite is found a mass that may be distilled in a
Retort with a gradual fire increased to the highest degree of all, in a
Reverberatory Furnace, there will come forth an acid spirit of much the same
virtues as the fixed spirit of Sal Armoniack, of which I shall speak hereafter.

Remarks.
Sal Armoniack is here mixed that the Volatile parts may carry off the more
soluble portion of the stone Haematites; for it would never be able to sublime,
if it were not driven by some such like Vehicle. This salt being also
incorporated with it serves very much to give it the sudorisick quality, by
reason of its Volatility.

The Cucurbite is set in an open fire, that it may be heated the more, and the
Flowers be the more tinctured; for the more heat there is, the sal armoniack
does the more easily sublime the parts of the stone; the Volatile spirit is
only some portion of the Flowers drawn into liquor.

The mass that remains in the Cucurbite is a mixture of the more fixed part of
the stone, and sal armoniack.

All that is drawn from the stone Haematites is accounted of some use, and
chiefly so by reason of the Iron it contains.

Many other Preparations of this stone have been invented, but these are the
best, and choicest.

Add to page 154. Remarks upon the Oil of Bricks.
The ancient Chemists called this Oil, the Oil of Philosophers, and have given
the Epithete Philosophical to all Preparations that are made with Bricks. The
reason that can be given for it is, that because they call themselves the only
True Philosophers, or Philosophers by way of excellence, they thought they were
obliged to confer some influences of this mighty name upon Bricks, because they
are the materials where with they build their Furnaces, to work at the High and
mighty Operation, or the Philosophers stone; for they pretend it is by this
Operation alone that True Philosophy can be obtained.

Add to page 165. chap. 14. Of Common Salt.
Sea salt is made at Rochell in salt marshes, which are places that must be of
a lower situation than the sea, and the ground must be Clayie, for otherwise
they would not be able to retain the salt water that has been let into them.
Thus all places near the sea are not alike proper to make salt marshes.

When the Season of the year begins to grow hot, which commonly happens in May,
all the water is emptied that was put into the marshes for better preserving
them during the Winter, then the sluices are opened to let in as much salt water
as they think fit, it is made to pass through a great many Channels, wherein it
purifies and heats, and then is let into places that are made flat, smooth and
fit to Crys^ allize the salt.

This salt is made only during the great heats of Summer, the Sun does in the
first place evaporate some part of the Water, and because after the great heat,
a small Wind does use to blow (as is usual near the sea) the coolness of this
Wind does condense and Crystallize the salt.

But if it happens to rain but two hours during the hot weather, there can no
salt be made for a fortnight afterward, because the marshes must be again
emptied of all the water, to let in more in its place, so that if it chances to
rain but once again in the next fortnight, they can make no salt.

Besides the Purification of salt by evaporation, it may be further purified,
if instead of Evaporation of the humidity, you set some of it a Crystallizing
in a cool place, for very fine pure salt is found at bottom of the vessel,
which salt may be separated from the water, and dried, you may then evaporate
again some part of the salt liquor, and set it in a Celler a Crystallizing, and
so continue your Evaporations and Crystallizations, but at last you must be
fain to evaporate the liquor to the consumption of all the humidity, because at
last it will Crystallize no longer, the reason whereof is, that the remaining
salt is full of a fat bituminous matter, which is in a manner inseparable from
it, and this it is that hinders the Crystallizing at last.

It Is probable that this fat matter comes from the earth of those marshes that
were spoken of.

The first Crystallized salt being put into Oil of Tantar, or some other Alkali
salt dissolved, does mix with it without making any Ebullition, because
although sea salt is Acid, yet its points are too gross, and have too little
motion, to separate the parts of the Alkali.

The last salt being dried over the fire, and mixed with some Alkali salt
rendered liquid, such as Oil of Tartar, makes a Coagulation and Precipitation of
a substance that appears saline and Oily; this Coagulation does proceed from
the mixture and adhesion of Bituminous earth with sea salt and Tartar; for
these salts do easily embrace Oily substances, and in them lose their activity.

Many Acid Bituminous salts which are drawn by the Evaporation of certain
Mineral waters, such as those of Baleruc in Languedoc, and Digne in Provence,
do perform the same effects, when they are mixed with Oil of Tartar.

This Coagulum does not dissolve in water, as well by reason of the different
nature of the salts it is compounded of, as the Oily earth that holds them
together; but it will dissolve in distilled Vinegar, and several other Acid
liquors, and then an Effervescency rises, because the Acid does penetrate the
salt of Tartar, whose parts sea salt had no power to separate.

Add to page 169. lin. 30. Remarks upon Spirit of Salt.
Since I writ of Monsieur Seignett's particular way of drawing spirit of salt,
some have Printed, that if common salt well decrepitated, and kept a good while
over the fire, were exposed to the Air for some days, and distilled without
addition of any thing to it, it would yield a spirit much like that I have
spoken of, and in full as great a quantity.

But if we examine the sharp liquor which is drawn this way, we shall find it
of so weak a nature, that it may more reasonably be called Phlegm, than spirit,
and the salt remains entire in the Retort; whereas M. Seignett's spirit of salt
is full as strong as common spirit of salt, and has the very same qualities,
nay I conceive it somewhat better, as not having so great an Impression from
fire as the other.

Again some say, it does not deserve the name of spirit of sea salt, nor ought
this Preparation to be looked upon as any great mystery, because the same
incorporation and augmentation happens to diverse other salts exposed to the
Air, after drawing off their spirit.

I grant this augmentation proceeds from the spirit of the air, and I conceive
it is the same spirit which produces all manner of things according to the
Matrixes or different pores of the earth it uses to meet with, as I have
explicated in my Remarks upon the Principles. But because this spirit of the
air has met with Pores in our matter, ready disposed to make a salt much like
unto common salt, and a spirit is drawn from it much like unto that which is
drawn from common salt, I see no reason to doubt why this spirit should not be
a true spirit of salt; all the difference is this, the salt I now speak of is
not so thoroughly united to its earthy part, as common salt is, and therefore
its spirits do separate with more ease; for they are drawn without Addition of
any thing else, and with a gentle fire, whereas those of common salt are so
fixed, that they cannot be driven out, without mixing a great deal of earth in
order to separate all its parts, and without a very great fire.

As for the Augmentation which happens to many other bodies exposed to the Air,
after their spirits are drawn off, I don't question the matter of fact, nor
that these same substances do return into what they were before, by
impregnating again with spirits of the Air in considerable time; but it is
rarely found that any of them do yield as strong spirits, and as easily as our
salt, and herein lies the mystery.

Add to page 170. lin. 12. in the same Remarks.
Some have written, that the Precipitation, which is made by spirit of salt, of
any matter held up by Aqua fortis, must not be imputed to the gravity, nor
force of spirit of salt, nor to any conflict or jogg that this spirit gives to
Aqua fortis, or the matters dissolved; but rather to the conjunction of the
Acidity of this spirit with the Volatile and Sulphurous Alkali of Aqua fortis,
or spirit of Niter, which Acid hereby forces this last to abandon the metal it
had dissolved.

But this is the same as to explicate an obscure matter by another more
obscure; for what likelihood is there that the Volatile spirit of Aqua fortis
is an alkali? and how comes it to continue in so great a motion with the fixed
Acid spirit of this water without being destroyed? this cannot easily be
understood. Again, suppose this spirit were an alkali, we must come to
explicate mechanically, by what reason this Alkali does leave the body of the
metal to betake it self unto the spirit of salt; for to say simply that by the
conjunction of these two spirits, the Aqua fortis is compelled to abandon the
metal it held dissolved, does give no light at all to the question, unless we
had power enough to bestow intelligence upon these spirits; wherefore we must
needs at last have recourse to joggs and conflicts.

Add to page 171. lin. 16. Chap. 15. Of Niter or Saltpeter.
The great and violent flame which happens as soon as Saltpeter is flung upon
the Coals, and the red vapors which it uses to yield when reduced into a
spirit, have induced the Chemists generally to believe that this salt is
inflammable, and consequently full loaded with Sulphur, because sulphur is the
only Principle that flames; but if they had suspended their judgments herein,
until they had got more experience on this Subject, they would not only have
known that Saltpeter is not at all Inflammable by nature, but they would even
have doubted whether or no any sulphur does enter into the natural composition
of this salt; for if Saltpeter were Inflammable of it self like sulphur, it
would burn in places where there is no sulphur, for example in a Crucible
heated red hot in the fire; but it will never flame therein, use what quantity
of it you please, and let the fire be never so great. It is true indeed, if you
throw Saltpeter upon kindled coals, it makes a great flame, but this is only
through the Sulphurous Fuliginosities of the coals, which are violently raised
and rarefied by the Volatile nature of Niter; as I shall prove in the Operation
upon fixed Niter.

As for any sulphur that is thought to be contained in Saltpeter, it cannot be
demonstrated by any Operation whatever, for the red vapors that come from it
are no more Inflammable than the Niter, when they are not mixed with some
Sulphurous matter; and it is far more probable, that this salt contains no
Sulphur, if we consider its cleanness, transparency, acidity, and cooling
quality, which have no manner of affinity with the effects of Sulphur, which
are commonly to make a body opace, to join with its acidity, and to heat it.

Add to page 177. l. 26. Remarks upon Sal Polychrestum.
Sal Polychrestum must by no means be used until it is made very white, and
very pure; for when there remains any gross portion of Sulphur, Vertigoes are
to be feared, and stupefaction of the Nerves, and nauseonsness of the stomach.

If you used sixteen ounces of purified Saltpeter, and so much sulphur in this
Operation, you will have at last but three ounces and a half of Sal Polychrestum
very fine; but if you use common Saltpeter instead of purified, you will have
five ounces of Polychrestum as white as the other.

This difference of weight proceeds from common Salt-peters containing more
fixed salt than purified saltpeter.

Sal Polychrestum may be Crystallized like saltpeter and other salts. Its
Crystals are very small, and much like those of sea salt, but only they are
keener.

Add 10 page 179. Remarks on Salt of Sulphur.
Some have presumed to write, that when spirit of sulphur is poured upon Sal
Polychrestum dissolved in Water, there rises an Effervescency as great as when
the same Acid spirit is cast upon saltpeter; but doubtless they took but
little care in what they maintained, for there happens no manner of
Effervescency, neither with Sal polychrestum, nor with saltpeter, for both of
them are Acid salts. Nor do I see any reason to believe, that if the mixture of
saltpeter and spirit of Sulphur is drawn in a Retort, the spirit of Niter will
come forth and leave the spirit of Sulphur in union with the fixed part of
saltpeter; for although red vapors are seen to come forth of the Retort, this
does not prove that they are purely Nitrous, those of the spirit of Sulphur are
mixed with them, but they are hid in the redness like Water in Wine.

Add to page 182. after Spirit of Niter. Spirit of Niter Dulcified.
Put into a large Boulthead eight ounces of good spirit of Niter, and so much
spirit of Wine well dephlegmated; set your Boulthead in the Chimney upon a
Round of Straw, the liquor will grow hot without coming near the fire, and half
an hour or an hour afterward, it will boil very much; have a care of the red
vapors that come out a-pace at the neck of the Boulthead, and when the
Ebullition is over, you will find your liquor clear at bottom, and to have lost
half what it was; pour it into a Viol and keep it, this is the sweet spirit of
Niter.

It is good for the Wind Cholick and the Nephritick, for Hysterical distempers,
and for all Obstractions; its Dose is from four to eight drops in Broth or some
other convenient liquor.

Remarks.
You must leave the Boulthead open; for the Vapors would either carry away the
Stopple; if there were one, or else they would break the vessel; the Boulthead
is so hot during the Ebullition, that one cannot endure ones hand upon it.

The Heat and Ebullition begin sooner or later; according as the Spirits that
are used have been more or less dephlegmated.

This Effect is very strange; for spirit of Niter being a strong Acid, and
Spirit of Wine a sulphur, it cannot be said that there is here any alkali, to
cause the Ebullition with Acid, according to the common maxim. And this
Operation shows us that every thing cannot be explicated by the sole Principles
of Acid and alkali, as some do pretend.

This Operation has much resemblance with that which happens when Oil of
Turpentine is put into a bottle with Oil of Vitriol; for the mixture of these
liquors does heat and boil much alike. I shall say something of this last
mixture hereafter. There is this difference notwithstanding, that spirit of
Niter being more Volatile than Oil of Vitriol, causes a greater Effervescency.

In order therefore to explicate this Ebullition, two things must be
considered. First, that spirit of Niter contains a great many fiery parts
locked up in its Acidity, but which still retain some motion, for it is they
that make spirit of Niter to Fume as it does.

The second is, that spirit of Niter is more Inflammable than saltpeter, when
mixed with any sulphurous body, and the reason thereof is, that it is more
rarefied than saltpeter.

Thus when this Acid spirit is mixed with spirit of Wine, which is a sulphur
very much exalted, and very susceptible of motion, the Volatile part of the
spirit of Niter joins its self to this sulphur, and the mixture becomes ready
to take flame; likewise after this mixture the fiery bodies that were in Spirit
of Niter, do by striving to mount upwards put the liquor into so great a
motion, that it even almost flames, and would without all question quite flame,
if there were not some Phlegm always mixed with these spirits, let 'em be drawn
never so pure, which serves to allay the activity of the fiery particles; so
that there must needs follow a very great Ebullition.

This Effervescency therefore proceeds from this, that spirit of wine, and
spirit of Niter, which are as it were a saltpeter, and highly exalted sulphur,
have been almost kindled into a flame by the fiery bodies that were in spirit
of Niter; and that which further proves this conception is, a noise or kind of
Detonation, during the Effervescency, which is much like that which happens,
when sulphur and saltpeter are burnt together.

The great diminution of the liquor proceeds from the Evaporation of the more
Volatile parts of the Spirits of wine and Niter, through the neck of the
Boulthead during the Ebullition.

That which remains is a well sweetened spirit of Niter, for not only its points
are soundly blunted in the Ebullition, but the spirit of wine being a sulphur
unites and imbodies with those that remain, so that they have no longer any
Corrosive quality.

Add to page 182. Remarks upon Aqua Fortis.
The mixture of Vitriol and saltpeter has quickly some smell of Aqua fortis,
because Vitriol contains a great deal of sulphur, which easily insinuates into
the Volatile part of saltpeter, and exalts some little of it, which causes the
smell; it is this sulphur in Vitriol which by volatilizing the Red spirit of
Niter, makes it come forth faster, and with a less fire, than when saltpeter
is distilled with Clay.

Add to page 184. Remarks upon the Fixation of Saltpeter into an Alkali Salt.
The Crucible must be but half full of saltpeter, because the Detonation is so
great, that the matter would be driven out of the Crucible, if too much be put
in. When the Crucible is not very strong, it breaks in pieces about the middle
of the Operation, and some part of the matter is lost by it.

This Detonation is more violent than that which is made with a mixture of
saltpeter and common sulphur, because the sulphur of Coals is more Rarefied
than common sulphur.

Niter will never be able to flame, when set over the fire alone in a Crucible,
though you make your fire never so strong, and coals though loaded with
fuliginous or Oily parts, do send forth but only a small blew flame; but when
these two bodies come to be mixed together, the Volatile parts of Niter joining
with the Coals, which are Oily, do rarify and exalt the Coals with such a
violence, that they produce a very great flame. Now this Operation confirms my
Opinion that saltpeter does only serve here to Rarifie the flame of sulphur,
but cannot send forth the least flame of its self; seeing that as soon as ever
the coals, you put into the Crucible, are burnt, the flame goes out, and
appears no more until you throw in more Coals, with which a convenient
proportion of the Volatile parts of saltpeter, that still remained, does join,
and Rarifie them into a flame. Thus new Coals are successively thrown into the
Crucible, until it flames no longer; but toward the end of the Operation,
because there remain but few Volatile parts of Niter, the Detonation is much
the less, and so is the flame, until at last the Coals finding nothing more in
saltpeter for it to raise, do burn only just as they use to do all alone.

If you make use of common saltpeter for this Operation, you will have occasion
to use but three ounces and a half of Coals, and you will get twelve ounces of
Purified salt, but if you use fine saltpeter, you must spend seven ounces of
Coals, and will get but three ounces of purified salt.

This difference of weight proceeds from the fine salt-peters containing more
Volatile parts than the other; likewise a great deal more Coals is required to
raise them, and there remains the less fixed salt for the same reason.

The fixed Niter being prepared as I have showed, it is a little gray colored;
now to make it white you must Calcine it in a great fire, stirring it in the
Crucible all the while with a spatule; when it shall have continued Red hot for
above an hour, it will become exceeding white. You must then dissolve it in
water, filter the dissolution, and evaporate the water, and thus you have a
very pure and white salt.

This salt is an Alkali, being a mixture of the salt of Coals, which is an
Alkali, and fixed saltpeter; these two salts are so strictly united and mixed
together in the Calcination, that they make a Porous salt, and such as is much
like unto the fixed salt of Plants.

Not that there is an Alkali salt in saltpeter, as Chemists will have it; for
give what Calcination, or other Preparation you please to this Mineral salt,
without adding any thing to it, not the least Alkali can be drawn from it, and
all that ever we can see in it is Acid.

It is further Observable, that the liquor of fixed Niter, which has been made
with common saltpeter, being kept a year, or a year and a half, loses most of
its activity as an Alkali, so that it is no longer able to cause any such
Ebullition with Acids, as it could before it was so stale.

This accident can have no other cause, than that the Pores of salt contained
in the liquor do close up by little and little, and the Acid salt of Niter does
absorbe and destroy the Alkali, which kept the Pores open.

But the same thing does not happen, where the liquor of fixed Niter was made
with Purified saltpeter, because whereas a great deal of Coals was used in the
fixing it, and but little salt of Niter remained in it, the Alkali must there
predominate so powerfully, that the Acid is not able to regain its strength.

This Experiment seems plainly to demonstrate, that fixed Niter is only an Acid
salt rendered Porous by the Alkali of Coals.

Some Chemists have thought fit to call the liquor of fixed Niter, Alkahest,
that is, an Universal dissolvent, thinking it is capable to draw out the
sulphurous substance of all mixed bodies.

Add to page 185. Chap. 16. Of Sal Armoniack.
The Artificial sal Armoniack is made at Venice, and diverse other places with
five parts of Urine, one part of sea salt, and half a part of Chimney soot;
these three are boiled together, and reduced into a Mass, which being put into
subliming Pots, over a gradual fire, it sublimes into a salt in the form we
commonly see sal Armoniack. Now in this sublimation the Volatile Alkali salts
of Soot and Urine do carry up as much sea salt as they are able, and do join so
strictly together with this Acid salt, that the mixture seems to be fixed. The
reason of this close union is, that sea salt being in form of points, does
insinuate into the Alkali salts; and because it has not motion enough to
separate the parts of these salts; it gets within 'em, and fills their Pores.

Add to page 190. the end of the Remarks upon Aqua Regalis.
It is Objected, that if there is any heavy matter as it were intercepted
between the Pores of Gold, it must needs Precipitate of its self, after the
action of Aqua Regalis upon this metal, which is a thing that does not happen.

I Answer that if the parts of Gold are heavy, the Dissolvent is a gross body,
and very well proportioned to hold up those heavy parts, and hinder them from
Precipitating.

Others have opposed this Explication, and have writ, that if Aqua Regalis
dissolves Gold, and cannot dissolve Sylver, the reason of it is, that the gross
points of spirit of Niter, or Aqua fortis are subtilized by the mixture of sal
Armoniack, and are rendered fit to enter into the small pores of Gold, whereas
the delicate Fabric of these same points does not leave the necessary force
nor motion to divide the parts of Sylver, whose pores are a great deal bigger.

But this way of arguing does not agree with Experience; for what likelihood is
there that the points of spirit of Niter are so subtilized by the penetration
and division of the parts of sal Armoniack? or where shall we find any Example,
that after a considerable Effervescency of two salts met together in conflict,
the Acidity grows sharper than it was before? this is a thing that can never be
proved. On the contrary, every body knows well enough that no Effervescency
happens but the acid is partly blunted or broken thereby. Moreover the Argument
supposes that spirit of Niter does break its subtilest points in violently
contending with the sal Armoniack, whereas in sal armoniack there are Alkali
salts whose property it is to destroy acids. I could further add here, that the
conjunction of salt with spirit of Niter should of necessity render its points
more gross than they were, and that the Crystals which are drawn by the use of
aqua Regalis have their shape not so sharp as those that are drawn by aqua
Fortis. But that which I have said is so probable in its self, and so easy to
be convinced of, if one takes never so little pains to consider it, that I
should but amuse the Reader to little purpose, if I should offer to give any
more proofs of it.

Neither do I find it convenient to make a long discourse in Explicating how
Sylver, which has lesser Pores, is more susceptible of the impressions of Air
and Fire, than Gold which has larger, seeing I have already supposed that the
matter intercepted between the Pores of Gold is more compact, and consequently
more hard to separate than that of Sylver.

Add to page 194. Remarks upon another Preparation of the Volatile Spirit of
Sal Armoniack, together with its Flowers, and Fixed Salt against Fevers.
You see by this Operation that eight ounces of Sal armoniack do contain at
least four ounces and a half of Volatile salt.

The Volatile Spirit of Sal armoniack is only a dissolution of Volatile salt in
water, and if there is not Phlegm sufficient to dissolve all the Volatile salt,
there remains some part of it at bottom of the Receiver, and that may likewise
be turned into Spirit, by only adding enough water to dissolve it. Thus the
Spirit becomes as strong as it can be made, for the Pores of the water being
filled with as much salt as they can contain, it can receive no more. But if
there happens more water than the proportion of Volatile salt requires, then
the Spirit proves weak, and must be given in a larger Dose.

This Spirit is Sudorifick, but you may perceive more sensibly the effect of
Sal armoniack to cause Sweat, by dissolving six or eight grains of this Salt,
and the same quantity of Salt of Tartar, each separately in two small Doses of
some proper liquor, and giving them to a Patient one presently after the other;
for the salt of Tartar working upon the Sal armoniack in the stomach, after the
same manner as it does when they are mixed together in a Mortar, the Spirits do
separate from the latter with more force, and act more powerfully, than when
they have been separated, before they were given, by a preceding mixture; for
the small violence that the Volatile Spirits do use in their separation from
sea salt, does leave them the more activity, and disposes them the better to
pass through the Pores. Again, it is not incredible, that in the former Effort
which these Spirits made in their separation from the fixed part, when Sal
armoniack was mixed with salt of Tartar in a Mortar, the more subtle part flies
away first, and is lost; now it is this subtle portion that is most proper to
Rarifie the humors, and to drive them out by Transpiration.

If you mix in a Viol equal quantities of Volatile spirit of Sal armoniack, and
Spirit of Wine, and shake them a little together, they will cause a Coagulum.

This Coagulation proceeds from that the Spirit of Wine, which is a Rarefied
Oil, does unite with the Spirit of Sal armoniack which is a salt liquor, and
it is but the same thing as happens from stirring Oil and some salt liquor in a
Mortar, in order to make an Unguent, called Nutritum.

By this incorporation together, the salt is shut up in the ramous parts of the
sulphur, and these same sulphurous parts are checked, or as it were fixed by
the salt, so that neither of them have any more freedom of motion; and from
this repose of these parts results the Coagulum.

Add to page 197. Chap. Of Vitriol.
If you dissolve a little white, or green Vitriol in water, and write with the
Dissolution, the writing will not be seen, but if you rub the Paper with a
little Cotton dipped in the Decoction of Galls, it will appear legible; then if
you wet a little more Cotton in Spirit of Vitriol, and pass it gently over the
Paper, the Ink will disappear again; and yet at last if you rub the place with
a little more Cotton dipped in Oil of Tartar made per Deliquium, it will again
appear legible, but of a Yellowish color.

The reason that I can give for these Effects is this, the Spirit of Vitriol
dissolves a certain Coagulum which is made of Vitriol and Galls, but the Oil of
Tartar breaking the force of this Acid Spirit, the Coagulum resumes it self,
and appears again, but because it now contains Oil of Tartar too, it acquires a
new color.

If you should throw the dissolution of Vitriol, or Vitriol only powdered into
a strong Decoction of dried Roses, it will turn as black as common Ink; if you
pour some drops of spirit of Vitriol into it, this Ink will turn red; and if
you add to it a little Volatile spirit of Sal Armoniack, 'twill turn gray.

These changes of color do proceed from the spirit of Vitriols dissolving the
Coagulum which the Vitriol it self had made, and rendering it invisible; the
liquor recovers a fresher Red color than it had, before the Vitriol was put
into it, because the same Spirit does separate the parts of the Rose which were
dissolved in the liquor, and renders them more Visible.

The Volatile spirit of Sal Armoniack, which is an Alkali, does partly break
the Acid edges of the spirit of Vitriol, so that the parts of the Rose having
nothing more to hold them Rarefied, do close together, and consequently the
liquor changes color.

By this Experiment may be seen, that the dried Rose may serve to make Ink
with, as well as Galls; Indian Wood, and diverse other things will do the same.

Add to page 199. the end of the Remarks upon Galcination of Vitriol.
If one should resolve to dry as exactly as one can, sixteen pounds of green
Vitriol, there would remain but seven pounds of white Vitriol.

But in order to do this exactly, you must powder the white Mass of Calcined
Vitriol, after you have broke the Pot, and stir it for a long time in an
Earthen Pan, over a little fire, until there rises no more Fume from it, or
until there remains in it no more Phlegm.

If you should Calcine this white Vitriol to a Redness, you would have five pounds
and a half of Cholcothar.

Some have affirmed in writing that the Red color which appears after a long
Calcination of English Vitriol, was an undoubted proof that that there was
Copper in it, after the same manner as the Red color which happens to
Verdigrease calcined is a certain proof that it contains in it some particles
of Copper.

But that which is here said to pass for a thing undeniable, is no proof at
all; for first of all those Vitriols which are thought most to partake of
Copper, do give no greater Redness in their Calcination, that the others which
partake least of it. Secondly let Copper be Prepared which way you please, you
can never make it Redder than the Cholcothar of. English Vitriol, whose Redness
must be thought to proceed from some particles of this Metal contained in it.
And thirdly, we see plainly, that Iron, Lead, Mercury, and diverse Mineral
bodies do acquire a Red color in their Calcining, without granting they
contain any Copper.

Add to page 201. the bottom of the Page, Remarks upon Spirit of Vitriol.
If you Distill eight pounds of white Vitriol, at sixteen ounces to the pound,
you will draw off seventeen ounces of Phlegm, and two and twenty ounces and a
half, both of the Sulphurous, and the Acid spirit of Vitriol. Of these two and
twenty ounces and a half, there will be five ounces of Sulphurous spirit.

You Will find in the Retort five pounds, five ounces of Cholcothar.

Use all the care you can possible to preserve all the liquors which come from
Vitriol, and yet it will be impossible for you to hinder it from losing some
through the Junctures, during the Distillation.

If you should use German instead of English Vitriol, you would draw off a little
more spirit than the quantity I named, but it would have some smell of Aqua
Fortis, and the matter which remains in the Retort would be of a brown color
drawing toward black. This Color proceeds from sulphurous Fuliginosities
which rise more from this Vitriol than the other, because it partakes of
Copper; for this Sooty vapor finding no vent to get out at, falls down again
upon the matter and blackens it.

There Is one thing happens about the Oil of Vitriol, when it is very strong,
which is very strange indeed; it is, that if you mix it with its Acid Spirit,
or with water, or else with an Ethereal Oil, such as the Oil of Turpentine,
this mixture grows hot to that degree, that sometimes it breaks the Viol 'twas
put into, and often it produces a considerable Ebullition.

I should quickly give account of this heat and Ebullition, if I would suppose
an Alkali in the Oil of Vitriol, as those do who pretend to explicate every
thing that happens by the notions of Acid and Alkali; but not comprehending how
an Alkali should be able to remain so long a time with so strong an Acid as is
the Oil of Vitriol without being destroyed, I had rather give a reason that
seems to me abundance more probable.

I conveive therefore that if water, or Spirit of Vitriol, or the Ethereal Oil
of Turpentine do heat the Oil of Vitriol, it is by setting in motion a great
many fiery particles which the Oil of Vitriol had drawn with it in the
Distillation; for these little fiery bodies being environed with salts that are
exceeding heavy, and hard to Rarifie, they drive about vehemently whatsoever
stands in their way, and when they have caused an Ebullition, and find they
cannot get out a-top of the Viol, they break it to pieces with the bussle they
make at bottom, and on the sides.

Perhaps it will-be said, I do here suppose gratis that the Oil of Vitriol does
contain fiery particles; but if we consider the great violence of fire, and the
time that is spent in drawing this Acid, 'twill be no such hard matter to grant
me this supposition. Besides it will be hard to explicate the great and burning
Corrosion of Oil of Vitriol without admitting these fiery parts, for the
Vitriol contains nothing in it self of this Caustic nature; it is true indeed
that it contains Phlegm, Sulphur, and Earth, but it is a thing impossible but
this Acid should discover it self more than it does, if it were as Corrosive in
the Vitriol, as it is in the Oil.

Once it happened to me, that putting into my Furnace a Retort whose two thirds
were filled with German Vitriol dried, in order to draw off its Spirits, I
Distilled first of all the Phlegm, and sulphurous spirit, which I took out of
the Receiver; I then fitted it again to the Retort, and by a great fire
continued for three days and three nights, I distilled off the Acid Spirit as
we are used to do. When the Vessels were grown cold, I admired to find in my
Receiver nothing but a Mass of Salt, or Congealed Oil of Vitriol: This Salt was
so exceeding Caustic and burning, that if I offered to touch the smallest part
of it with my finger, I presently felt an insufferable scalding, and was fain
to put my hand immediately into water, it continued to fume still, and when a
little of it was thrown into water, it made the same hissing noise, as a
fire-coal put into water would do. Besides it heated the water very much, and
much more than common Oil of Vitriol could.

If you fill a Glass Viol with the Decoction of Nephritick Wood clarified, and
observe it, turning toward the Light, it will appear Yellow; but if you turn
your back to the Light, it will appear Blew; if you mix with it some dregs of
Spirit of Vitriol, it will appear Yellow on every side, but if you again and
about as much more Oil of Tartar, it will return unto its first color.

If you take a Blew, or Violet tincture made in water, such as is drawn out of
the Sun-Flower, or Violet Flowers, and pour upon it some drops of Spirit of
Vitriol, it will presently turn Red; but if you throw into it some Alkali salt,
it will recover again its former color.

On the contrary if you pour an Alkali liquor, such as Volatile Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, upon the Blew tincture, it will presently turn Green; and if you
again pour upon it a little Spirit of Vitriol, it will change this color into
an obscure Red.

The Decoction of Indian Wood is very Red: if you drop into it a little Spirit
of Vitriol it will turn Yellow; and if you still add some Volatile Spirit of
Sal Armoniack it will become black.

All these changes of color, which the Spirit of Vitriol, or other Acids, and
Alkali's do make, proceed only from the different position of bodies dissolved
in the liquor, and from its disposition to modifie the Light different ways.

Add to page 208. Remarks upon Distillation of Alom.
Some have written that Alom yields but very little Acid, yet if they will but
take the pains to keep up a strong fire under it for three days together,
they will find that this Spirit does not give place in strength, or quantity to
that of Vitriol.

Nor are we at all obliged to distinguish, as they would have us, the
Acrimonious, Corrosive salt of Alom from its Acid, seeing that there is nothing
either Acrimonious or Corrosive in this Mineral salt, which will not turn into
an Acid Spirit, when it is driven forcibly by fire.

Add to page 211. Remarks upon Flowers of Sulphur.
If you mix one part of Sal Polychrestum with two pounds of Sulphur, and
sublime them together, as those I have described, you will have white Flowers of
Sulphur, which are thought to be better for distempers of the Breast than those
others; they are given in the same Dose. This Whiteness proceeds from a very
exact Attenuation which Sal Polychrestum gives to the Sulphur; the Sal
Polychrestum which remains at bottom of the Cucurbite, may be Calcined, and if
you afterward Purify it by Dissolution, Evaporation, and Filtration, it will
be full as good as before.

Add to page 216. Chap. Of Amber.
Amber is to be found near the Baltick-sea, in the Duchy of Prussia, and no
where else.

Some do think Petroleum, or Oil of Peter, to be nothing but a liquor drawn
from Amber by the means of subterranean fires, which make a distillation of it,
and that Jet and Coals are the remainders of this distillation.

This Opinion would have some resemblance of truth, if the places where this
Oil is found were not so far distant the one from the other; for Petroleum is
usually found only in Italy, as in Sicily, and in Provence, this Oil Distills
through the clefts of rocks, and it is very probable to be the Oil of some
Bituminous matter, which the subterranean fires had raised.

Tincture of Amber.
Powder finely five or six ounces of Yellow Amber, and put it into a Boult
head, pour upon it spirit of wine four singers height, stop this Boult-head
with another to make a Circulatory vessel, and luting exactly the Juncture with
a wet Bladder, set it in Digestion in warm Sand, and leave it so for five or
six days, or until the Spirit of Wine is well impregnated with an Amber
color; pour off this Tincture by inclination, and add more Spirit of Wine to
the remaining matter, you must digest it as before, afterward separating the
impregnation, mix it with the other, filter them, and then distill in a Limbeck
with a small fire, about half the Spirit of Wine, which may serve for the same
use as before: keep the Tincture that you find at bottom of the Limbeck, in a
Viol well stopped.

It is good for the Apoplexy, Palsy, Epilepsie, and Hysteric distempers; the
Dose is from Ten drops to a dram in some proper liquor.

Remarks.
You must powder the Amber very finely, that the Menstruum may open it the more
easily; this Tincture is only the sulphurous or Oily part of Amber, with which
the Spirit of Wine, which is a sulphur, is impregnated; some other liquor that
is not sulphurous would perhaps be able to dissolve the Amber, but then that
which it did dissolve would be but impure. And for this reason you must always
use a dissolvent that is of the same nature with the substance you desire to
dissolve.

The Volatile Salt of Amber.
Put two pounds of Amber powdered, into a large glass or earthen Cucurbite, let
it be filled but the fourth part full, set this Cucurbite in Sand, and after
you have fitted a head to it, and a small Receiver, lute well the Junctures,
and light a little fire under it for about an hour; then when the Cucurbite is
grown warm, increase it by little and little to the third degree; and there
will distill first of all a Phlegm and Spirit, then the Volatile Salt will rise,
and stick to the head in little Crystals; afterward there distills an Oil first
white and then red, but clear: when you see the Vapors rise no longer, you
must put out the fire, and when the Vessels are cold unlute them. Gather the
Volatile Salt with a Feather, and because it will be but impure as yet, by
reason of a little Oil that is mixed with it, you must put it into a pretty
large Viol big enough that the salt may fill only the fourth part of it, place
the Viol in Sand, after you have stopped it with plain Paper, and by means of a
little fire, you will sublime the pure salt in fair Crystals a-top of the Viol.
When you perceive the Oil begin to rise too, you must then take your Viol off
the fire, and letting it cool, break it, to separate the salt, keep it in a
Viol well stopped, you will have half an ounce.

This salt has the same virtues as the other I mentioned before, that is, you
may give it from Eight grains to Sixteen in some Opening liquor, for the
Jaundies, for Ischuries, Ulcers in the Bladder, the Scurvy, Fits of the Mother,
and upon all occasions where there is any need of removing Obstructions, and
opening by way of Urine.

The Spirit and Oil have the same virtues as those I have spoke of. If you
would Distill in a Retort the Mass which remained in the Cucurbite, until there
comes away nothing more, you will have a Black Oil, which might serve Women to
smell to in fits.

Remarks.
The Cucurbite must be sure to be large enough, for otherwise it will break
while the Vapors are a rising.

A Clear Oil may be drawn from Amber in the first Distillation by mixing the
Amber with an equal weight of Sea Salt, and distilling it in a Retort the usual
way; there will remain likewise some Volatile salt in the neck of the Retort,
which may be Rectified by subliming it in a Viol as I have said.

Add to page 220. chap. Of Ambergriese.
It is thought to be found no where else but in the Oriental seas, though some
of it has been known to be sometimes met with upon the English Coast, and in
several other places of Europe; the most of it is found upon the Coast of
Melinda, and especially at the Mouth of the River that is called Rio di Sena.

Add to page 233. Remarks upon Distillation of Guaiacum.
During the Distillation of Spirits, you must not make the fire too strong, for
they coming forth with a great deal of violence, would else be apt to break
either the Retort or the Receiver.

Though the Guaiacum that is used is a very dry body, yet abundance of liquor
is drawn from it; for if you put into the Retort four pounds of this Wood, at
sixteen ounces to the Pound, you will draw at least a Pound of Spirit and Phlegm,
and four ounces of Oil; as for the salt, you will gain but half an ounce, or six
drachms at most.

Add to page 238. Remarks upon Oil of Cloves per Descensum.
If you use a pound of Cloves, to Distill them per Descensum, according to the
Description I have given, you will draw an ounce and two drachms of White Oil, and
an ounce of Spirit; there will remain thirteen ounces and two drachms of
matter, from whence might still be drawn a little Red Oil.

Add to page 249. lin. 6. Chap. Of Wine.
It Is Objected to this last discourse, that the Tartareous part being in a
Natural way separated from the Wine, should in no wise diminish the quantity
nor the strength of the Spirituous and Inflammable part.

But when I asserted that the Spirits of diverse Wines are extremely much loaded
with Tartar, I did not mean that Tartar which Petrifies at the sides of the
vessels, for that same is quiet, and does not hinder the Exaltation of Spirits;
but I intended a Tartar that still remains mixed in the Wine after the
Fermentation, and which according as it abounds more or less, does render the
Wines more or less thick and gross. It is easy to see this Tartar I speak of,
if you evaporate the aqueous part of Wine, for it will remain at bottom in form
of Lees. Nevertheless there is no need of establishing two sorts of Tartar in
one kind of Wine, for the former is only the more soluble part of the latter.

Diverse little Objections have been made me on this subject, for want of duly
examining what I have established. Wherefore I have no desire to enlarge my
self in the relation of them, for it is my aim, as much as I can, to avoid all
Repetitions, as being of no further use but to swell a Book and tire the
Readers patience.

Add to page 256. lin. 32. in the Remarks upon Spirit of Wine.
Some persons do endeavor to reject the Method that I have described for
drawing Spirit of Wine, because, say they, a long time is required to draw a
little Spirit, and by reason of the difficulty they conceive in procuring such
Vessels well made, at Paris, and much more so in the Country.

But it is likely these Gentlemen do blame this Method, before ever they tried
it; for if they had but taken the pains to make the Experiment of it, they
would have found that with two or three of these Vessels, they might have drawn
as much Spirit of Wine, as they could be able to do with their great Machine;
and that this Spirit is not liable to the Impression which might be
communicated to it from Copper or Tin vessels. As for the difficulty that there
is pretended of finding these Glass vessels, there is none at all that I know
of, but only for such as will not take the pains to visit the Glass-houses, for
there they would find enough for their turn; and though I use a great many of
them in my Courses of Chemistry, I never was to seek for any yet. But suppose
there were none to be found ready made, methinks they might as easily bespeak
'em, and have 'em made at the Glass-houses, as well as bespeak those grand
Copper or Tin Machines, that are commonly used. I know those that are better
pleased with making a Fair show, than with the effects of things, and who
measure the goodness of an Operation by the trouble it gives one, and by the
greatness of Vessels and Furnaces, will find here but little to their
satisfaction. But I am very little concerned at such men's exceptions, I never
at all endeavored to follow their Road way. My design is simply to facilitate
the means of working in Chemistry, and to despoil it, as much as lies in my
power, of those things which render it mysterious and dark.

Add to page 258. Remarks upon Spirit of Wine Tartarized.
A sign, that the Spirit of Wine has carried along with it some of the Salt of
Tartar, is this: if you dry gently the Salt of Tartar that remains in the
Cucurbite, and weigh it, you will find it diminished an ounce and a half.

You may again put this Spirit of Wine Tartarized to half a pound of more Salt
of Tartar, in a Limbeck, and distill it as before, but I have found that it is
never a-whit the better for it.

This way of Tartarizing Spirit of Wine is the very best and shortest of all
that have been invented, whether you desire to make it Pure, or to impregnate
it with salt of Tartar; and I may venture to say, that all the many long and
tedious descriptions that have been given of this Operation, have been only
invented to cast a dust into the eyes of Novices; for it is easy for any to
observe, who give themselves a little to examine things, that after all their
long turnings and windings, and circumstances to no purpose, the Spirit of Wine
is not so well Tartarized, as by the plain Method that I have described.

Add to page 259. Remarks on the Queen of Hungary's Water.
The Oil or Essence of Rosemary may be made as the Oil of Cinnamon, and some
drops may be put into Spirit of Wine, and thus we have a Queen of Hungaries
Water presently made upon the spot. The Water of the Queen of Hungary sometimes
gives ease to the Toothache, being snufft at the Nose, or applied to the Gums
with a little Cotton.

Some endeavoring to Criticize to little purpose, do say, it is altogether
useless to digest Rosemary Flowers with Spirit of Wine, because their substance
being of a very Volatile nature, it easily dissolves without any Digestion.

But this Circumstance is very necessary, if we desire to have a Water well
impregnated with the Essence of the Flowers, for although there is a Volatile
substance in Rosemary, yet good part of the Oil, in which consists principally
the Smell, is involved in the other Principles, and it cannot be well Rarefied,
mixed, and Exalted, but only by a Digestion: and thus we find a very good
Effect from it.

Add to page 260. last line, Chap. Of Vinegar.
Perhaps it will be Objected that Wine separated from Tartar and Lees grows
sour, when kept a long time in a vessel, without any dissolution of Tartar.

But we must consider that Wine, let it be as clear and pure as may be, does
always retain the more salt and subtle part of Tartar, which exalts and easily
smells, when by the Fermentation it gets the predominancy of the Sulphurous
Spirits, which held it as it were involved: and thus clear wine sowrs when
alone, but it does not sour so fast, and the Vinegar is not so strong, as when
it is made upon Tartar.

Furthermore if we consider the Principles that Wine consists of, we shall
find, that neither the Oil, nor Earth, nor Water, are capable of yielding any
Acidity, and that nothing but the Salt is able to give it. Now it cannot be
doubted but that the Salt of Wine is in the Tartar.

It may be added here, that the Air to which Wines are exposed, by leaving the
vessel open, when they would have them turn into Vinegar, does likewise
communicate a little of its Acidity to the Wines, in the stirring up, and
rarifying the Acid of Tartar.

Add to page 262. Remarks on Distillation of Vinegar.
Some having dried and calcined the sweet extract that remains at the bottom of
the Cucurbite, after the Distillation of vinegar, and having by Dissolution,
Filtration, and Coagulation, separated an Alkali fixed salt, much like unto that
which is drawn from Tartar, they do mix it with Spirit of vinegar, and Distill
and Cohobate it diverse times, until, say they, the spirit has carried off all
the Salt, and then will needs have it called Spirit of vinegar Alkalized, or
Radical spirit of vinegar, and they assert that this being much more pure, and
entirely united with its proper salt, is much more powerful in dissolving
Metals. But far from the Distilled vinegars becoming the stronger through this
Preparation, I can demonstrate that it breaks and loses the greatest part of
its points in contending with the Alkali salt, with which it is mixed, for it is
the property of this salt to sween Acids.

Neither is it necessary to believe that by Distillations is drawn the Alkali
salt of Vinegar, for it remains fixed at bottom of the Retort with the Acids it
is impregnated with; so that this same Spirit of Vinegar to which so many great
names and uses have been appropriated, is properly the more Phlegmatic part of
distilled vinegar.

Add to page 264. Remarks on Crystals of Tartar.
I see no reason so much to wonder as some do, why Tartar will not dissolve in
cold water; for although it does contain a great deal of Salt, this salt is
involved in Earth, and Oil, which must needs hinder this dissolution, and
there is no need of having recourse, for an explication of this, to a
proportionate Union of Volatile salts and Acids.

Add to page 264. Soluble Tartar.
Powder and mix together eight ounces of Crystals of Tartar, and four ounces
of the fixed salt of Tartar, put this mixture into a glazed earthen Pot, and
pouring upon it three pints of common water, boil the matter gently for half an
hour, then letting it cool, filter and evaporate the liquor until it is dry,
and there will remain at bottom, eleven ounces six drachms of a white salt;
keep it in a Viol, it is both a good Aperitive, and Laxative, it is good for
Cachexies, Dropsies, and all Diseases that proceed from Obstructions: the Dose
is from ten grains to two scruples in Broth, or some proper liquor.

Remarks.
This Operation is nothing but a Dissolution that the Salt of Tartar has made
of Cream of Tartar, so that it can dissolve in cold water, which it could not
do being alone; the Cream of Tartar also being an Acid insinuates into the
Pores of the Alkali salt, and sweetens it.

If you Boil Cream of Tartar in water, and put into it some salt of Tartar,
there will happen an Effervescency between 'em, but if you mix these two
Ingredients together in cold water, there will be no Effervescency; the reason
of which is, that the Acid Spirits of Cream of Tartar being involved in other
Principles, can have no active power to penetrate the Alkali, unless they be
actuated by fire.

I use to filter the Dissolution, in order to separate some terrestrious part
of the Cream of Tartar, which could not dissolve: this salt comes near to
Tartar vitriolated for virtues, some do call it Vegetable salt.

Chalybeated or Martial Crystals of Tartar.
Powder and mix a pound of good white Tartar, and three ounces of Rust of Iron,
boil this mixture in an Iron Kettle with five or six quarts of water, for half
an hour, or so much time as is requisite to dissolve the Tartar, pass the
liquor hot through a warm cloth, then let it alone to settle in an Iron or
Earthen Pot ten or twelve hours, it will shoot into brown Crystals, at the
sides and bottom of the Pot, pour off the liquor by Inclination, and gather the
Crystals; then evaporate over the fire about half the liquor in the same Pot,
then let the remainder settle, and take out the Crystals as before; continue
these Evaporations and Crystallizations, until you have drawn out all your
Tartar, dry the Crystals in the Sun, and so keep them.

It is a good remedy for Obstructions of the Liver, Mesentery, Spleen; it is
given in Cachexies, and for Melancholy, and the Quartan Ague; the Dose is from
fifteen grains to two Scruples in Broth or some other liquor proper to the
Distemper.

Remarks.
This Preparation is boiled but little, that the Tartar may dissolve only the
more Saline part of Iron; the liquor is made to pass through a cloth, to free
it from the Impurities of the Tartar and Iron that could not dissolve; but you
must pass it very hot, for if it were a little cool, the Tartar would Coagulate
in the Cloth, and so none of the liquor would pass.

Instead of Crystallizing the dissolved Tartar, you may evaporate all the
liquor, and so obtain a brown powder, which has the same virtues as the
Crystals.

When you would exhibit this Chalybeated Crystal of Tartar, you must make it
just boil in the liquor you give it in, for otherwise it will not dissolve, and
you must be sure to give it as hot as they can take it, for fear it should
Crystallize at the bottom of the Poringer or Cup.

Soluble Tartar Chalybeated.
Put into an Earthen Pan, or Glass vessel four ounces of soluble Tartar, and
sixteen ounces of Tincture of Mars prepared according to the description that I
have given, set the vessel in sand, and with a small fire evaporate the
humidity of the liquor, until there remains a black powder, shut it in a viol
well stopped, and keep it, you will have eight ounces of it.

This Martial Tartar has the same virtues as the Tincture of Tartar, it is good
to remove all Obstructions, wherefore it is very properly used in Cachexies,
Dropsies, retention of the Menstrua, in Nephritick Colicks, and difficulties of
Urine: the Dose is from ten grains to half a dram, in some proper liquor, or
else made into Lozenges.

Remarks.
This Preparation of Chalybeate, or Martial Tartar is not only more convenient
for use than the former, (in that it dissolves, or mixes in a cold liquor) but
has much more virtue in it, for the Tincture of Mars contains only the more
salt part of Tartar.

Add to page 265. Remarks on Soluble Emetick Tartar.
Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack may be used instead of that of Urine; but
then there will appear no sensible Ebullition, the reason of which is, because
the salt of this Spirit is not so open as the Spirit of Urine, by reason of
some impression it has of the Acid sal Armoniack, with which it was mixed;
insomuch that the Crystals of Tartar whose Acid is not separated from the
Earth, has points too gross and too unactive to insinuate into the Pores of
this salt, and divide its parts so easily as those of the salt that is contained
in Spirit of Urine, whose Pores are bigger.

Another sort of Soluble Emetick Tartar may be made by boiling in Water an
ounce of the Glass of Antimony in Powder, with four ounces of Soluble Tartar,
for seven or eight hours, then upon Filtring and evaporating the liquor, there
will remain a gray Powder of the same virtues as the other, and to be given in
the same Dose.

Add to page 268. Remarks upon the Fixed Salt of Tartar, and its Oil.
I commonly use to draw this way four ounces of very white, and well Purified
salt of Tartar, from each pound of Red Tartar; a little more may be drawn from
white Tartar, but it is no better than the other.

I have observed that when water is thrown upon the Mass of Tartar newly
Calcined, it heats, much like unslack't Lime, when wetted; the reason of which
is the same that I have given, to explicate the Ebullition of Quicklime in
water: all the difference is this, that Tartar Calcined containing a great deal
of Salt, does more easily imbibe water than Quicklime.

Some do Calcine salt of Tartar with a little sulphur, to hinder it from
dissolving so easily by the Air, and to whiten it the more; but this is no good
practice, because the Acid Spirit of sulphur destroys some part of the Alkali;
and this does come to happen, by reason that the Pores of this Salt by being
thus Calcined are not so open as they were, and the Air therefore cannot so
easily melt it. If you would desire to make Salt of Tartar, and other Alkali
fixed salts very white indeed, you must Calcine them all alone in a great fire,
until they become white, and then Purify them by Dissolation, Filtration, and
Coagulation. As for their proneness to dissolve, this accident is Natural to
Alkali salts, and it cannot be taken from them, but by destroying their nature.

Nor can I approve the addition of some quantity of Niter to the Calcination of
Tartar, as some will do, because the Volatile parts of Niter being exalted, the
fixed do remain, and by their Acidity do diminish the virtue of Salt of Tartar.

Alkali salts are Aperitive, in that they dissolve those slimy humors which
caused Obstructions; and it is for the same reason that Salt of Tartar does
correct Senna, and hinders it from griping, for the substance of Senna being
Viscous, this does Rarifie it, and make it work the quicker; it may also serve
to dissolve some viscous Phlegm that sticks to the Intestines, which as it is
going off, causes griping pains.

Add to page 272. the last line in Remarks upon Magistery of Tartar, or Tartar
Vitriolated.
If you use two ounces of Salt of Tartar in this Operation, you will draw two
ounces and a half of Tartarum Vitriolatum. This Augmentation comes from the
more heavy and strong part of the Vitriol, for the humidity that is Evaporated
is very Phlegmatic.

You may here use the Rectified Oil of Vitriol instead of the Spirit, and then
the less is required, because it is a stronger Acid, but the Tartarum
Vitriolatum will not be so white, as when Spirit of Vitriol is used, by reason
of some Tincture that always remains with Oil of Vitriol, Rectify it as much
as you please.

Though some have written, that if Tartarum Vitriolatum should be put into a
Retort, and actuated by fire, one might draw Spirit of Vitriol as good as it
was at first, nevertheless it is certain 'twill not be so strong a Spirit; for
it has lost the most subtle part of its Acidity, by encountering with the
Alkali, which may be easily judged both by the Taste, and the Effects.

If by way of Curiosity you would search a little narrowly into this Operation,
and observe what happens during the Ebullition of Acid and Alkali, you will find,
that a great many little dashes of water do fly about, especially if the vessel
is not placed too low, and you hold a lighted Candle near it, for they will be
apt to put it out. This Effect can have no other cause than the violent
separation of the parts of Alkali by Acid, which makes the watery part of this
liquor sprinkle it self upwards, it being on all sides furiously driven.

If you use Oil of Vitriol, the Ebullition is the greater, and the heat the
more considerable, because its Acid being stronger, it separates the parts of
the Alkali body with more ease.

Now considering the Ebullition which happens between Acid and Alkali, I have
the less opinion of a Method that some follow, which is to bathe a little the
bodies that are to be Embalmed, with Spirit of salt, and then to put Salt of
Tartar into the Embalming Powder; for it is very likely, that this Spirit of
Salt, which is an Acid, by mixing with the Alkali salt of Tartar, produces a
Fermentation which may stir up the remaining humidity of the Carcass, and make
it enter into the Ingredients of the Powder, and so instead of Preserving the
dead body entire, we may have reason to fear lest this Fermentation should
rather hasten the dissolution of its parts.

Add to page 274. lin. 27. in the same Remarks.
Leaven does increase the Fermentation in Dough, as being a Paste it self,
whose salts are made free by a long Fermentation; these salts do join with
those of the other Paste, and assist them both to rarifie and dissolve.

The same thing may be said of diverse other Acids which do cause a Fermentation.

But when the Acids have rarefied the matter as much as they can, they there
lose their motion, and then there happens a kind of Coagulation, that is to
say, the matter returns into its first dimensions.

Again there is one effect of Acids, which seems different from those I
mentioned before, and it is that they can preserve certain bodies that are put
into them, as salt preserves meat. Thus when young Cucumbers, Saxifrage,
Capers, etc. are set a steeping in Vinegar, there happens no Fermentation at
all, and consequently no Corruption.

The reason of which is, that the parts of Cucumbers, and other things I
mentioned, being of a viscous nature, the Acids do insinuate into them for to
dissolve them, but they have not motion there free enough to make their
attacks, and separate the parts, so that the Acid of Vinegar does only fix it
self in the Pores of these bodies, and there Coagulate.

It is this Coagulation that hinders the Cucumbers from corrupting, for these
Acids do stop up their Pores and serve as so many little Peggs, to keep the
parts firm and quiet. Sea Salt which is an Acid does preserve meat, and several
other things for the same reason; but I have spoken something of that in the
Remarks upon the Principles.

Add to page 276. the end of the same Remarks.
Another Objection may be made to what I have said touching Digestion; it is,
that whereas I maintained that Acids do Dissolve when they abound, and
Coagulate when there are but few in a great deal of matter, it should happen
that Spittle should then be apter to Coagulate the Aliments in the stomach, and
cause indigestion, than would a greater quantity of Acids, for it seems,
according to my Discourse, the more acids are found in a matter, the more
liable it must be to dissolve.

To resolve this difficulty, which seems to be very considerable, we must
observe, that the natural acids of Aliments taken into the stomach, are
sufficient to rarifie and dissolve those bodies which hinder their motion, when
they have been stirred up by Mastication, or by some salt of the spittle, which
serves as a Leaven to them, much after the same manner as the salts of Meal do
rarifie the Paste, when they are actuated by means of Trituration and Leaven
together; but now if there happens to be too much acid in the Aliments that are
taken into the stomach, they will have the same effect as Cucumbers and those
other things I mentioned, which preserve in Vinegar. The acids will indeed
endeavor to cut in pieces what stands in their way, but having to do with
parts too viscous and heavy, they will soon lose all their motion, and fix by
their quantity, and by their gravity the natural salt of these aliments, as
Vinegar fixes that of Cucumbers; for whereas the acids do shut the Pores of the
matter, and keep them firm and quiet, the natural salt cannot be able to exalt
so as to cause Fermentation or Digestion.

The reason then why a small portion of acids will cause Digestion in the
stomach, and a greater quantity will hinder it, is that the small quantity will
join with the natural salt of aliments, and have its operation without stopping
the Pores of the matter, whereas a great store of acids will quite stop up the
Pores of this same matter, and hinder the motion of the natural salt; for it is
not enough that there are a great many acids, to cause a dissolution, these
acids must have room to move in, and make their attacks.

Thus these Effects make nothing against what I asserted concerning acids, for
a greater quantity of them will always have more disposition, and tendency to a
dissolution; but if this great quantity does Coagulate diverse things, it is
only by accident, and by reason of the disposition of the matter into which the
acid points do use to enter.

What I have established concerning acids may serve very much toward the
explicating of Fevers, and their principal symptoms.

First of all every body must grant, that when there are Obstructions in our
Bodies, the obstructed matter does Ferment and sour, as Dough, Wine, and
several other things grow sour by being stale.

This matter by Fermenting sends salt or acid vapors into the Mass of Blood,
which do cause diverse Alterations in it, according to their quantity, and
quality, for these acids are commonly mixed with sulphurs, which are a kind of
Vehicle to the acids, and are more or less corrupted, according as the matter
whence they are derived have sojourned more or less in the Obstructed part.

Now if these acid vapors are carried into the Vessels, but only in such a
quantity as is fit to make a kind of Leaven in the Blood, they will then
rarifie the Blood too much, and whereas they by consequence increase its motion
and heat, they do cause that which we call a Fever; this Fever must remain as
long as the Ferment continues in the Blood, and according as there comes a new
supply of matter in place of what nature has thrown off.

But if a greater quantity of acids rises all of a sudden from out of the
Obstructions, then there must needs happen a kind of Coagulation, for these
acids thus abounding, and fixing the grosser part of the Blood, do partly lose
their motion, and quiet the Ebullition of the Blood by fixing its parts.

It is this kind of Congelation which causes those Cold Shiverings, which are
felt, before the Hot Fit begins; for as the Heat is derived from the motion of
the Spirits, the Cold is produced from the cessation of their motion.

The Cold fit continues until the Spirits have by their activity rarefied this
Congelation; for the Spirits being continually supplied with additional forces
do violently assault the passage 'till they have broke it open, and made their
way free.

The Coagulum being dissolved, the Blood should seem to Circulate as it did
before, but because the matter of the Coagulum is converted into a Leaven, this
Leaven makes the Blood to Boil, and so causes a Fever; this Fever continues
until the Blood is freed from all this Ferment, either by Transpiration, or by
way of Urine.

Now to conceive how this Coagulum may be converted into a Leaven, we must
consider that the Spirits of the Blood have lost most of their acidity in
dissolving this Coagulum, and that there remains but only acidity enough to
produce a Fermentation.

Nevertheless you must not think I mean by this Congelation now spoken of, a
Coagulum altogether like unto that in Milk, or to that which happens, when an
acid liquor is sying'd into the Veins of an Animal, for these Congelations are
too strong, and there would then happen to us the same thing, or very near the
same as does to the animal, who soon afterward falls into Convulsions, and
dies, because the course of the Spirits and Blood would be entirely stopped, and
they would never be able to break through so great an obstacle: but I
understand here that the Blood is made thicker than it was, and has not so free
a motion as it had before, which is enough to cause such cold Fits.

Now there remains for me to explicate how it comes to pass that Fevers have
their abatements and returns regularly by Fits.

The matter that makes the Obstructions which I have laid down for the
Fundamental Cause of Fevers, begins not to send out its vapors, nor disperses
its acid salt into the Blood in order to cause a Fever, until it has got
together a certain quantity in the obstructed vessels, and then it is probable
there is a kind of Eruption of the matter.

This Eruption of Feverish matter must happen at set times, so long as the
Obstruction lasts, because the humors which Circulate to the obstructed parts,
and there stop, are always in an equal quickness and quantity.

Now seeing that in a Tertian Ague, the vessels wherein the obstruction
happens, do acquire in two days time a sufficient repletion of matter to
produce the Eruption and Fermentation I have spoken of, the Fits do come to
operate every second day.

But because in a Quartan Ague the humors are more tenacious and heavy, and
flow with expedition, the Fermentation and Eruption must needs be slower and
consequently the Fits more distant the one from the other.

The Quotidian Ague is caused by a Salt Pituita, which is naturally fluid
enough to make the matter ferment in less time, wherefore it is that the Fits
do return every day.

We may reason concerning the other kinds of Fevers upon the same Principle,
and explicate all the accidents that happen, but I have no design to enlarge my
self further upon this subject, I should think it would be too great a
Digression, and a Book might rather be made on purpose, to express all the
circumstances which might be deduced from it.

Volatile Salt of Tartar.
Dry the Lees of Wine in a gentle fire, and fill with them two thirds of a
large earthen or glass Retort, place this Retort in a Reverberatory Furnace,
and fitting to it a large Receiver, give a small fire under it to heat the
Retort by degrees, and to drive out an insipid Phlegm; when vapors begin to
rise, you must put out the Phlegm, and luting carefully the Junctures of your
vessels, quicken the fire by little and little, until you find the Receiver
filled with white Clouds; continue it in this condition, and when you perceive
the Receiver to cool, raise the fire to the utmost extremity, and continue it
so, until there rise no more Vapors. When the Vessels are grown cold, unlute
the Receiver, and shaking it about to make the Volatile salt which sticks to it
fall to the bottom, pour it all into a Boulthead with a long neck; fit to it a
Head with a small Receiver; lute well the junctures, and placing it in sand,
give a little fire under it, and the Volatile salt will rise, and stick to the
head, and the top of the Boulthead; take off your head, and set on another in
its place: gather your salt, and stop it up quickly, for it easily dissolves
into a liquor; continue the fire, and take care to gather up the salt according
as you see it appear; but when there will rise no more salt, a liquor will
distill, of which you must draw about three ounces, then put out the fire.

This salt is had in great request to Purify the Blood, by Sweat or Urine: it
may be given in the Palsy, Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Quartan and Tertian Agues, to
open Obstructions; the Dose is from six grains to fifteen in some proper liquor.

The Distilled liquor is a Volatile salt that is risen with Phlegm; it is called
the Volatile Spirit of Tartar, and has the same virtues as the salt; its Dose
is from eight to four and twenty drops.

After this same manner the Volatile salt of Beans, Soot, and diverse Fruits and
Seeds may be Prepared.

Remarks.
The Lees of Wine being incomparably more Fermented than the Tartar which is
found in the sides of Vessels, we need not wonder if its salt is more Volatile.

This salt is sublimed in a Boulthead with a long neck, to the end the Phlegm,
which is too heavy to rise easily so high, may not much mix with it; but it is
extraordinary hard to keep this salt dry, it easily humects and dissolves into
liquor, wherefore it were much better to draw it in a Spirit, and less of the
Volatile part would be lost, being detained by Phlegm.

Nevertheless because there are several persons who are as well pleased with
the sight of things, as their Effects, this liquified salt might be mixed with a
sufficient quantity of Calcined Bones powdered, to make thereof a Paste, which
might be made into little Pellets, to be put into a Boult-head, and fitting to
it a Blind head, this salt may be sublimed or Rectified as before, and this
pure salt must be kept in Viols well stopped.

The difficulty there is in keeping this Volatile salt dry, as well as that of
other Vegetables, does proceed from this, that only the more Essential part is
Volatilized, for there remains much fixed salt with the earth in the Retort.

This Volatile salt becomes Alkali by the means of fire, as the other Volatile
salts do, whereof I have already spoken in my Remarks upon the Principles; and
there is no manner of probability that it should have been of this nature,
either in the Plant or in the Lees, for the reasons that I have shown in the
same Remarks.

I shall add here, that if the Alkali salt did exist in the Lees, but is not
able to unfold it self, and get the predominancy of Acids but only by a long
Fermentation, as the Chemists will have it, who follow the common way of
discoursing of these things, it would then necessarily follow that the more
Lees do Ferment, the more they must lose of their Acidity, because the Alkali
would destroy it. Nevertheless the contrary to this happens; for Lees do sour
as they grow stale, and those who make your Vinegar, do know well enough how to
use Lees, and make them Ferment with their Wine, when they would use a quick
dispatch in making Vinegar.

It seems to me from the consideration of this effect, that there is little
reason to follow the Sentiments of some, who have writ that the Lees of wine
abounding in Volatile salt, and a sulphurous spirit do contain but very little
Acid; for it is as plain as may be that this Volatile salt is Acid in the Lees,
and is the fame that makes the Acid spirit of Vinegar, as being more Volatile
than many other Acids, to Volatilize along with its Phlegm in the distillation.
It is true that salt of Tartar drawn by the Retort, does rise more easily than
the Spirit of Vinegar, but this is from its being Volatilized by the violent
heat of fire.

Another mark that all the salt of Lees is Acid, is this, that the Tartar does
all dissolve in the wine, and turns into Vinegar; for very little or no Lees,
or other Tartar, is to be found in the Barrels wherein Vinegar was made,
although there was some before as nature made it, or though some other was
added to it.

Perhaps it will be Objected, that Lees are sometimes added to Wines grown ropy
and mucilaginous to make them good again, and those Wines are not sowred by the
Lees.

But this effect happens, when the former Fermentation becoming imperfect,
through the too great quantity of Phlegm for the little proportion of Salt that
was in the wines, the salt of the Lees does rarifie, exalt, and involve it self
in some measure in the Oily parts of the liquor that the wine is made of, as I
have said in the Chapter of Wine.

For the Wine does not sour, so long as the salt finds Oil to act upon, but it
does so, when this salt finds nothing to hinder it from separating.

The Volatile salt of Tartar produces much the same effects, as that of Beans,
and other seeds, and though many will needs give it such sublime and
extraordinary virtues in comparison with other Volatile salts, I do'nt see any
reason for such high fancies, nor that effects do answer their Pretenses.

Volatile salts have a good use, when they find the Pores and Humors disposed
for Transpiration, but they are full as dangerous, when the Humors are not at
all Prepared; for by their Volatility they do so stir them up, that oftentimes
the Fever is known to be increased by them, and translated to the Brain:
wherefore you must be sure to consider well the Temper and present state of
your Patient, before you presume to give them.

That which remains in the Boulthead, after the Volatile salt, and spirit are
drawn off, is a black and stinking Oil mixed with the more Phlegmatic part of
the liquor; you must separate this Oil in a Funnel lined with brown paper; it
is good for the Palsy, Cold pains, and for Hysteric women to smell to.

A Lee or Calcined Tartar is found in the Retort, out of which you may draw a
fixed Alkali salt, as out of common Tartar, but in a lesser quantity, for that
the greatest part of the Salt of Lees is Volatilized.

Add to page 278. Extract of Opium called Laudanum.
Opium does mitigate all pains which proceed from too great a subtilty of the
humors, it is good for the Toothache, being applied to the Tooth, or else made
into a Plaisser, and applied to the Artery of the Temples; it is used to stop
spitting of blood, Dysenteries, Fluxes of the Menstrua, and the Hemorrhoids,
for Colicks, defluxions of sharp humors upon the eyes, for Rheumatisms, and to
ease all sorts of Griping pains. The Dose, etc. as before.

Add to page 284. Remarks upon Laudanum.
Some have writ in opposition to what I have established on this subject, and
say, that if we have regard to the quantity of Narcotick vapors that may arise
from a small Dose of Opium, it ought not to be imagined that those Vapors
should be able to shut the channels of the Spirits and humors which make a
defluxion upon some part; but that we should rather conclude the mitigation of
pains, and stopping of defluxions to proceed from a jus proportion of the salt
and sulphur of Opium, and from the secret Ferment they contain.

But this Objection will give us but little trouble in the answering, when we
consider that although the Vapors caused by it are but few, yet the vessels of
the Brain, in which the Animal Spirits do move, are exceeding delicate, and
easy to be obstructed; and that the too great activity of the Spirits, which
often fly into the diseased parts, being thus abated by the viscous nature of
Opium, there must needs follow thereupon some ease and comfort, without any
need at all of admitting a stoppage of the Vessels. And again we may conceive,
that all the Opium that was taken, being capable of being Rarefied into vapors
by the heat of the body, there must needs be produced good quantity of them.

As for the proportion of Salt, and Sulphur in Opium, and the secret Ferment
they pretend to acquaint us with, in order to Explicate this matter, I know
they are high terms indeed, but illustrate very little; for though they say
these salts and sulphurs do unite with Homogeneous particles that they meet
with, and destroy such as are the cause of the Distemper, we can never by this
means receive any clear Idea of that which makes Opium soporiferous.

Besides the virtue which Opium has to cause sleep, I have observed that it is
often Sudorifick. I conceive this effect must not be attributed only to the
Volatile parts of this mixed, which may be thought to operate this way, after
they are disingaged from its viscosity, but rather to this, that during sleep,
the inward vessels being as it were obstructed, or in some manner Coagulated,
and the Spirits finding resistance in their passage, do reflect, or turn their
motion to the outward parts, and draw along with 'em some moisture through the
Pores. That which confirms me in this opinion is the consideration, that diverse
persons do use always to sweat, when they are a sleep, though they have not
taken any Opium at all. Now it may happen that in the operation of Opium, the
Spirits finding more resistance within than they are wont, may tend outward
with the more force, and consequently incline to sweat more than in natural
sleep.

Some prejudiced Chemist may not relish perhaps this my Explication, because I
don't season it with salt enough, and sulphur, and other Principles; but
although the five Principles which may be drawn from other Vegetables, may also
be drawn from Opium, I never use them but to explicate some Effect; for
whenever I find they are not able to satisfy my reason, nothing shall hinder
me from pursuing my thoughts and searching otherwhere for some better
explication. In fine the Beauty of Chemistry does not consist in suiting our
opinions to those of ordinary Chemists, who resolving to explicate all the
Events of nature by their received Principles, which they manage according to
their own fashion, do reject as ridiculous whatsoever does not agree with their
Sentiments; but it rather consists in examining and imitating what is done
Naturally, and so searching for reasons that are most probable, and such as may
be said to come nearest to truth, though one is fain to forsake the way that
others have trod in.

Add to page 285. Chap. Of Aloes.
Aloes is not only used inwardly, as I shall say speaking of its Extract, but
it is also used outwardly in many Unguents and Plasters that are Detersive,
and Resolutive.

Its Tincture is also drawn with Spirit of wine, by the same Method as I shall
describe that of Myrrh; it is resolutive, detersive, good against Gangrenes,
and to Incarnate: it is used in Injections to dissolve Gypsous humors, and to
cleanse Wounds, and old Ulcers.

Add to page 292. lin. 3. in Remarks on Extractum Panchymagogum.
Spirit of Wine is commonly used to make this Extract; and it may seem to be so
much the purer, being drawn by this dissolvent, rather than by a watery
menstruum; for spirit of wine dissolves only the more Balsamic and purer part
of mixed bodies: but nevertheless I choose rather to prefer the use of Dew, or
else Rainwater, nay and common water before Spirit of wine for several reasons.

First, because in the Evaporation of the humidity of the Extract, drawn by
Spirit of wine, a great many of the more subtle parts are lost, which this
dissolvent had Volatilized. And indeed it cannot be denied, but some parts will
evaporate, let us use what dissolvent we please; but it is plain there is no
such great loss, when watery menstruums are used, as when spirit of wine. Now we
should always prefer such menstruums, as are best able to preserve the virtue
of the mixed, whose Extract we intend to draw.

The second is, because Spirit of wine does always leave some impression of
heat and acrimony in the Extracts it draws, which the liquors that I use don't
do.

The third is, because spirit of wine is not so convenient a menstruum to
dissolve the salts which the Ingredients we use are full of, and it is in this
salt, that their grearest virtue does consist.

Wherefore we ought to choose such dissolvents, as best preserve the virtue of
mixed bodies, and such as are familiar to our nature. We must use Spirit of wine
to extract Rosines, such as that of Scammony, Jalap, Turbith; but whenever an
Extract can be drawn with a watery menstruum, it is better to use that, rather
than another, for the reasons I have mentioned.

Add to page 304. after the chap. Of Gum Ammoniack. CHAP. Of Myrrh.
Myrrh is a Gummy juice that distills from a Spinous Tree, of a middle height,
by Incisions that are made into it; this Tree grows commonly in Ethiopia, and
Arabia, and because the Inhabitants of those countries are thought to feed on
Serpents, the Myrrh that is brought thence is called Troglodytick. The
Ancients were wont to collect from the same Tree a liquor that fell from it
without Incision, which was called Stacten; it is only a liquid Gum, but I am
apt to think it should have more virtue than common Myrrh, because it was the
more spirituous part, which filtrated through the Pores of the Bark of this
Tree.

You must choose such Myrrh as is friable, light, odoriferous, clear, and such
as is in small pieces, of a Yellowish color, and bitter to the Taste; it is
aperitive and resolutive; it is much esteemed for obstructions of the Vterus,
and to bring the menstrua, and to quicken Women's Labor; it also resists
malignity of humors, it is used in Corroborative Remedies, and resolvent
Plasters.

Tincture of Myrrh.
Put what quantity you please of good Myrrh powdered, into a Boulthead, and
pour upon it spirit of wine four fingers high; ftir the matter and set it in
digestion in warm sand, for two or three days, or until the Spirit of Wine is
loaded with the Tincture of Myrrh; then separate the liquors by Inclination,
and keep it in a Viol well stopped. It may be used to expedite Women's Labor, to
bring down the Menstrua, and in the Palsy, Apoplexy, Lethargy, and all diseases
that proceed from Corruption of humors; it is Sudorifick and Aperitive: the
Dose is from six drops to fifteen in some proper liquor: it is commonly used in
outward applications, or mixed with the Tincture of Aloes to discuss cold
Tumors, and to dissolve Gypsous humors by way of Injection, and for the
Gangrene.

Remarks.
Though Tinctures of Myrrh are daily drawn in Wine, or Aqua vitae,
notwithstanding the best that can be Prepared is with Spirit of wine, because
this Menstruum receives the more Oily, or Balsamic part of Myrrh; whereas the
Phlegm of Wine, and Aqua vitae, do cause these liquors to dissolve, and
impregnate with the more terrestrious part of the Gum, as well as with the Oily.

Some do use to evaporate this Tincture to the consistence of an Extract, but
because thereby they are fain to lose the more Volatile part of the Myrrh with
the spirit of wine, I do conceive it better to use the Tincture it self as I
have described it.

Oil of Myrrh per Deliquium.
Boil Eggs until they are grown hard, then cutting them in two, separate the
Yelk, and fill the White with Myrrh powdered, set them on little sticks placed
conveniently on purpose, in a plate, or earthen pan, in a Cellar, or some such
moist place, and there will distill a liquor to the bottom of the vessel, which
you may take out, and keep for use. This is called the Oil of Myrrh: it is
good to take away Freckles, and Tettars, applied outwardly.

Remarks.

Though this liquor, improperly called Oil, is only the more soluble part of
Myrrh humected with the moisture of whites of Eggs, and the Cellar together,
yet it is the best of any that have been invented, whether you draw it in
Spirit of wine, or distill this Gum in a Retort: for by spirit of wine the more
Volatile part of Myrrh is lost, either by Distillation, or Evaporation; and it
is so Torrified in a Retort, that it loses its best virtues; whereas per
Deliquium what Volatile this Gum contains is preserved in its Natural being,
for the humidities that mix with it are no ways capable of destroying or
altering its nature.

Add to page 309. l. 11. in the Chap. Of Vipers.
I am apt to conceive, that the Venom of Vipers is caused by an affluence of
Acid salts, violently thrown forth, and which by insinuating into the Veins, do
by degrees cause a Coagulum in the Blood, to hinder its Circulation, and the
course of the spirits; this opinion is the more probable, in that Coagulated
Blood has been found in the Veins of many Animals, which have been bit by the
Viper, and besides the most powerful Remedies that cure this Poison, are
Volatile Alkali salts, which are proper to dissolve the Coagulum.

As for what may be said, that if this discourse were true, the Natural acidity
of the Blood would Coagulate it sometimes, as it happens to Milk which Curdles
of it self; and that this Coagulation would produce the same effects as does
the Venom of Vipers; this Objection raises no difficulty at all. For the Blood
circulating in its Natural way, the Acidity that is in it is so well united to
it, that it cannot separate to make a Coagulum, no more than the acidity that
is in milk can separate from it, whilst the milk remains in the Teats, for we
see it never uses to Curdle there, unless occasioned by some Distemper.

And again, who can doubt but certain Pestilential Airs, or diverse Diseases
that come from the corruption of the humors of the body, may be able to
Coagulate the Blood, and have the same effect as the venom of Vipers?

Add to page 314. the bottom of the page in Remarks on Distillation of Vipers.
There is another way of Rectifying the Volatile salt, which is by mixing it
with five or six times as much Bones, or Horns burnt white, and putting the
mixture into a glass, or earthen Cucurbite, then fitting to it a blind head, or
such a one whose Nose has not been opened, after that luting well the
junctures, then setting the vessel in sand, and with a gentle fire the Volatile
salt will rise, and stick to the head, you must continue the fire until there
rises nothing further.

This salt is hereby purified from a great deal of its Oil, which remains in
the powder of Bones, wherefore it is whiter than it was, and pleasanter to the
Palate. It may again be mixed with other Calcined Bones, and sublimed as before,
to render it the purer still, and take away the more of its unsavory smell,
that is caused partly by the Empyreumatical oil that it draws along with it in
the distillation.

Add to page 316. the end of the same Remarks.
If you distill two and thirty ounces of shavings of Hartshorn, you will draw
thirteen ounces of liquor, and Volatile salt, and there will remain in the
Retort nineteen ounces of matter as black as any Coal.

You Will draw from the liquor an ounce and a half of Volatile salt, six ounces of
spirit, and two ounces of Black Oil.

The black matter being grinded on a Marble is good for Painters to use; if you
Calcine it, the fuliginous parts which make it black, will fly away, and leave
the Hartshorn very white; you will have sixteen ounces of it, and this is called
burnt Hartshorn. It is accounted Cardiack, but indeed has no other virtue than
to destroy Acids, as all other Alkali matters do too.

Some do use to stratifie Hartshorn with Bricks, and Calcining it that way,
they call it Hartshorn prepared Philosophically, they account it more Cordial
than it was before; but they are very strangely mistaken, for the Volatile
salt, and Oil, which were the things that should render it Cardiack, were
carried away in the Calcination, and there remains only a Terrestrious matter
that might be called Caput mortuum. Notwithstanding it is an Alkali, that may
serve as Crab's-eyes, Coral, and diverse other matters of the like nature, which
absorbe Acids; the Bricks bestow no virtue at all on it.

Add to page 323. Remarks on the Distillation of Wax.
If by way of curiosity you desire to know exactly what quantity of liquor, or
spirit, can be drawn from Wax, you must dry your Bolus as much as you can, or
else use in its place, broken pots, or Bricks powdered, which are not at all
wet: out of three and twenty ounces of Wax, you will draw in the first
Distillation just the same weight of liquor; to wit, twelve ounces of
Phlegmatic spirit, and the rest is a Butter; in the second and third
Distillation you will draw fourteen ounces of spirit, and six ounces of clear Oil.

Spirit of Wax is only a small quantity of Acid Volatile salt dissolved in
Phlegm; but you must not believe what some have written, that having Distilled
a considerable quantity of Wax, and put that which was drawn into a Boult head
with a long neck, they could sublime the Volatile salt like others of that
nature. For this salt, though it is indeed Volatile, yet it is not Volatile
enough to rise before the Phlegm; it is an Acid salt much like unto that of
Amber, but is not of the nature of Volatile Alkali's, which are known to
sublime so easily; it were better therefore to keep this spirit as it is, or
else to evaporate about half of it with a very mild heat, that it may be the
stronger.

The Volatile salts of many sulphurous matters are drawn Acid, as they were de
facto in the mixed, because being clothed with soft and ramous parts which give
way easily to their motion, they do not break their natural keenness in
endeavoring to separate, when they are forced by fire, and so they do not
receive so much terrestrious and fiery matter, as is requisite to make them
Porous, like Volatile Alkali's.

Methinks this Operation, and the Distillation of Amber which I have described,
do much confirm what I said before in my Remarks upon the Principles, that all
the salt of mixed bodies is naturally Acid, and that Alkali is nothing else but
a mutation made by fire. Besides, all sorts of Experiments do seem to me to
confirm and establish this Opinion; but yet I am not so peremptory in the
vindication of it, but would gladly give place to another, if I could be showed
that it is better than mine, for I seek after nothing else but real Truth.

Neither would I have it thought, I am so full of Vanity, as to vaunt my self
for the first Author of this Opinion, of many other thoughts, and of all the
ways of Operation that are to be found in my Book, as if for certain they were
never writ before; for although I can assure my Reader, that they are dictates
of my own conception, and that I have not searched into any Author whatsoever
to find them out; it may have happened nevertheless, and I am willing to think
so, that many others besides my self may have thought and written the same
things that I have done, and with more order and decorum. All the glory
therefore that I am desirous to reserve unto my self, upon this occasion, is,
that I have had the fortune to fall into the same reflections, as many Ingenious
persons have done before me, without consulting any of them.

FINIS.
AN INDEX OF THE MORE Material REMARKS IN THIS APPENDIX.
A
ACid and Alkali, their nature discoursed of at large, Page 14, 15. All Bodies
that Ferment with Acids are not compounded of an Alkali salt; as Pearl, Coral,
etc. but are themselves Alkali's, 13. An Alkali after its conflict with Acids,
remains no longer Alkali, 16, 17. No Alkali salt in Animals, 17. Choler no
Alkali, 18. The notions of Acid and alkali cannot explicate the Heat and
Ebullition, which proceeds from mixing spirit of Niter with spirit of Wine, 80.
The Oil of Turpentine with Oil of Vitriol occasions the same difficulty, ib.
How these Ebullitions are to be explicated, 81. Why Acids can preserve certain
bodies put in them, as Salt preserves meat, 116, 117. Alchymy, an excellent
definition of it, 27. Aloes, its Tincture how drawn, 130. Alom, its spirit as
good and strong as spirit of Vitriol, 96. Amber, where found, 97. its Tincture
how made, 98. its Volatile salt how drawn, 99. Ambergrease, where found, 101.
Antimony Emetick, by reason of a saline sulphur it contains, 59, 60. its
Regulus Calcined, weighs more than it did before, 60. and this Augmentation
from the addition of Fire into its body, ib. whence proceeds the Star, that is
seen in its Martial Regulus, 61, 62, 63. Aquafortis, its spirit no ways
alkali, 75. Arcanum Corallinum how Prepared, 54. Astrological Fancies about the
correspondence of Metals, and the Planets, diverse of them confuted, 22, 23.
Judicial Astrology censured, 62. Aurum Fulminans, why it may be taken inwardly,
30.
B.
Bismuth, why in making its Magistery the Ebullition is so great, and the
Boulthead grows so hot, 31. its Magistery may be made without using Salt in the
Water, but the Precipitation is better and quicker with Salt, 32.
C.
Color, proved to be no real thing; but only to depend on the Modification of
parts by diverse Experiments on Red Precipitate, 55, 56: several Experiments
upon Colors, 95, 96. Copper, why Water or other liquor that is heated or boiled
in Copper vessels a whole day together, if not removed from off the fire,
savours not so much of the Copper, as other Water boiled in a like vessel, and
removed from the fire but an hour, 36, 37, 38. what liquors take its Impression
sooner than others, 38. Cautions in the use of Copper vessels, ib. why a Kettle
newly taken off the fire is not so hot at bottom, as on the sides, 39. Crocus
Metallorum, a certain sort, called Magnesia Opalina, 64. in the Preparation of
the common sort of it, ordinary Saltpeter being used, yields more Crocus than
the Purified Saltpeter; and the reason why, 64. that made with common
Saltpeter, is the Redder, and nearer the color of an Animals Liver, 64. the
preparation of it that may be given in a greater Dose, not better than that
which is given in a less, 65.
D.
Digestion, an Objection concerning it answered, 117, 118. Dissolvents to be
used of the same nature with the substance you desire to dissolve, 98, 99.
E.
Emails, what they are made of, 40. Extractum Panchymagogum, better drawn with
a watery Menstruum, than Spirit of Wine, 131. In what Extracts Spirit of Wine
should be used, 132.
F.
Fevers, and their principal symptoms explicated by what is spoken concerning
acids, 119, 120. How Intermittent Fevers, or Agues, come to return regularly
by Fits, 121, 122.
G.
Goddards Drops, some account of their Process, in the Preface. Gold, thought
to be the end that Nature aims at in all her Mines, 23. taken inwardly no real
Cordial, 27. nor receives any Influence from the Sun more than other things do,
ib. Stories to prove it a Cordial, refuted, 28, 29, 30. That there are
Volatiles which can Sublime it away, 29. Gold purified by Lead, as the White of
an Egg Clarifies a Syrop, 33. the intercepted heavy matter between its Pores,
does not Precipitate of its self, 86. an Objection answered, 86, 87. Guaiacum
though a dry body, yet yields much liquor, 201.
H.
Hartshorn Burnt no Cardiack, but only an alkali, 137. Philosophically
prepared, it is but an ill Medicine, ib. Haematites, or the Bloud-stone how
prepared, 68. an Acid Spirit drawn from it, ib. Sublimation of this stone, 69.
I.
Ink, how made to appear and disappear several times in Paper, 90. Dried Roses
with Vitriol will make as black an Ink, as that made with Galls, 90. and so
will diverse other things, 91. Iron differs from the Loadstone but only in the
figure of its Pores, 40. Though it is an Acid Vitriolick Salt, yet it remains
an Alkali, ib. Diverse objections to prefer Steel before Iron for Physical uses,
answered at large, 41, to 45. its Aperitive virtue, partly from its salt, and
partly from its gravity, 42.
L.
Lead, though it loses much by its Calcination, yet weighs heavier at last, by
addition of fiery particles into its body, 33, 34. in the distillation of its
Burning spirit, called Burning spirit of Saturn, six drachms are taken out of
the Retort, more than were put in, besides an ounce and six drachms more of
liquor thence distilled, 34, 35. its Calx how revived, 36.
M.
Metals, how different from Minerals, 21. seven in number, ib. Mercury, the
former discourse upon its effects and operations in the Pox, vindicated
(modestly) to be the Authors own invention, 45. It is proved to be an Alkali,
though it contains no alkali salt, 46. Objections against its being an alkali,
and the venom of the Pox an acid, answered, 47, 48.
K.
Not half the Spirit of Niter requisite to dissolve it, as is for the same
weight of Bismuth, 49. a difficulty about its making a sublimate corrosive in
the body, answered, 50, 51. why Mercurius Dulcis, in a Flux, does not fill the
Brain with Vloers, as it does the mouth, 49. its White Precipitate by
sublimation becomes as sweet as Mercurius Dulcis, and may be then given in as
great a Dose, 52. its Red Precipitate the less it is Calcined, and the less Red
it is, the more Corrosive 'twill prove, 53. why spirit of Vitriol upon its Red
Precipitate, makes a clear dissolution without any Ebullition, 54. why spirit
of Salt upon its Red Precipitate, makes a curious white, 55. why the Color
turns so soon from Red to White, ib. its Red precipitate will sublime if you
continue it on the fire too long, 53, 54. other Precipitates of Mercury, 56.
and remarkable Observations upon them, 57, 58, 59. why the Volatile Spirit of
Sal Armoniack does so much help the Precipitation of Mercury, 52. Milk, whence
its Coagulation, 18, 19. Minerals, how they grow, 20. Myrrh, what, 132. its
liquid Gum, anciently called Stacten, ib. how chosen, and what it is good for,
133. its Tincture how drawn, ib. why spirit of Wine draws it best, 134. its
Tincture better than the Extract, ib. its Oil per Deliquium how made, ib.
N.
Niter, not at all inflammable, 76. No Sulphur in Saltpeter, 77. Spirit of
Niter how dulcified, 79. in the Fixation of Saltpeter into an alkali salt, why
the Crucible must be but half full, 82. The Detonation from Saltpeter and
Coals, why greater than from Saltpeter, and common. Sulphur, 82. why more Fixed
Salt get by the use of common saltpeter than by that which is Purified, 83. How
to make Gray fixed Niter become: exceeding White, 84. Fixed Niter why an Alkali,
ib. No Alkali salt in saltpeter, ib. why the liquor of Fixed Niter, that is made
with common saltpeter, being kept a year or so, loses its alkali nature;
whereas that which is made with purified Saltpeter, never loses being an
Alkali, 84, 85. Fixed Niter an Acid salt rendered porous, by the Alkali of Coals,
85. Liquor of Fixed Niter called by some Alkaest, or Universal dissolvent, 85.
Niter excellently well proved not to be inflammable, ib.
O.
Opium, what it is good for, 127. its Operation proved to proceed from
Narcotick Vapors, shutting the channels of the Spirits and Humors, 128. and
not from any proportion of salt and sulphur, or secret Ferment, 129. Opium
observed to be Sudorifick, ib. Oil, nothing else properly said to be
inflammable, 1. that which caused its Flagration must be a Volatile or
Essential salt, ib. this proved from common sulphur; and a mixture of saltpeter
with sulphur, 2. Oil of Bricks why called by Chemists the Oil of Philosophers,
70, 71. Oil of Peter, Jet, and Coals, supposed to be from a distillation in the
Earth, but falsely, 97. 98.
P.
Petrification, how, 20. Philosophers-stone, the several methods of searching
after it related, and pleasantly discoursed of, 24, 25. the misery of those men
that seek after it, 26. the possibility of the Philosophers-stone granted, but
accounted next to an impossibility, and the reason why, ib.
Q.
Quicklime, in the making of it, the fire must be kept at an equal height, to
the end of the work, 65. its Corrosion caused by Igneous bodies, 66. no Acid in
it, to cause its Ebullition in water, 67.
S.
Sal Armoniack, how made Artificially at Venice, 85. eight ounces of it do
contain at least four ounces and a half of Volatile salt, 88. its Volatile
spirit only a dissolution of Volatile salt in Water, ib. its spirit sensibly
proved to be Sudorifick by a proper instance, 89. whence it is that a
Coagulation happens from the mixture of spirit of Wine with the Volatile spirit
of Sal Armoniack ib. Sal Polychrestum, not fit to be used, until it is made
very white, 77. why more of it is made with common Saltpeter than that which is
Purified, 78. an Ebullition falsely said to rise, when spirit of Sulphur is cast
upon it, or upon Saltpeter, 78. Salt, that of Vegetables proceeds from a salt
juice of the Earth they grow in, 5. too much salt as bad for Lands as too
little; an instance of those near the River Nile, 6. it is a Volatile, or at
least a saltpetrous salt that fertilizes Lands, ib. yet the Ashes of
Vegetables, though full of a fixed salt, do well to this purpose, 7. Three sorts
of salt drawn from Vegetables, an Acid or Essential, a Volatile, and a fixed
salt, 9. the acid salt the only true salt in nature, 9, 10, 11. Salt
decrepitated exposed to the Air to be distilled without addition, yields only a
Phlegm, rather than spirit, 74. Monsieur Seignet's Distillation of spirit of
Salt without addition of Clay to separate its parts, vindicated to be good, and
an admirable Operation, 74, 75. how all alkali Fixed salts are made very white,
113. and why they are Aperitive, 114. its spirit not good to bathe bodies with
that are to be Embalmed, 116. Salt Water in the Sea, caused by Mines of Salt
therein contained, 3, 4. Sea Salt, how made at Rochel, 71. when Crystallized,
it makes no Ebullition with Oil of Tartar, 72. Saltpeter, vide Niter. Sulphur,
its white Flowers made with Sal Polychrestum, 97.
T.
Tartar, why its Crystals will not dissolve in cold water, 108. why its
Crystals boiled with its salt do raise an effervescency in hot water, which
they cannot do in cold, 109. its soluble Tartar only the Cream of Tartar made
soluble in cold water, ib. its Chalybeated or martial Crystals, ib. soluble
Tartar how chalybeated, 111. soluble Emetick Tartar may be made with Volatile
Spirit of Sal Armoniack, instead of Spirit of Urine, but then there will be no
Ebullition, and why, 112. how this Emetick is prepared another way, ib. why
water thrown upon its salt newly Calcined, does come to heat like unslack't
Lime, 113. Salt of Tartar not to be Calcined with Sulphur, ib. nor Niter, 114.
its Volatile salt why made of Lees of Wine, rather than Tartar, 124. very hard
to keep its Volatile salt dry, and yet how that may be done, ib. its Volatile
salt made alkali by the fire, but was not of that nature, either in the Plant,
or in the Lees, ib. the Salt of its Lees proved to be Acid, 125, 126. this
Volatile salt no better than others, 126. some fixed Alkali salt to be found in
the Lees remaining in the Retort, 127. Tartarum Vitriolatum, distilled in a
Retort yields not so strong a spirit of Vitriol, as it was at first, 115.
during the Ebullition of Acid and Alkali in this Operation a great many dashes
of water fly about, enough to put out a Candle, ib. Tartarum Vitriolatum made
with Rectified Oil of Vitriol, is not so white as that made with the Spirit,
114. but when Oil of Vitriol is used, the Ebullition is the greater, 115.
V.
Vegetation, from a mixture of Volatile salt and Sulphur, 7, 8. the fixed salt
that lies in the ashes of Vegetables, does fructify by being Porous, 7.
Vinegar, its Alkalized, or Radical spirit, proved to be only the more
Phlegmatic part of distilled Vinegar, 107. Vipers, their venom caused by Acid
salts, 135. the natural acidity of the blood not capable of causing any such
Venomous Coagulation, as Vipers do, 135, 136. their Volatile salt how
Rectified, and why, 136. Vitriol, the Redness of it Calcined, proved not to
proceed from any Copper therein contained, 91, 92. some of its Spirit always
flies away through the Junctures, use what care you can, 93. German Vitriol
yields more, but not so good spirit as the English, 93. its Oil being mixed
with its Acid Spirit, or with water, or some Ethereal Oil, as Oil of
Turpentine, why it causes so violent a Heat and Ebullition, 93, 94. This not to
be explicated by the notions of Acid and Alkali, but by fiery particles
contained in the Oil, 94. an excellent Experiment to prove its Oil full of
fiery parts, 94, 95. Volatile salts when proper to be used, and when not, 126.
many of these Volatile salts, drawn Acid, as they were in the mixed, 139.
W.
Water, Queen of Hungaries water how readily made upon the spot, 105. the
Rosemary Flowers in it, though Volatile in their nature, yet require a
Digestion to draw out their virtue, 106. why plain water can Precipitate
Bismuth, Lead, and Antimony, but cannot precipitate Gold, Sylver, or Mercury,
32. Wax, its spirit an Acid Volatile salt, like the Salt of Amber, 138. This
Distillation, and that of Amber, prove all the Salt of mixed bodies to be
naturally Acid, and Alkali's to be nothing but mutations made by fire, 139.
Wine, that which is clear, and freed from Lees and Tartar, will sour, and turn
into a (weak) Vinegar, but this by reason of a Tartar contained in its
Principles, 106. and the Air thought to communicate some Acidity to Wine, 107.
The Authors way of drawing its Spirit vindicated, 103, 104.
FINIS.

