A Practical COMMENTARY, UPON THE Two first Chapters of the first Epistle
General of St. Peter. By the Most Reverend Dr. ROBERT LEIGHTON, Some-time
Archbishop of Glasgow. Published after His Death, at the Request of his
Friends.

YORK, Printed by I. White, Their Majesty's Printer, for the City of York, and
the five Northern Counties. And are to be Sold at London by Sam. Keble at the
Turks-head in Fleet Street. 1693

To the Pious Reader.
THou may Remember in publishing some of this Authors Discourses about two
Years ago, A Promise was made, That if they happend to be well received, more
of them should see the Light.

The general acceptance they have met with (especially from those for whom they
were chiefly designed) And the necessity the Bookseller found to make a second
Edition (tho by the Printers ovresight very incorrect) are sufficient grounds
to oblige me to the making good that Promise. And here it is in part performed,
by offering to thee the following Meditations of this Primitively Devout Author
upon the two first Chapters of the first Epistle General of St Peter. His Latin
Discourses which he had to the Students when he was Principal of the College
of Edinburgh, are now in the Press.

Matters of Controversy in Religion among Protestant Divines, this good Man,
upon all occasions, in his Life time, either absolutely shunned, or endeavored
to soften, and where he could not Conciliat the Terms and Points themselves in
dispute, yet he endeavored to reconcile the Persons Disputing: For [out of his
great Charity] he had much better thoughts of each of them, than they ordinarily
have one of another. And even when he gives in these Papers, his own Opinion in
some few of those Points, he does it, with that Moderation, and discretion,
that can give no offense to any of the Parties, Except to such of them, who
will needs be contentious: He was a singular Instance how far good Men may
differ in Judgment about some Abstruse points in Religion; Yet without
Diminution of Affection, either to Truth, or to one-Another.

If his way of Expression, or Method of handling the Passages of Scripture here
treated of, are not according to the Modern Critical exactness, or if his Style
is not after the Mode and dress of those times, And hence perhaps may be less
gratifying to some, such are humbly desired, that they would be pleased to
enjoy those other Writings they so deservedly value, and whereof they have so
great store in this Age: Yet at the same time, its hoped from their good
Nature, that they will bear with such, who do, and must own to their great
Comfort, that they find a sweetness in this Divine Authors thoughts, and way of
writeing peculiar to him, which make those Scriptures, thus treated by him,
drop sweeter to their souls than Honey, and the Honeycomb. While they
Enlighten their understandings, at the same time they purify, and rejoice their
hearts; While they make wise the Simple, they convert their Soul. This was his
design in Preaching those Discourses above thirty Years ago. And this is the
Design in Publishing them now, God grant that the success in perusing them may
answer the good intention of both. Paul may plant and Apollos may water, but
God gives the increase, which that it may be in that abundance, which shall
make both Planters, and Waterers rejoice in that Great and last Harvest, is,
and shall be the fervent Prayer of the Publisher.

J. F.

I. Ep. St. Peter Chap. 1.
verse 1.
Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers scattered throughout
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia.
THe grace of God in the heart of man, is a tender Plant in a strange unkindly*
soil, and therefore cannot well prosper and grow, without much care, and
pains, and that of a skilful hand, and that has the art of cherishing it; for
this end, has God given the constant Ministry of the Word to his Church, not
only for the first work of conversion; but also for confirming, and increasing
of his grace in the hearts of his Children.

And though the extraordinary Ministers of the Gospel, the Apostles, had
principally the former for their charge, the converting of unbelievers, Jews
and Gentiles, and so the planting of Churches; to be after kept, and watered by
others, as the Apostle intimates, 1 Cor. 3.6. Yet did they not neglect the
other work of strengthening the begun grace of God in the new Converts of those
times, both by revisiting them, and exhorting them in person as they could, and
by the supply of their writing to them when absent.

And the benefit of this extends (not by accident, but by the purpose, and good
Providence of God) to the Church of God in all succeeding Ages.

This excellent Epistle (full of Evangelical Doctrine and Apostolical
authority) is a brief, and yet very clear summary both of the consolations and
Instructions needful for the encouragement and direction of a Christian in his
Journey to Heaven, Elevating his thoughts, and desires to that happiness, and
strengthening him against all opposition in the way, both that of Corruption
within, and Tentations and Afflictions from without.

The heads of Doctrine contained in it are many, but the maine that are most
insisted on are these Three, Faith, Obedience and Patience. To establish the
believing, to direct them in doing, and comfort them in suffering; And because
the first is the groundwork and support of the other two, this first Chapt. is
much in that, persuading them of the truth of that Mystery they had received
and did believe, viz. their Redemption and Salvation by Christ Jesus; that
Inheritance of immortality bought by his blood for them, and the evidence and
stability of their Right and title to it.

And then he uses this belief, this assurance of the glory to come, as the
great persuasive to the other two, both to holy Obedience, and constant
Patience, since nothing can be too much either to forgo, or undergo, either to
do, or to suffer for the attainment of that blessed State.

And as from the consideration of that Object, and matter of the Hope of
Believers, he encourages to Patience, and exhorts to Holiness in this Chapter
in general, so in the following Chapters, he expresses more particularly, both
the universal, and special Duties of Christians, both in doing and suffering,
often setting before them to whom he wrote, the matchless example of the Lord
Jesus, and the greatness of their engagement to follow him.

In the two first verses, we have the Inscription and Salutation, the usual
style of Apostolic Epistles.

The Inscription has the Author and the Address, from whom, and to whom. The
Author of this Epistle is designed by his Name Peter, and his Calling an
Apostle.

We shall not insist upon his Name, that it was imposed by Christ, and what is
its signification, this the Evangelists teach us. S. Ioh. 1.42. S^ Mat. 16.18.
etc.

By that which is spoken of him in diverse passages of the Gospel, he is very
remarkable amongst the Apostles, both for his Graces, and his failings, Eminent
in zeal and courage, and yet stumbling often in his forwardness, and once grossly
falling, and these by the Providence of God being recorded in Scripture, give a
check to the excess of Rome's conceit concerning this Apostle; Their extolling
and exalting him above the rest, is not for his cause, and much less to the
honor of his Lord and Master Jesus Christ, for he is injured and dishonored
by it; but it is in favor of themselves, as Alexander distinguished his two
friends, that the one was a friend of Alexander, the other a friend of the
King, That preferment they give this Apostle, is not in good will to Peter, but
in the desire of Primacy. But whatsoever he was, they would be much in pain to
prove Rome's right to it by succession. And if ever it had any such right, we
may confidently say, it has forfeited it long ago by departing from St. Peter's
footsteps, and from his faith, and retaining too much those things wherein he
was faulty, namely,

His u^willingness to hear of, and consent to Christ's sufferings, his Master
spare thy self, or far be it from thee, in those they are like him, for thus
they would disburden and exempt the Church from the cross, from the real cross
of afflictions, instead of that, have nothing but painted, or carved, or
gilded Crosses, these they are content to embrace, and Worship too, but cannot
endure to hear of the other, instead of the Cross of Affliction, they make the
Crown or Mitre, the badge of their Church, and will have it known by
Prosperity, and outward Pomp, and so turn the Church Militant, into the Church
Triumphant, not considering, that it is Babilons voice, not the Churches, I sit
as a Queen and shall see no sorrow.

Again his saying on the Mount at Christ's Transfiguration, when he knew not
what he said It Is good to be here, So they have little of the true glory of
Christ, but the false glory of that Monarchy on their seven hills, it is good to
be here, say they.

Again in their undue striking with the Sword, not the Enemies, as he, but the
faithful Friends, and Servants of Jesus Christ; but to proceed.

We see here S Peter's Office, or Title An Apostle, not Chief Bishop. Some in
their glossing have been so Impudent as to add that beside the Text. Though
Chap. 5.4. He gives that Title to Christ alone, and to himself only fellow
Elder, and here not Prince of the Apostles, but An Apostle, restored and
reestablished after his fall, by repentance, and by Christ himself after his
own Death and Resurrection, Ioh. 21. Thus we have in our Apostle, a singular
instance of humane frailty on the one side, and of the sweetness of Divine
grace on the other. Free, and rich grace it is indeed, that forgives and
swallows up multitudes of sins, of greatest sins, not only sins before
Conversion as to S. Paul, but foul offenses committed after Conversion, as to
David, and to this Apostle, not only once raising them from the dead, but when
they fall, stretching out the same hand, and raising them again, and restoring
them to their Station, and comforting them in it by his free Spirit, as David
prays Not only to cleanse polluted clay, but to work it into Vessels of
honor, yea of the most defiled shape, to make the most refined Vessels, not
vessels of honor of the lowest sort, but for the highest and most honorable
Services, vessels to bear his own precious Name to the Nations; making the most
unworthy and the most unfit, fit by his grace, to be his Messengers.

Of Jesus Christ.) Both as the beginning, and end of his Apostleship, as Christ
is called Alpha and Omega, Rev. 2.11. Chosen and called by him, and called to
this, to Preach him, and salvation wrought by him.

Apostle of Jesus Christ.) Sent by him, and the Message no other but his Name,
to make that known, An^ what this Apostleship was then; after some
extraordinary way, befitting these first times of the Gospel, That is Now, the
Ministry of the word in Ordinary, and therefore an employment of more
difficulty and excellency then is usually conceived by many, not only of those
that look upon it, but even of those that are exercised in it, to be
Ambassadour^ for the greatest of Kings, and upon no mean employment, that great
treaty of peace and reconcilement betwixt him and mankind. 2 Cor. 5.20.

This Epistle is directed to the Elect who are described here, By their
Temporal, and by their Spiritual conditions. The first has very much dignity,
and comfort in it, but the other has neither, but rather the contrary of both,
and therefore the Apostles intent, being their comfort, he mentions but the one
in passing, to signify to whom particularly he sent his Epistle; But the other
is that which he would have their thoughts dwell upon, and therefore prosecutes
it in his following discourse, and if we look to the order of the words, their
temporal condition is but interjected, for it is said, to the Elect, first, and
then To the Strangers scattered, etc. And he would have this as it were drowned
in the other, according to the foreknowledge of God the Father.

That those dispersed Strangers that dwelt in the Countries here named, were
Jews, appears, if we look to the foregoing Epistle, where the same word is
used, and expressly appropriated to the Jews. S Iam. 1.1. And Gal. 2. S Peter is
called An Apostle of the Circumcision, as exercising his Aposteship most
toward them, and there is in some passages of the Epistle, somewhat that
though belonging to all Christians, yet has in the strain and way of
expression a particular fitness to the believing Jews, as being particularly
verified in them, which was spoken of their Nation, Chap. 2. v. 9.10.

Some argue from the Name Strangers that the Gentiles are here meant, which
seems not to be; For Proselyte Gentiles were indeed called strangers in
Jerusalem, and by the Jews; But were not the Jews Strangers in these Places,
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia? Not strangers dwelling
together in a prosperous flourishing condition, as a well planted Colonie, but
Strangers of the dispertion, scattered too and fro, and their dispersion which
was partly, first by the Assyrian Captivity, and after that the Babylonish, and
by the Invasion of the Romans, and it might be in these very times increased by
the believing Jews flying from the hatred, and persecution that was raised
against them at home.

These places here mentioned through which they were dispersed, are all in
Asia. So Asia here is Asiae the lesser. Where its to be observed, that some of
these who heard S Peter, Act. 2. are said to be of those regions. And if any of
those then converted were amongst these dispersed, the Comfort was no doubt the
more grateful from the hand of the same Apostle by whom they were first
converted, but this is only conjecture. Tho Divine truths are to be received
equally from every Minister alike, yet it must be acknowledged that there is
something (we know not what to call it) more acceptable reception of those who
at first were the means of bringing men to God then others, like the opinion
some have of Physicians whom they love.

The Apostle comforts these strangers of this dispersion by the spiritual union
which they obtained by Effectual calling, and so calls off their eyes from
their outward dispersed and despised condition, to look above that, as high as
the spring of their happiness, the free love, and Election of God. Scattered in
the Countries, and yet gathered in Gods Election, chosen or picked out, Stangers
to men amongst whom they dwelt; but known, and foreknown to God, removed from
their own Country to which men have naturally an unalterable affection but made
heirs of a better, as follows verse 3.4. And having within them the evidence
both of Eternal Election, and that expected salva^ion, the Spirit of holiness,
verse 2. At the best a Christian is b^t a Stranger here, set him where you
will, as our Apostle teaches after, and it is his privilege, that he is so,
and when he thinks not so, he forgets and disparages himself, and descends far
below his quallity when he is much taken with any thing in this place of his
Exile.

But this is the wisdom of a Christian when he can solace himself against the
meaness, and any kind of discomfort of his outward condition with the
comfortable assurance of the love of God, that he has called him to holiness,
given him some measure of it, and an endeavor after more, and by this may he
conclude, that he has ordained him unto salvation, if either he is a Stranger
where he lives, or as a stranger deserted of his friends, and very near stripped
of all outward comforts, yet may he rejoice in this, that the Eternal
unchangable Love of God that is from Everlasting to Everlasting is sealed to
his soul, O what will it avail a man to be compassed about with the favor of
the world, to sit unmolested in his own home and possessions, and to have them
very great and pleasant, well moneyed, and landed, and befriended, and yet
estranged and severed from God, not having any token of his special Love.

To the Elect,] The Apostle here denominates all the Christians to whom he
writes by the condition of true Believers, calling them Elect and sanctified,
etc. And the Apostle St. Paul writes in the same style in his Epistles to the
Churches, not that all in these Churches were such indeed, but because they
professed to be such, and by that their profession, and Calling as Christians,
they were obliged to be such, and as many of them as were in any measure true
to that their Calling, and profession were really such. Besides it would seem
not unworthy of Consideration* that in all probability there would be fewer
false Christians, and the number of true believers usually greater, in the
Churches in those Primitive times, then* now in the best reformed Churches,
because there could not then be many of them that were from their Infancy bred
in the Christian Faith, but for the greatest part, were such, as being of years
of discretion, were by the hearing of the Gospel, converted from Paganism and
Iuduisme to the Christian Religion first, and made a deliberate choice of it,
to which there were at that time no great outward Encouragements, and therefore
the less danger of multitudes of hypocrites, which as Vermin in Summer, breed
most in the time of the Churches Prosperity. Tho no Nation or Kingdom had then
universally received the faith, but rather hated and persecuted it, yet were
there even then amongst them, as the writings of the Apostles testify, false
Brethren, and inordinate walkers, and men of corrupt minds, earthly minded, and
led with a spirit of envy and contention, and vainglory.

Howsoever the question that is moved concerning the necessary qualifications
of all the members of a true visible Church, can no way (as I conceive) be
decided from the Inscriptions of the Epistle, but eertainly they are useful to
teach Christians, and Christian Churches what they ought to be, and what their
holy profession requires of them, and sharply to reprove the gross unlikeness,
and inconformity that is in the most part of man, to the description of
Christians. As there be some, that are too strait in their Judgment concerning
the being, and nature of the visible Church; so certainly the greatest part of
Churches are too loose in their practice.

From the dissimilitude betwixt our Churches, and those, we may make this use
of reproof. That if a^ Apostolical Epistle were to be directed to us, it
behoved to be Inscribed to the Ignorant, profane, mali^ious etc. As he, who at
the hearing of the Gospel read, said, Either this is not the Gospel, or we are
not Christians. So either these Char^cters, given in the Inscription of these
Epistles, are not true Characters, or we are not true Christians.

Verse 2.
Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through Sanctification
of the Spirit, unto Obedience, and sprinckling of the blood of Jesus Christ.
IN this verse we have their Condition, and Causes of it, Their Condition,
Sanctified, and Justified, the former expressed by Obedience, the latter, by
sprinkling of the blood of Christ. The Causes, 1 Eternal Election. 2. The
Execution of that Decree, Their Effectual Calling, which (I conceive) is meant
by Election here, the selecting them out of the World, and joining them to the
fellowship of the Children of God, so Ioh. 15.19. The former, Election,
particularly ascribed to God the Father, the latter to the Holy Spirit, And the
blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God is here the cause of their Justification,
and so the whole Trinity concurring, dignifie them with this their Spiritual
and happy estate.

First, I shall discourse of these seperately, and then of their Connection. 1.
Of the state it self, and first of Justification, tho named last.

This sprinkling has respect to the Rite of the Legal Purification by the
sprinkling of Blood, and that appositely, for these Rites of sprinkling and
Blood, did all point out this Blood, and this Sprinkling, and exhibited this
true ransom of souls which was only shadowed by them.

As the use and end of Sprinkling was Purification and Expiation, because sin
merited death, and that the pollutions and stains of human nature was by sin,
Such is the pollution, that it can be no manner of way washed off, but by Blood
Heb. 9.^2. Neither is there any Blood able to purge from sin, except the most
precious Blood of Jesus Christ, which is called the blood of God, Act. 20.28.

That the stain of sin can only be washed off by Blood, in^imates, that it
merits Death, And that no Blood, but that of the Son of God, can do it,
intimates, that this stain merits Eternal Death, and it had been our portion,
except the death of the Eternal Lord of life had freed us from it.

Filthiness needs sprinkling, Guiltiness (such as deserves death) needs
sprinkling of Blood, and the death it deserves being Everlasting death, The
Blood must be the Blood of Christ. The Eternal Lord of life, dying to free us
from the sentence of death.

The Soul (as the body) has its life, its health, its purity, and the contrary
of these, its Death, Diseases, Deformities, and Impurity, which belong to it as
to their first Subject, and to the body by participation.

The Soul and Body of all mankind is stained by the Pollution of sin; The
impure Leprosy of the Soul, is not a spot outwardly; but wholly inward, hence
as the corporal Leprosy was purified by the sprinkling of blood, so is this.
Then by reflecting, we see how all this that the Apostle St. Peter expresses,
is necessary to Justification. 1. Christ the Mediator betwixt God and man, is
God and man. 2. A Mediator not only interceeding, but also satisfying, Ephesians.
2.16. 3. This satisfaction does not reconcile us unless it be applied.
Therefore there is not only mention of blood, but the sprinkling of it, the
spirit by faith sprinkleth the soul as with hysop, wherewith the sprinkling was
made, this is it of which the Prophet speaks, Isai. 52.15. So shall he sprinkle
many Nations. And which the Apostle to the Hebrews prefers above all Legal
sprinklings Chap. 9.12, 13, 14. both as to its duration, and as to the
excellency of its effects.

Men are not easily convinced and persuaded of the deep stain of sin, and that
no other La^er can fetch it out, but the sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus
Christ. Some that have moral Resolutions of amendment, dislike at least gross
sins, and purpose to avoid them, and it is to them cleanness enough to reform in
those things; but they consider not, what becomes of the guiltiness they have
contracted already, and how that shall be purged, how their natural pollution
shall be taken away; be not deceived in this, it is not an eva^ishing sigh, or a
light word, or a wish of, God forgive me, no, nor the highest current of
Repentance, nor that which is the truest evidence of Repentance, Amendment.
It Is none of these that purifies in the sight of God and expiats wrath, they
are all imperfect and stained themselves, cannot stand and answer for
themselves, much less be of value to counterpoise their former guilt of sin,
the very tears of the purest Repentance, unless they be sprinkled with this
Blood, are impure, all our washings without this, are but washings of the
Blackmore, it is labor in vain, Ier. 2.22. Job. 9.30* 31. There is none truly
purged by the Blood of Christ, that do not endeavor purity of heart and
Conversation; but yet it is the Blood of Christ by which they are all fair, and
there is no spot in them, here it is said, Elect to obedience, but because that
obedience is not perfect, there must be sprinkling of the Blood too. There is
nothing in Religion further out of natures reach, and out of its likeing and
believing, then the doctrine of Redemption by a Savior, and a Crucified
Savior, by Christ, and by his blood, first shed on the Cross in his suffering,
and then sprinkled on the soul by his Spirit. It Is easier to make men sensible
of the necessity of Repentance, and amendment of life (though that is very
difficult) then of this purging by the sprinkling of this precious Blood. Did
we see how needful Christ is to us, we would esteem and love him more.

It Is not by the hearing of Christ, and of his blood in the Doctrine of the
Gospel, it is not by the sprinkling of water, even that water that is the sign
of this blood, without the blood it self, and the sprinkling of it. Many are
present where it is sprinkled, and yet have no portion in it. Look to this,
that this blood be sprinkled on your souls, that the destroying Angel may pass
by you. There is a Generation (not some few, but a generation) deceived in
this, they are their own Deceivers, pure in their own eyes, Prove. 30.12. How
earnestly does David pray wash me, Purge me with hysop. Though bathed in tears,
Psa. 6.6. that satisfied not wash thou me. This is the honorable condition of
the Saints. That they are purified and consecrated unto God by this sprinkling,
yea have on long while Robes washed in the Blood of the Lamb, There is mention
indeed of great Tribulation, but there is a double comfort Joined with it. 1.
They come out of it, that tribulation has an end. And 2 They pass from that to
glory; for they have on the Robe of Candidates, long white Robes washed in the
blood of the Lamb, washed white in blood, as for this blood, it is nothing but
purity and spotlesness being stained with no sin, and besides, has that virtue
to take away the stain of sin where, it is sprinkled, My Wellbeloved is white
and ruddy says the Spouse, thus in his death, ruddy by bloodshed, white by
Innocence, and purity of that blood.

Shall they then that are purged by this blood return to live among the Swine,
and tumble with them in the pudle, what gross injury is this to themselves, and
to that Blood by which they were cleansed. They that are chosen to this
sprinkling, are likewise chosen to Obedience, this blood purifieth the heart,
yea, This blood purges our Consciences from dead works to serve the living
God. Heb. 9.14.

Unto Obedience] It Is easily understood to whom, when obedience to God is
expressed by the simple absolute name of Obedience, it teaches us, that to him
alone belongs Absolute and Unlimited Obedience, all obedience by all creatures,
And it is the shame and misery of man that he has departed from this Obedience*
that we are become Sons of disobedience, But Grace renewing the hearts of
believers, changes their natures, and so their names, and makes them Children
of obedience. As afterward in this Chapter. This Obedience consists as in the
receiving Christ, as our Redeemer, so also at the same time, as our Lord, or
King, an entire rendering up of the whole man to his obedience. This Obedience
then of the only begotten Jesus Christ may well be understood not as his
Actively, as Beza, but Objectivly, as 2 Cor. 10.5. I think here it is contained,
yea chiefly understood, To signify, that Obedience which the Aposte to the
Romans calls the Obedience of faith, by which the Doctrine of Christ is
received, and so Christ himself, which uniteth the believing soul to Christ, he
sprinkles it with his blood to the remission of sin, and is the root and spring
of all future obedience in the Christian life.

By Obedience, Sanctification is here intimated, it signifies then, both
habitual, and active obedience, Renovation of heart, and conformity to the
Divine will; the mind is illuminated by the Holy Ghost to know and believe the
divine will, yea this Faith is the great and chief part of Obedience Romans 1.8.
the truth of the Doctrine is first impressed on the mind, hence flows out
pleasant obedience, and full of love, hence all the affections, and the whole
body with its members learn to give a willing obedience and submit unto God,
whereas before they resisted him being under the standerd of Satan.

This Obedience tho imperfect, yet has a certain (if I may so say) imperfect
perfection, Its universal three manner of ways. 1. in the subject. 2. In the
Object. 3. In the duration, the whole man subjected to the whole Law, and that
constantly, and perseveringly.

The first universality, is the cause of the other, because its not in the
tongue alone, or in the hand, etc. but has its root in the heart, therefore
does not wither as the grass, or flower lying on the superfice of the earth:
but it flourishes because rooted, and therefore it embraces the whole Law,
because it arises from a reverence it has for the Lawgiver himself. Reverence I
say, but tempered with Love, hence it accounts no Law nor command little, or of
small value which is from God, because he is great and highly esteemed by the
pious heart. No command hard, (tho contrary to the flesh) because all things
are easy to Love, there is the same authority in all, as St. James divinely
argues. And this Authority is the golden chain of all the commandments, which
if broke in any link all falls a pieces.

That this three fold perfection of obedience is not a picture drawn by fancy,
is evident in David, Psalm. 119. where he subjects himself to the whole Law. His
feet, v. 105. his mouth, v. 13. his heart v. 11. the whole tenor of his life v.
24. He subjects himself to the whole law, v. 6. and he professes his constancy
therein, in v. 16. and 33. teach me the way of thy Statutes and I shall keep it
unto the end.

According to the foreknowledge of God the Father,] The exactest knowledge of
things is to know them in their causes; it is then an excellent thing, and
worthy of their endeavors that are most desirous of knowledge, to know the
best things in their highest Causes, and the happiest way of this knowledge is,
to possess those things, and to know them in Experience, to such the Apostle
here speaks, and sets before them the excellency of their spiritual condition,
and leads them to the causes of it.

Their Estate is, that they are sanctified, and justified, the nearest cause of
both these is Jesus Christ, he is made unto them both Righteousness and
Sanctification, the sprinkling of his blood purifies them from guiltines, and
quickens them to obedience.

Now follows to consider the appropriateing, or applying Cause the Holy, and
holy making, or sanctifying Spirit, the Author of their selecting from the
world, and effectual calling unto grace.

The source of all, the appointing, or decreeing Cause, is God the Father, for
though they all work Equally in all, yet in order of working, we are taught
thus to distinguish, and particularly, to ascribe the first work of Eternal
Election to the first Person of the blessed Trinity.

In, or through Sanctification,] for to render it Elect to the sanctification
is strained: so then I conceive this Election, is their Effectual Calling,
which is by the working of the holy Spirit. 1 Cor. 26.27.28. where Vocation and
Election are used in the same sense. Ye see your Calling Brethren, how that not
many wise after the flesh, etc. but God has chosen the foolish things of the
world to condemn the wise it is the first act of the decree of Election, the
beginning of its performance in these that are Elected, and it is in it self a
real seperating of men from the profane and miserable Condition of the world,
and an appropriating and consecrating of a man unto God, and therefore both in
regard of its relation to Election, and in regard of its own nature, it well
bears that name. Romans 8.28.30. Act. 2.47. and 13.48. Ioh. 15.19

Sanctification in a narrower sense, as distinguished from Justification,
signifies the inherent holiness of a Christian, or his Inclinement, and
Innablement to obedience mentioned in this verse: but it is here more large and
so extends with the whole work of Renovation. and is the severing and
seperating of men to God, by his holy Spirit, drawing them unto him, and so it
comprehends Justification (as here) and the first working of faith by which the
soul is justified, through its apprehending, and applying the righteousness of
Jesus Christ.

Of the spirit,] The Word calls men externally, and by that Eternal calling
prevails with many to an External receiving and professing of Religion, but if
it be left alone it goes no further* it is indeed the means of sanctification
and effectual calling, Joh. 17.17. Sanctify them through thy truth. But this
is does when the spirit that speaks in the Word works in the heart, and causes
it to hear and obey. The Spirit or Soul of a man is the chief and first subject
of this work, and it is but slight false work that begins not there, but the
Spirit here, is rather to be taken for the Spirit of God the Efficient, then
the Spirit of man the Subject of this sanctification. And therefore our Savior
in that place prays to the Father, that he would sanctify his own by that
truth, and this he does by the concurrence of his Spirit, with that word of
truth which is the life and vigor of it, and makes it prove the power of God
unto salvation to them that believe, it is a fit means in it self, but it is then
a prevailing means when the Spirit of God brings it in to the heart, it is a
Sword, and sharper then a two edged Sword, fit to divide, yea even to the
dividing of Soul and Spirit. But this it does not without it be in the Spirits
hand, and he applies it to this cutting and dividing. The word calls, but the
Spirit Draws, not severed from that word, but working in it, and by it.

It Is a very difficult work to draw a Soul out of the hands and strong chains
of Satan, and out of the pleasing Entanglements of the world, and out of its
own natural perverseness to yield up it self unto God, to deny it self, and live
to him, and in so doing to run against the main stream, and the current of the
ungodly world without, and Corruption within.

The strongest Rhetoric the most moving and persuasive way of discourse is all
too weak, the tongue of Men and Angels cannot prevail with the soul to free it
self and shake off all that deteins it, although it be convinced of the truth
of those things that are represented to it, yet still it can and will hold out
against it, and say, non persuadebis etiamsi persuaseris.

The hand of Man is too weak to pluck any soul out of the crowd of the world,
and set it in amongst the select number of Believers. Only the Father of
Spirits has absolute command of Spirits, viz. the Souls of Men, to work on
them as he pleases, and where he will. This powerful, this sanctifying Spirit
knows no Resistance, works sweetly, and yet strongly; it can come in to the
heart, whereas all other speakers are forced to stand without. That still voice
within persuades more then all the loud crying without, as he that is within
the house, though he speak low, is better heard and understood, then he that
shouts without doors.

When the Lord himself speaks by this his spirit to a Man selecting and calling
him out of the lost world, he can no more disobey then Abraham did when the
Lord spoke to him after an extraordinary manner to depart from his own Country
and Kindred, Genesis 12.4. Abraham departed as the Lord had spoken to him. There
is a secret but very powerful virtue in a word, or look, or touch of this
spirit upon the soul, by which it is forced, not with a harsh but a pleasing
violence and cannot choose but follow it, not unlike that of Elija's Mantle upon
Elisha. 1 Kin. 19.19. How easily did the Disciples forsake their callings, and
dwellings to follow Christ.

The spirit of God draws a Man out of the world by a sanctfied Light sent into
his mind discovering to him. 1. How base and false the sweetness of sin is that
withholds men and amuses them, that they return not, and how true and sad the
bitterness is, that will follow upon it. 2. Setting before his eyes the free
and happy condition, the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, the riches of
their present enjoyment, and their far larger and assured hopes for afterward.
3. Making the beauty of Jesus Christ visible to the soul which straight way
takes it so, that it cannot be stayed from coming to him: though its most
beloved friends, most beloved sins lie in the way and hang about it and cry
will you leave us so; It will tread upon all to come within the embracements of
Jesus Christ, and say with St. Paul, I was not disobedient to, or unperswaded
by the heavenly Vision.

It Is no wonder that the Godly are by some called singular and precise, they
are so, Singular, a few selected ones picked out by Gods own hand for himself,
Psalm. 4.3. Know that the Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself,
Therefore says our Savior the world hates you because I have chosen you out
of the world. For the world lies in unholiness and wickedness, is buried in it.
And as living men can have no pleasure amongst the dead, neither can these
Elected ones amongst the ungodly; they walk in the World as warily as a Man or
Woman neatly apparel'd would do amongst a multitude that are all sullied and
bemired.

Endeavor to have this sanctifying spirit in your selves, pray much for it,
for his promise is past to us, that he will give this holy spirit to them that
ask it, and shall we be such fools as to want it, for want of asking, when we
find heavy setters on our souls and much weakness, yea aversness to follow the
voice of God calling us to his obedience, then pray with the Spouse, Draw me,
She cannot go nor stir without that drawing, and yet with it, not only goes
but runs. We will run after thee.

Think it not enough you hear the word and use the outward Ordinances of God
and profess his Name, for many are thus called, and yet but a few of them are
chosen. There is but a small part of the world outwardly called in comparison
of the rest that is not so, and yet the number of true Elect is so small that
it gains the number of these that are called, the name of many. They that are
in the visible Church, and partake of external vocation are but like a large
list of names (as in civil elections is usual) out of which a small number is
chosen to the dignity of true Christians, and invested into their privilege;
some men in nomination to Offices or employments, think it a worse
disapointment and disgrace to have been in the list, and yet not chosen, them
if their names had not been mentioned at all, certainly it is a greater
unhappines to have been not far from the Kingdom of God (as our Savior speaks)
and miss of it, then still to have remained in the furthest distance, to have
been at the mouth of the Haven (the fair Havens indeed) and yet driven back and
Shipwrackt, your labor is most preposterous, you seek to ascertain and make
sure things that cannot be made sure, and that which is both more worth and may
be made surer then them all, you will not endeavor to make sure, Hearken to
the Apostles advice, and at length set to this in earnest, to make your calling
and Election sure, make sure this Election as it is here (for that is the Order)
your effectual calling sure, and that will bring with it assurance of the
other, the eternal Election and love of God toward you which follows to be
considered.

According to the foreknowledge of God the Father.] Known unto God are all his
works from the beginning says the Apostle James Act 15.18. He sees all things
from the beginning of time to the end of it and beyond to all Eternity, and
from all Eternity he did foresee them, but this foreknowledge here* is peculiar
to the Elect, Ver^a sansus in sacra scriptura connotant affectus, as the
Rabbis remark, so in man Psalm. 66. if I see Iniquity, and in God, Psalm. 1.
ult. Amos 3.2. and in that speech of our Savior, relating it as the terrible
doom of Reprobates at the last day Depart, etc. I know you not, I never knew
you, so St. Paul, Romans 7.15. and Bez^ observes that (...) is by the Greeks
sometimes taken for dece^^ere, judicare, thus some speak, to cog^osce upon a
business, so then this foreknowledge is no other, but that Eternal love of God,
or decree of Election by which some are appointed unto life, and being
foreknown or elected to that end, they are predestinate to the way to it, Romans
8.29.

It Is most vain to Imagine a foresight of faith in men and in the vieu of that,
as the Condition of Election it self, to have chosen them; for 1. Nothing at
all is futurum, or can have that imagined futurition, so to speak, but as it
is, and because it is decreed by God to be; and therefore as before the Apostle
St. James says known to God are all his own works, therefore because his works
in time, and his purpose from Eternity. 2. It Is most absurd to give any reason
of Divine will without himself. 3. This easily solves all that difficulty that
the Apostle speaks of, and yet he never thought of such a solution but runs
high for an answer, not to satisfy cavilling reason, but to silence it, and
stop its mouth. For thus the Apostle Argues, Romans 9.19, 20. Thou will say then
unto me, why does he yet find fault for who has resisted his will? Nay, but O
man who art thou that replyest against God? Who can conceive whence this should
be, that any man should believe unless it be given him of God, and if given
him, then it was his purpose to give it him, and if so, then is it evident that
he had a purpose to save him, and for that end he gives faith, not therefore
purposes to Save, because Man shall believe. 4. This seems cross to these
Scriptures where they speak of the subordination, or rather Coordination of
those two, as here, Foreknown, and Elect, not because of Obedience, or
sprinkling, or any such thing, but to Obedience, and sprinkling, which is by
faith. So he predestined, not because he foresaw Men would be conform to
Christ, but that they might be so, as Romans 8.29. For whom he did foreknow, he
also did predestinate. and the same order, Act. 2.47. And the Lord added to the
Church daily such as should be saved. and 13.48. And as many as were ordained
to Eternal life believed.

This Foreknowledge then, is his Eternal and Unchangable Love, and that thus he
Chooses some, and rejects others, is for that great End, to manifest and
magnify his Mercy and Justice; but why he appointed this Man for the one, and
the other for the other, made Peter a vessel of this mercy, and Judas of wrath,
this is even so because it seemed good to him. This if it be harsh, yet is
Apostolic Doctrine, Has not the Potter (says St. Paul) power over the same
Lump to make one Vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor. This deep we
must admire, and always in considering it, close with this. O the depth of the
riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God.

Now the Connection of these, we are, for our profit to take notice of, that
effectual Calling is inseparably tied to this Eternal Foreknowledge or Election
on the one side, and Salvation on the other. These two links of the chain are
up in Heaven in Gods own hand, but this middle one, is let down to earth, into
the hearts of his Children, and they laying hold on it, has sure hold on the
other two, for no power can sever them, and therefore the reading the
characters of Gods Image in their own souls, those are the counterpain of the
golden characters of his Love, in which their names are written in the Book of
Life. Their believing writes their names under the promises of the revealed
Book of Life, the Scriptures, and so ascertains them that the same names are in
the secret Book of Life that God has by himself from Eternity. So finding the
stream of grace in their hearts, tho they see not the Fountain whence it
flows, nor the Ocean into which it returns, yet they know that it has its
source, and shall return to that Ocean which arises from their Eternal
Election, and Salvation, and shall empty it self into Eternity of happiness.

Hence much joy arises to the Believer, this tie indissolvable, as the Agents
are the Father, the Son, and the Spirit. So Election, and Vocation, and
Sanctification, and Justification, and Glory, and therefore in all conditions
they may from the sense of the working of the Spirit in them, look back to that
Election, and forward to that Salvation; but they that remain unholy and
dissobedient have as yet no evidence of this Love, and therefore cannot without
vain presumptions and self delusion, Judge thus of themselves, that they are
within the peculia^ Love of God: but in this, Let the Righteous be glad, and
let them shout for joy all that are upright in heart.

It Is one main point of happiness, that he that is happy does know, and judge
himself to be so; this being the peculiar good of a reasonable creature, it is
to be enjoyed in a Reasonable way, it is not as the dull resting of a Stone, or
any other natural body in its natural place; but the knowledge and
consideration of it, is the fruition of it, the very relishing, and tasting its
sweetness.

The perfect blessedness of the Saints is abiding them above: but even their
present condition is truly happy, tho incompleatly, and but a small beginning
of that which they expect, and this their present happiness, is so much the
more, the more clear knowledge, and firm persuasion they have of it, it is one
of the pleasant fruits of the Godly to know the things that are freely given
them of God. 1 Cor. 2.12. Therefore the Apostle to comfort his dispersed
Brethren sets before them a description of that excellent Spiritual Condition
to which they are called.

If they be inseparably linkt together, then by any one of them a man may lay
hold upon all the rest, and may know that his hold is sure, and this is that
way wherein we may attain, and ought to seek that comfortable assurance of the
Love of God. Therefore Make your Calling sure, and by that your Election: for
that being done, this follows of it self. We are not to pry immediately into
the Decree, but to read it in the performance, though the Mariner sees not the
Pole Star, yet the Needle of the Compass that points to it, tells him which way
he sails, thus the heart that is touched with the Loadstone of Divine Love,
trembling with godly fear, and yet still looking toward God by fixed
believing, it points at the Love of Election and tells the soul that its courss
is heavenward toward the Haven of Eternal rest. He that Loves may be sure he
was loved first, and he that chooses God for his delight and Portion, may
conclude confidently, that God has chosen him, to be one of those that shall
enjoy him, and be happy in him for ever, for that our Love and Electing of him,
is but the return and repercussion of the beams of his Love shining upon us.

Find thou but within thee Sanctification by the Spirit, and this argues
necessarily, both Justification by the Son, and the Election of God the Father
1 Ioh. 4.13. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has
given us of his Spirit. It Is a most strange demonstration, ab Effectu
reciproco, He Called, those he has Elected, he Elected those he Called, where
this sanctifying Spirit is not, there can be no persuasion of this Eternal Love
of God, they that are Children of disobedience, can conclude no otherwise of
themselves but that they are the Children of wrath. Although from present
unsanctification, a Man cannot infer that he is not Elected, for the Decree
may for part of a Man's life run (as it were) underground; Yet this is sure,
that that estate leads to death, and unless it be broken, will prove the black
line of reprobation. A man has no Portion amongst the Children of God, nor can
read one word of Comfort in all the Promises that belongs to them, while he
remains unholy. Men may please themselves in profane Scoffing at the Holy
Spirit of Grace, but let them withal know this, that that Holy Spirit they
mock, and despise is that Spirit, that seals men to the day of Redemption. Ephesians.
4.30.

If any pretend they have the Spirit, and so turn away from the straight rule
of the Holy Scriptures, they have the Spirit indeed; but it is a fanatical
Spirit, the Spirit of Delusion, and Giddiness; but the Spirit of God that leads
his Children in the way of truth, and is for that purpose sent them from Heaven
to guide them thither, squares their thoughtts, and ways to that Rule. And
that Word whereof it is Author, which was inspired by it, sanctifies them to
Obedience. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a
Liar and the truth is not in him. 1 Ioh. 2.4.

Now this Spirit that sanctifies, and sanctifies to Obedience, is within us
the Evidence of our Election, and Earnest of our salvation, and whosoever are not
sanctified, and led by this Spirit, the Apostle tells us, what is their
Condition, Romans 8.9. if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his.

Let us not delude our selves, this is a truth, if there be any in Religion,
they that are not made Saints in the estate of Grace, shall never be Saints in
Glory.

The Stones that are appointed for that Glorious Temple above, are hewn and
polished and prepared for it here, as the stones were wrought and prepared in
the Mountains for building the Temple at Jerusalem.

This is the Order Psalm. 84.12. He gives Grace, and Glory, as Moralists can
tell us, that the way to the Temple of Honor, is through the Temple of Virtue.
They that think they are bound for Heaven in the ways of sin, have either
found a new way untroden by all that are gone thither, or will find themselves
deceived in the end. We need not then that poor shift for the pressing of
Holiness, and Obedience upon Men. to represent it to them, as the meriting
cause of Salvation, this is not at all to the purpose, seeing without it, the
Necessity of Holiness to Salvation is pressing enough, for holiness is no less
necessary to Salvation, then if it were the meriting Cause of it, it is as
insepararably tied to it as the purpose of God, and in the Order of
performance, Godliness is as certainly before Salvation, as if Salvation did
wholly, and all* together depend upon it, and were in point of Justice deserved
by it. Seeing then there is no other way to Happiness, but by Holiness, no
Assurance of the Love of God without it. Take the Apostles advice study it,
seek it, follow earnestly after holiness without which no man shall see the
Lord.

Grace unto you and peace be mult^plyed] It has always been a civil custom
amongst Men, to season their intercourse with good wishes one for another, this
the Apostles use in their Epistles, in a spiritual divine way, suitable to
their holy Writings. It well becomes the Messengers of Grace and Peace to wish
both, and to make their salutation conform to the main scope, and subject of
their discourse. The Hebrew word of salutation we have here Peace, and that
which is the spring both of this, and these good things, are all in the other
word of Salutation used by the Greeks, Grace. All right Rejoicing, and
Prosperity, and Happiness flows from this source, and from this alone, and is
sought elsewhere in vain.

In general, this is the Character of a Christian spirit, to have a heart
filled with Blessing, with this sweet good will, and good wishing to all,
especially to those that are their Brethren in the same Profession of Religion.
And this Charity is a precious Balm diffusing it self in the wise, and
seasonable expressions of it, upon fit occasions, and those expressions must be
cordial, and sincere, not like that you call Court Holy Water, in which there
is nothing else but falsehood, or vanity at the best. This manifests Men to be
the Sons of Blessing, and of the ever blessed God, the Father of all Blessing,
when in his name they bless one another, yea our Saviors Rule goes higher, to
bless those that curse them, and urges it by that Relation to God as their
Father, that in this they may resemble him. That ye may be the Children of your
Father which is in Heaven.

But in a more eminent way, its the duty of Pastors to bless their People, not
only by their public and Solemn Benediction, but by daily and instant Prayers
for them in secret. And the great Father who sees in Secret will reward them
openly.

They are to be ever, both endeavoring and wishing their increase of
knowledge, and all Spiritual grace, in which they have St. Paul a frequent
Pattern.

They that are Messengers of this Grace, if they have Experience of it, it is
the Oil of gladness that will dilate their heart, and make it large in Love and
spiritual desires for others, Especially their own Flocks.

Let us 1 Consider the matter of the Apostles desire for them, Grace and peace.
2. The measure of it, that it may be multiplied.

1 Grace] We need not make a noise with the many School-distinctions of Grace,
and describe in what sense it is here to be taken, for no doubt it is all saving
Grace to those dispersed Brethren, so that in the largest Notion that it can
have that way, we may safely here take it.

What is preventing Grace, assisting Grace, Working and Co-working Grace, (as
we may admit these differences in a sound sense) but diverse Names of the same
effectual saving Grace in relation to our different Estate, as the same Sea
receives different names from the different parts of the shore it beats upon.

First, It Prevents and Works, then it Assists and Prosecutes what it has
wrought, he works in us to will and to do: but the whole sense of saving
Grace, I conceive, is comprehended in these two 1 Grace in the Fountain, that
is the peculiar Love and Favor of God. 2. In the Streams, the Fruits of this
Love, (for it is not an empty, but a most rich, and liberal Love) viz. All the
Graces and spiritual Blessings, of God bestowed upon them whom he has freely
chosen; The Love of God in it self can neither Diminish nor Increase, but it
is Multiplied, or abounds in the Manifestation and Effects of it, so then, to
desire Grace to be multiplied to them, is to Wish to them the living Spring of
it, that Love that cannot be exhausted: but is ever flowing forth, and in stead
of abateing, makes each day richer then another.

And this is that which should be the top and sum of Christian Desires. To
have, or want any other thing indifferently; but to be resolved and resolute in
this, to seek a share in this Grace, the free Love of God, and the sure
Evidences of it within you, the fruit of holiness and the Graces of his Spirit,
but the most of us are otherwise taken up. We will not be convinced how basely
and foolishly we are busied, though in the best and most respected employments
of the World. So long as we neglect our noblest trade of growing Rich in Grace,
and the comfortable enjoyment of the Love of God. Our Savior tells us of one
thing needful, Importing that all other things are comparatively Unnecessary,
By-works, and mere Impertinences, and yet in these we lavish out our short and
uncertain time, we let the other stand by, till we find leisure. Men who are
altogether profane, think not on it at all, some others possibly deceive
themselves thus, and say, When I have done with such a business in which I am
engaged, then I will sit down seriously to this, and bestow more Time and pains
on these things that are undeniably Greater, and Better, and more worthy of it;
but this is a slight that is in danger to undo us; what if we attain not to the
end of that business, but end our selves before it, or if we do not, yet some
other business may step in after that. Oh then, say we, that must be dispatched
also, thus by such delays, we may loose the present opportunity, and in the
end our own souls.

Oh be persuaded it deserves your diligence, and that without delay to seek
somewhat that may be constant enough to abide with you, and strong enough to
uphold you in all Conditions, and that is alone this free Grace, and Love of
God. While many say, Who will show us any good, set you in with David in his
choice, Lord lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon me, and this shall
rejoice my heart more then the abundance of Corn and Wine.

This is that Light that can break into the darkest dungeons, from which all
other Lights and Comforts are shut out, and without this, all other enjoy^ents
are, what the world would be, without the Sun, nothing but darkness. Happy they
who have this light of Divine favor, and Grace shining into their souls, for
by it they shall be led to that City where the Sun and Moon are needless, for
the glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof* Rev. 21.23.

Godliness is profitable for all things, says the Apostle, having the Promises
of this life, and that which is to come, all other blessings are the attendants
of Grace and follow upon it. This blessing that the Apostle here (and so St.
Paul in his Epistles) joins with Grace, was with the Jews of so large a
sense, as to Comprehend all that they could desire, when they wished Peace,
they meant all kind of good, all welfare and prosperity. And thus we may take
it here, for all kind of Peace, yea, and for all other blessings, but
especially that spiritual Peace, which is the proper fruit of Grace, and does
so intrinsecally flow from it.

We may and ought to wish to the Church of God outward blessiings, and
particularly outward Peace, as one of the greatest, so one of the most
valluable favors of God, thus prayed the Psalmist, Psalm. 122.7. Peace be
within thy walls, and Prosperity within thy Palaces.

But that wisdom that does what he will, by what means he will, and works one
contrary out of another, brings Light out of Darkness, Good out of Evil, Can,
and does turn Tears, and Troubles to the advantage of his Church, but certainly
in it self, Peace is more suitable to its increase, and if no^ abused proves so
too. As in the Apostolic Times, its said, The Church had Peace, and Increased
exceedingly. Act. 9.31. We ought also to wish for Ecclesiastical Peace to the
Church, that she may be free from Dissensions and Divisions.

These readily arise more, or less (as we see in all times) and haunt Religion,
and the Reformation of it, as a malus genius. S. Paul had this to say to his
Corinthians, though he had given them this testimony that they were enriched in
all Utterance, and Knowledge and were wanting in no gift, Cap. 1. v. 5. Yet
presently after v. 13 I hear that there are Divisions and Contentions among
you. The Enemy had done this, as our Savior speaks, and this Enemy is no fool:
for by divine permission, he works to his own end very wisely: for there is not
one thing that does on all hands choke the seed of Religion so much, as Thorny
debates and differences about it self. So in succeeding Ages, and at the
breaking forth of the Light in Germany in Luther's time, Multitudes of Sects
arose.

Profane men do not only stumble, but fall and break their necks upon these
Divisions. We see (think they, and some of them possibly say it ou^) that they
who mind Religion most, cannot agree upon it. Our easiest way is, not to Embroyl
our selves, nor at all to be troubled with the business. Many are of Gallio's
temper, they will care for none of those things, Thus these Offenses prove a
mischief to the profane World, as our Savior says, Woe to the World because
of Offenses.

Then the erring side, that is taken with new opinions and fancies, are
altogether taken up with them, their main thoughts spent upon them, and thus
the sap is drawn from that which should nourish, and prosper in their hearts
sanctified useful knowledge, and saving grace. The other are as weeds that
divert the nourishment in Gardens from the Plants and Flowers: and certainly
these weeds, viz. Men's own conceits, cannot but grow more with them, when they
give way to them, then solid Religion does: for their hearts (as he said of the
earth) are Mother to those, and but Stepmother to this.

It is also a Loss even to those that oppose Errors and Divisions, that they
are forced to be busied that way; for the wisest and Godliest of them find (and
such are sensible of it) that disputes in Religion, are no friends to that
which is far sweeter in it; but hinders and abates it viz. these pious and
devout thoughts, that are both the more useful, and truly delightful.

As Peace is a choice blessing, so this is the choicest Peace, and is the
peculiar inseparable Effect of this Grace, with which it is here jointly
wished, Grace and Peace. The flower of Peace growing upon the Root of Grace.
This spiritual Peace has two things in it. 1 Reconciliation with God, 2
Tranquillity of Spirit. The quarrel and matter of enmity, you know, betwixt God
and Man is the Rebellion, the sin of Man; and he being naturally altogether
sinful, there can proceed nothing from him but what foments and increases the
Hostility. It Is Grace alone, the most free Grace of God, that contrives, and
Offers, and makes the Peace, else it had never been. We had universally
perished without it. Now in this is the wonder of Divine Grace, that the
Almighty God seeks agreement, and entreats for it, with sinful clay which he
could wholly destroy in a moment.

Jesus Christ the Mediator and Purchaser of this Peace, bought it with his
Blood, killed the enmity by his own Death, Ephesians. 2.15. And therefore the Tenor
of it in the Gospel runs still in his name, Romans 5.1. we have Peace with God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. and St. Paul expresses it in his Salutations,
that are the same with this. Grace and Peace from God the Father and our Lord
Jesus Christ.

As the free Love, and Grace of God appointed this means, and way of our Peace,
and Offered it, So the same Grace applies it, and makes it Ours, and gives us
faith to apprehend it.

And from our sense of this Peace, or Reconcilement with God, arises that which
is our inward Peace, a calm and quiet temper of Mind. This Peace that we have
with God in Christ, Is Inviolable, but because the sense, and persuasion of it
may be interrupted, the soul that is truly at Peace with God, may for a time be
disquieted in it self, through weakness of Faith, or the strength of
Temptation, or the Darkness of desertion, losing sight of that Grace, that Love
and Light of Gods Countenance on which its Tranquillity, and Joy depends. Thou
hid'st thy face, says David, and I was troubled, but when these Eclipses are
over, the Soul is revived with new Consolation, as the face of the Earth is
renewed, and made to smile with the return of the Sun in the Spring, and this
ought always to uphold Christians in the saddest times, viz that the Grace,
and Love of God toward them, depends not on their sense, nor upon any thing in
them, but is still in it self incapable of the smallest alteration.

It Is Natural to Men to desire their own Peace, the Quietness and Contentment
of their Minds: but most Men miss the way to it, and therefore find it not, for
there is no way to it indeed, but this One, wherein few seek it, viz.
Reconcilement and Peace with God. The persuasion of that alone makes the Mind
clear and serene, like your fairest Summer Days. My peace I give you, says
Christ, not as the world. Let not your hearts be troubled. All the Peace and
Favor of the World cannot calm a troubled heart, but where this Peace is that
Christ gives, all the trouble and disquiet of the world cannot disturb it, When
he gives quietness, who then can make trouble? and when he hides his face,
who then can behold him? whether it be done against a Nation, or against a man
only. See also for this Psalm. 46.123. All outward distress to a mind thus at
Peace, is but as the rattling of the Hail upon the Tiles, to him that sits
within the House at a sumptuous Feast. A good Conscience is called so, and with
an advantage that no other Feast can have, nor could men endure it. A few hours
of feasting will weary the most professed Epicure, but a Conscience thus at
Peace, is a continual Feast, with continual unwearied delight, What makes the
World take up such a prejudice against Religion, as a sour unpleasant thing?
they see the Afflictions and griefs of Christians; but they do not see their
Joys, the inward pleasure of mind that they can possess in a very hard Estate.
Have you not tried other ways enough? has not He tried them that had more
ablility and skill for it then you, and found them not only vanity but vexation
of Spirit. If you have any belief of holy Truth, p^t but this once upon the
trial, seek Peace in the way of Grace. This inward Peace is too precious a
Liquor to be poured into a filthy Vessel; a holy Heart, that gladly entertains
grace, shall find that it, and Peace cannot dwell assunder.

An ungodly Man may sleep to Death in the Lethargy of Carnal Presumption and
Impenitency; but a true lively, solid Peace he cannot have. There is no Peace
to the wicked, says my God, Isa 57.21. And if He say there is none; speak
Peace who will, if all the World with one voice would speak it, it shall prove
none.

2 ly. Consider the Measure of the Apostles desire for his Scattered Brethren,
that this Grace and Peace may be Multiplied. This the Apostle wishe^ for them
knowing the Imperfection of the Graces, and Peace of the Saints while they are
here below, and this they themselves in sense of that Imperfection daily do
desire. They that have tasted the sweetness of this Grace and Peace call
uncessantly for more. This is a disease in Earthly Desires, and a disease
incurable, by all these things desired; there is no satisfaction attainable by
them, but this Avarice of Spiritual things is a Virtue, and by our Savior is
called Blessedness: because it tends to Fullness and Satisfaction. Blessed are
they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness for they shall be filled. Mat.
5.6.

Verse. 3, 4.
Blessed be the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his
abundant Mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the dead.

To an Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away.


It Is a cold lifeless thing to speak of spiritual things upon mere Report; but
they that speak of them, as their own, as having share, and interest in them,
and some experience of their sweetness, their discourse of them is enlivened
with firm belief, and ardent affection; They cannot mention them, but their
hearts are straight taken with such gladness, as they are forced to vent in
praises. Thus our Apostle here, and St. Paul, Ephesians. 1. and often elsewhere, when
they considered these things, wherewith they were about to comfort the Godly,
to whom they wrote, They were suddenly Elevated with the Joy of them, and broke
forth into Thanksgiving. So teaching us by their Example, what real Joy there
is in the Consolations of the Gospel, and what praise is due from all the
Saints to the God of those Consolations. This is such an Inheritance, as the
very thoughts, and hopes of it are able to sweeten the greatest Griefs, and
Afflictions. What then shall the Possession of it be? wherein there shall be no
Rupture, nor the least drop of any grief at all. The main Subject of these
ve^ses is, that which is the main Comfort that supports the Spirits of the
Godly in all Conditions.

I. Their after Inheritance in the 4 verse. 2. Their present Title to it, and
assured hope of it, v. 3. 3dly. The immediate cause of both assigned viz. Jesus
Christ. 4ly. All this derived from the free Mercy of God, as the first and
highest Cause, and returned to his Praise and Glory as the last and highest End
of it.

For the First. The Inheritance. [But because the 4th. verse which describes
it, is linked with the subsequent, we will not go so far off to return back
again, but first speak to this 3 verse, and in it,]

Consider 1. Their Title to this Inheritance. Begotten again. 2. Their
assurance of it, viz. A holy or lively Hope. The Title that the Saints have to
their rich Inheritance is of the validest, and most unquestionable kind, viz.
by Birth. Not by their first natural birth. By it we are all born to an
Inheritance indeed; but we find what it is, Ephesians. 2.3. Children of Wrath, Heirs
apparent of Eternal flames. It Is an Everlasting Inheritance too, but so much
the more fearful, being of Everlasting Misery, or (so to speak) of Immortal
Death, and we are made sure to it, they who remain in that Condition cannot
lose their Right although they gladly would escape it, they shall be for^'d to
enter Possession. But it is by a new and supernatural Birth, that men are both
freed from their Engagement to that woeful Inheritance, and invested into the
Rights of this other here mentioned, as full of happiness as the former is
miserable. Thefore are they said here to be begotten again to that lively Hope.
God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ has begotten us again. And thus are
the Regenerate the Children of an Immortal Father, and so entitled to an
Inheritance of immortality, if Children then Heirs, heirs of God. This Sonship
is by Adoption in Christ, therefore added, joint heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17.
we Adopted, and He the only begotten Son of God by an Eternal Ineffable
generation.

And yet this our Adoption is not a mere extrinsecal denomination, as is
adoption amongst Men: but accompanied with a real Change in those that are
adopted, a new Nature, and Spirit infused into them* by reason of which, as
they are Adopted to this their Inheritance in Christ, they are likewise
begotten of God, and born again to it, by the Supernatural work of
Regeneration. They are like their heavenly Father, they have his Image renewed
on their Souls, and their Fathers Spirit. They have and are acted, and led by
it. This is that great Mystery of the Kingdom of God, that puzzled Nicodemus,
it was darkness to him at first, till he was instructed in that Night, under
the covert whereof he came to Christ.

Nature cannot conceive of any Generation or birth, but that which is within
its own compass, only they that are partakers of this Spiritual Birth,
understand what it means; to others it is a Ridle, an unsavory unpleasant
subject.

It Is sometime ascribed to the subordinate means, to Baptism, called therefore
the Laver of Regeneration. Tit. 3.5. To the Word of God. Iam. 1.18. Its that
Immortal Seed, whereby we are born again; by the Ministers of this Word, and
the seals of it, as 1 Cor. 4.15. For though you have ten thousand Instructers
in Christ, yet have ye not many Fathers; For in Christ Jesus I have begotten
you through the Gospel. As also Gal. 4.19. But all those have their vigor and
efficacy in this great work, from the Father of Spirits, who is their Father in
their first Creation, and Infusion, and in this their Regeneration, which is a
new and second Creation. 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ he is a new
Creature.

Divines have reason to infer from the Nature of Conversion thus expressed,
that Man does not bring any thing to this work himself, it is true he has a
will, as his natural Faculty, but that this Will Embraces the offer of Grace,
and turns to him that offers it, is from Renewing Grace, that sweetly, and yet
strongly; strongly, and yet sweetly, inclines it.

I. Nature cannot raise it self to this, more then a man can give natural
being to himself. 2. It Is not a superficial change, it is a new life and being.
A moral man in his changes and Reformations of himself, is still the same man,
though he Reform so far, as Men in their ordinary phrase, call him, quite
another Man, yet in truth, till he be born again there is no new nature in him.
The Slugard turns on his bed as the door on the hinges, says Solomon. Thus the
Natural man turns from one custom and posture to another, but never turns off.
But the Christian by virtue of this new birth can say indeed. ego non sum ego.
I am not the same man I was.

You that are Nobles, aspire to this honorable Condition, add this Nobleness
to the other, for it far surpasses it, make it the Crown of all your honors
and advantages. And you that are of mean birth, or if you have any Crack or
stain in your birth, the only way to make up, and repair all, and truly to
Enoble you, is this, to be the Sons of a King, yea of the King of Kings, and
this Honor have all his Saints. To as many as received him, he gave this
privilege to be the Sons of God. Joh. 1.12.

Unto a lively Hope,] Now we are the Sons of God, (says the Apostle 1 Ioh.
3.2.) But it does not yet appear what we shall be. These Sons, are Heirs; but
all this lifetime is their underage; yet even then being partakers of this New
Birth, and Sonship, they have Right to it, and in the assuronce of that Right,
this Living Hope; As an Heir when he is Capable of those thoughts, has not
only Right of Inheritance; but may rejoice in the hope he has of it, and
please himself in thinking on it; but hope is said to be only of an uncertain
good; true, in the world's phrase it is so; for their Hope is conversant in
uncertain things, or in things that may be certain, after an uncertain manner,
all their woldly Hopes are tottering, built upon sand, and their Hopes of
Heaven are but blind, and groundless Conjectures: but the Hope of the Sons of
the Living God, is a living Hope. That which Alexander said when he dealt
liberally about him, that he left hope to himself, the Children of God may more
wisely and happily say, when they leave the hot pursuit of the world to others,
and despise it, their Portion is Hope, the thread of Alexanders life was ^ut
off in the midst of his Victories, and so all his Hopes evanished; but their
hope cannot dye, nor disapoint them.

But then its said to be Lively, not only Objectively, But Effectively,
Enlivening, and Comforting the Children of God in all Distresses* Enabling them
to encounter and surmount all difficulties in the way. And then it is formally
so, it cannot fail, dies not before accomplishment. Worldly Hopes often mock
Men, and so cause them to be ashamed, and Men take it as a great blot, and are
most of all ashamed of those things that discover weakness of judgment in them,
now worldly Hopes do thus, they put the fool upon a Man, when he has judged
himself sure, and laid so much weight and expectation on them, then they break,
and foyl him, they are not Living, but Lying Hopes, and dying Hopes; they die
often before us, and we live to bury them, and see our own own Folly, and
Infelicity in trusting to them: but at the utmost they dye with us when we dye,
and can accompany us no further. But this Hope answers Expectation to the full,
and much beyond it, and deceives no way, but that happy one of far exceeding it.

A living Hope, living in Death it self. The World dare say no more for its
devise, but dum spiro spero; but the Children of God can add, by virtue of this
living Hope, dum exspiro spero. It Is a fearful thing when a Man and all his
hopes dye together. Thus says Solomon of the Wicked, when He dies (many of
them before, but at the utmost then all of them) then dye his Hopes. Prove.
11.7. but the Righteous has hope in his Death Prove. 14.32. Death that cutts
the sinews of all other Hopes, and turns men out of all other Inheritances, it
alone fulfils this Hope, and ends it in Fruition. As a Messenger sent to bring
the Children of God home to the possession of their Inheritance.

By the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead,] This referrs to both Begotten
again by his Resurrection, and having this living Hope by his Resurrection; and
well suits both, it being the proper cause of both, in this order. First then
of the Birth, then of the Hope.

The Image of God is renewed in us by our Union with him who is the express
Image of his Fathers person, Gal. 4 19. Therefore this new birth in the
Conception is expressed by the forming of Christ in the Soul, and Resurrection
particularly is assigned as the cause of our New Life, this New Birth is called
our Resurrection, and that in conformity to Christ, yea by virtue and Influence
of His. His Resurrection is called a Birth, he the first begotten from the
dead, Rev. 1.5. and that Prophecy Psalm. 2.7. Thou art my Son this day have I
begotten thee, is applied to his Resurrection as fulfilled in it. Act. 13.33.
God has fulfilled the same unto us their Children, in that he has raised up
Jesus again, as it is also written in the second Psalm. Thou art my Son this
day have I begotten thee. Not only is it the Exemplary, but the Efficient cause
of our new birth. Thus Romans 6. at large, and often elsewhere, and thus likewise
it is the cause of our Living hope, that which indeed inspires and maintains
life in it, because he has Conquered Death, and is risen again, and that
employed, which follows, is set down at the right hand of God, has entered
Possession of that Inheritance, This gives us a Living Hope, that according to
his own Request, where he is there we shall be also. Thus this Hope is strongly
underset, on the one side by the Resurrection of Christ, on the other by the
abundant mercy of God the Father. Our hope depends not on our own Strength, or
Wisdom, nor on any thing in us, for then if it did, it would be short-lived;
would die, and dye quickly: but on his Resurrection that can dye no more, for
in that he died, he died unto sin once: but in that he lives, he lives unto
God. Romans 6.10. This makes this Hope not to imply in the notion of it
Uncertainty, as worldly hopes; but it is a firm, stable, inviolable hope, an
Anchor pitched within the vail.

According to his abundant mercy,] Mercy is the Spring of all this: yea great
Mercy, and manifold Mercy: for (as St. Bernard says) Great sins, and Great
Miseries, need Great Mercy, and many sins and Miseries, need many Mercies, and
is not this great Mercy, to make of Satan's slaves, Sons of the most high. Well
may the Apostle say, Behold what manner of Love, and how great Love the Father
has showed us, that we should be called the Sons of God. The World knows us
not, because it knew not him. they that have not seen the Father of a Child,
cannot know its Resembling him, for the World knows not God, and therefore
discerns not his Image in his Children to esteem them for it. But whatever be
their Opinion, this we must say our selves, Behold what Love to take
firebrarnds of Hell, and to appoint them to be one day brighter then the Sun in
the firmament, To raise the poor out of the dunghill, and set them with Princes
Psalm. 11.38.

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,] Lastly, we see it
stirs up the Apostle to praise the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
This is the style of the Gospel, as formerly under the Law, the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and the God that brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt,
etc. This now is the Order of the Government of Grace, that it holds first with
Christ our Head, and in Him with us, so he says, I go to my Father, and your
Father, and my God, and your God. Which as St. Cyril of Hierosol. in his
Catechism observes, shows us not only our Communion with him, that might have
been expressed thus, I go to my God and Father, but the Order of the Covenant,
First my Father, and my God, and then yours. Thus ought we in Consideration of
the mercies of God, still take in Christ, for in him they are conveyed to us,
Thus Ephesians. 1.3. With all spiritual Blessings in Christ Jesus.

Blessed] He blesses us really, benefaciendo benedicit, We bless Him by
acknowledging His goodness. And this we ought to do at all times, Psalm. 34.1. I
will bless the Lord at all times, his praise shall continually be in my mouth.
All this is far below Him, and His mercies. What are our lame praises in
comparison of his Love? Nothing, and less then nothing: but Love will stammer
rather then be dumb. They that are amongst his Children begotten again, they
have in the Resurrection of Christ, a lively hope of glory, as it is Col. 1.27.
which is Christ in you the hope of Glory. This leads them to observe and admire
that rich mercy whence it flows, and this consideration awakes them, and
strains them to break forth into praises.

To an Inheritance incorruptible] As he that takes away a garment in cold
weather, and as Vinegar upon nitre, so is he that sings Songs to a heavy
heart, Prove. 25.20.

Worldly Mirth is so far from curing Spiritual Grief, that even worldly Grief,
where it is great, and takes deep root, is not allayed but increased by it, a
man that is full of inward heaviness, the more he is compassed about with
mirth, it exasperates and enrages his Grief the more, like ineffectual weak
Physic, that removes not the humor but stirs it, and makes it more unquiet,
but spiritual Joy is seasonable for all Estates. In prosperity it is pertinent
to crown, and sanctify all other Enjoyments, with this that so far suspasses
them; and in distress it is the only Nepenthe, the cordial of fainting Spirits.
So Psalm. 4. He has put joy into my heart, this mirth makes way for it self
which other mirth cannot do, these Songs are sweetest in the Night of distress.
Therefore the Apostle writing to his scattered afflicted Brethren, begins his
Epistle with this Song of Praise, Blessed be the God and Father, etc.

The matter of it is, the Joyful Remembrance of the Happiness laid up for them
under the name of Inheritance. Now this Inheritance is described by the
singular Qualities of it. They Contain. 1. The Excellency of its Nature. 2. The
certainty of its attainment, the former in these three, Incorruptible,
Undefiled, and that fades not away. The latter in the last words of this
verse, and in the following* Reserved in heaven for you, etc.

God is bountiful to all, gives to all men, all that they have, Health, Riches,
Honor, Strength, Beauty, and Wit, but those things he scatters (as it were)
with an Indifferent hand. Upon others he looks, as well as on his beloved
Children: but the Inheritance is peculiarly theirs, Inheritance is convertible
with Sonship, for Genesis 25.5. Abraham gave gifts to Keturah's Sons and dismissed
them; but the Inheritance was for the Son of the Promise. When we see Men
rising in Preferment, Estate, or admired for Excellent Gifts, and Endowments of
mind, we think there is a happy man: but we consider not that none of all those
things are matter of Inheritance, within a while, he is to be turned out of
all, and if he have not somewhat beyond all those to look to, he is but a
Miserable man, and so much the more Miserable, that once he seemed, and was
reputed happy. There is a certain time wherein heirs come to possess, thus it
is with this inheritance too, there is by the Apostle mention made of a perfect
man, unto the measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. And
though the Inheritance is Rich and honorable, yet the heir being young is held
under discipline, and is more strictly dealt with possibly then the Servants,
sharply corrected for that which is let pass in them, yet still even then, in
regard, of that which he is born to, his Condition is much better then theirs,
and all the Correction he suffers, prejudices him not, but fits him for
inheriting. The Love of our heavenly Father is beyond the Love of Mothers in
tenderness, and yet beyond the Love of Fathers (which are usually said to Love
more wisely) in point of wisdom. He will not undo his Children, his Heirs, with
too much Indulgence? it is one of his heavy Judgments upon the foolish children
of disobedience, that ease shall slay them, and their Prosperity shall prove
their destruction.

While the Children of God are childish and weak in faith, they are like some
great Heirs, before they come to years of understanding, they consider not
their Inheritance, and what they are to come to, have not their Spirits
Elevated to thoughts worthy of their Estate, and their behavior Conformed
to it, but as they grow up in years they come by little and little to be sensible
of those things, and the nearer they come to possession, the more apprehensive
they are of their Quality, and what does answerably become them to do, and this
is the duty of such as are indeed Heirs of Glory, to grow in the understanding,
and consideration of that, which is prepared for them, and to suite themselves,
as they are able, to those great Hopes. This is that the Apostle St. Paul
prays for, for his Ephesians, Chap. 1. v. 18. The eyes of your understanding
being enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his Calling, and what
the riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints. this would make them
holy and heavenly, to have their Conversation in Heaven from whence they look
for a Savior, that we may then the better know somewhat of the Dignity and
Riches of this Inheritance, Let us Consider the description that is here given
us of it, And first,

Incorruptible, Although this seems to be much one with the 3d. that fades not
away, which is a borrowed Expression for the illustrating of its
Uncorruptibleness, yet I conceive there is some difference, and that in these
three qualities there is a Gradation. Thus its called, Incorruptible, that is,
it perishes not, cannot come to nothing, is an Estate that cannot be spent;
but though it were abiding, yet it might be such, as the Continuance of it were
not very desirable, this Life at the best, were but a misery to continue
always in it. Plotinus thanked God that his Soul was not tied to an Immortal
body. Then Undefiled, it is not stained with the least spot, this signifies the
purity and perfection of it, that the perpetuity of it, it does not only abide,
and i^ pure, but those together, it abides always in its Integrity. And
lastly it Fades not away, it does not fade nor wither at all, is not sometimes
more, sometimes less pleasant, but ever the same, still like it self and
that is the Immutability of it.

As it is Incorruptible, It carries it away from all Earthly Possessions and
Inheritances; for so all those Epithits are intended to signify in opposition
to the things of this World, and showing how far it excels them all; and thus
comparatively we are to Consider it: for as Divines say, of the knowledge of
God, that we have here: the Negative Notion makes up a great part of it, we
know rather what he is not, than what He is, Infinite, Incomprehensible,
Immutable etc. so it is of this Happiness, this Inheritance, and indeed it is no
other but God. We cannot tell you, what it is, but we can say so far, what it
is not, as declares it is unspeakably above all the most excellent things of the
inferior World, and this present life, it is by privatives, by removing
Imperfections from it, that we describe it, and can go no further. viz.
Incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away.

All things that we see, being Compounded, may be dissolved again, the very
visible Heavens that are the purest piece of the material World.
(notwithstanding the pains the Philosopher takes to exempt them) the Scriptures
teach us, that they are Corruptible Psalm. 102.26. They shall perish but thou
shall endure; yea, all of them shall wax old like a Garment: as a vesture shall
thou change them, and they shall be changed. And from thence the Apostle to the
Hebrews, Chap. 1. v. 10. And our Apostle in his other Epistle cap. 3.11. use
the same expression. But it is needless to fetch too great a Compass, to evince
the Corruptibleness of all Inheritances. Besides what they are in themselves,
it is a shorter way to prove them Corruptible in Relation to us, and our
Possessing them by our own Corruptibleness, and Corruption, or perishing out of
this life in which we enjoy them, we are here inter peritura perituri, the
things are passing we enjoy, and we are passing who enjoy them. Earthly
Inheritance is so called in regard of Succession: but to every one it is but at
the most for term of life. as one of the Kings of Spain answered to one of his
Courtiers, who thinking to please his Master wished that Kings were Immortal.
If that had been said he, I should never have been King. When Death comes, that
removes a Man out of all his Possessions to give place to another; therefore
are these Inheritances Decaying, and and dying in Relation to us: because we
decay, and dye, and when a Man dies his Inheritances, and Honors, and all
things here, are at an end in respect of him: Yea, we may say the World ends to
him.

Thus Solomon reasons, that a Man's happiness cannot be upon this Earth: because
it must be some durable abiding thing that must make him happy, abiding, to wit
in his Enjoyment. Now though the Earth abide, yet because Man abides not on the
Earth to possess it: but one Age drives out another, one Generation passes and
another comes. velu^ unda impellitur unda, therefore his Rest and his
Happiness cannot be here.

All possessions here are defiled, and stained with many other defects and
failings, still somewhat wanting, some damp on them, or crack in them, fair
houses, but sad cares flying about the Gilded and Cieled Roofs, Stately and
soft Beds, a full Table: but a sickly body and queasy stomach. The fairest face
some Mole, or Wart in it. All Possessions stained with sin, either in acquiring
or in using rhem, therefore called Mammon of Unrighteousness. St. Luke 16.9.
Iniquity so involved in the notion of Riches, that it can very hardly be
separated from them. St. Hierom. says, verum mihi videtur illud, dives aut
iniquus est, aut iniqui Haeres. Foul hands pollute all they touch, it is our sin
that defiles what we possess, it is Sin that burdens the whole Creation, and
presses Groans out of the very frame of the World, Romans 8.22. For we know that
the whole Creation groaneth and travelleth in pain together until now. This our
Leprosy defiles our Houses, the very walls, and floors, our meat and drink and
all we touch, polluted alone, and polluted in society, our meetings, and
Conversations together being for the greatest part nothing but a Commerce, and
Interchange of sin and vanity.

We breath up and down in an infected Air, and are very receptive of the
Infection by our own corruption within us. We readily turn the things we
possess here to Occasions, and Instruments of sin, and there is no Liberty, nor
delight in their use without abusing them, how few are they, that can carry (as
they say) a full Cup even, that can have digestion strong enough for the right
use of Great Places and Estates, that can bear Preferment without Pride, and
Riches without Covetousness, and Ease without Wantonness.

Then, as those Earthly Inheritances are stained with sin in their use; so what
Grief, and strife, and Contentions about Obtaining or Retaining them. Does not
matter of Possession, this same Meum and tuum divide many times the affections
of those who are knit together in Nature or other strait ties, and prove the
very Apple of strife betwixt nearest Friends?

If we trace great Estates to their first Original, how few will there be
found, that owe not their Beginning, either to Fraud, or Rapine, or Oppression,
and the greatest Empires, and Kingdoms in the World have had their foundations
laid in blood. Are not those defiled Inheritances?

That withers not] A borrowed speech alludeing to the decaying of plants and
flowers that bud, and flourish at a certain time of the year, and then fade and
wither, and in Winter are as if they were dead.

And this is the 3d. disadvantage of Possessions, and all things worldly, that
they abide not in one Estate; but are in a more Uncertain; and Irregular
Inconstancy, then either the flowers and plants of the Field, or the Moon, from
which they are called sublunary: like Nebuchadnezzar's Image, degenerating by
degrees, and in the end into a mixture of Iron and clay.

The Excellency then of this Inheritance is, that it is free from all those
evils, falls not under the stroke of time, comes not within the compass of its
Sith, that has so large a Compass, and cuts down all other things.

There is nothing in it weighing it toward Corruption. It Is Immortal,
Everlasting, for it is the fruition of the Immortal Everlasting God by Immortal
souls, and the Body rejoyned with it, shall likewise be Immortal, having put on
Incorruption as the Apostle speaks.

That fades not away] No spot of sin, nor sorrow there, all pollution wiped
away, and all tears with it, no Envy, nor strife, not as here among men one
supplanting another, one pleading, and Fighting against another, dividing this
point of Earth, with fire and sword, No, this Inheritance is not the less by
division, by being parted amongst so many Brethen, every one has it all, each
his Crown, and all agreeing in casting them down before his Throne from whom
they have received them, and in the harmony of his Praises.

This Inheritance is often called a Kingdom, and a Crown of Glory. This word
may allude to those Garlands of the Ancients, and this is its property, that
the Flowers in it are all Amaranthes, as a certain plant is named, and so its
called. 1 Pet. 5.4. a Crown of Glory that fades not away.

No change at all there, no Winter and Summer, not like the poor comforts here,
but a Bless always flourishing. The grief of the Saints here, is not so much
the changes of outward things, as of their inward Comforts. suavis hora, sed
brevis mora. Sweet presences of God they sometimes have; but they are short,
and often interrupted, but there; no Cloud shall come betwixt them, and their
Sun, they shall behold Him in his full brightness for ever; and as no Change in
their beholding, so no weariness, nor abatement of their Delight in beholding.
They sing a new Song, always the same, and yet always New. The sweetest of
our Music, one day of it will weary them that are most delighted with it, what
we have here cloyes; but satisfies not* the Joys above, never cloy, and yet
always satisfy.

We should here Consider the last property of this Inheritance, namely the
Certainty of it.

Reserved in Heaven for you. But that is connected with the following verse,
and so will be fitly joined with it. Now for some Use of all this.

If these things were believed, they would persuade for themselves, we needed
not add any entreaties to move you to seek after this inheritance: Have we not
experience enough of the vanity, and misery of things Corruptible? and are not
a great part of our days already spent amongst them? is it not time to
consider whether we be provided of any thing surer and better, then what we
have here? if we have any Inheritance to go home to after our wandering? or can
say with the Apostle. 2 Cor. 5.1. We know that if our earthly house of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, Eternal in the Heavens.

If those things gain our assent while we hear them yet it dies so; None almost
retire themselves after, to follow forth those thoughts, and to make a work
indeed of them, but busy their heads rather another way, building Castles in
the air, and spinning out their thoughts in vain Contrivances. Happy are they
whose hearts the spirit of God sets, and fixes upon this Inheritance; they may
join in with the Apostle. And say as here, Blessed be the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has begotten us again unto this lively Hope, to this
Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled and that fades not away.

Verse. 5.
Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation. ready to be
revealed in the last time
It Is no doubt a great Contentment to the Children of God to hear of the
Excellencies of the life to come, they are not readily weary of that subject,
yet there is one doubt, that if it be not removed may dampt their Delight, in
hearing and considering of all the rest. The Richer the Estate is it will the
more kindle the Malice, and Diligence of their Enemies to deprive them of it,
and to cut them short of possessing it. And this they know, that those
spiritual Powers that seek to ruin them, do overmatch them far, both in Craft
and Force.

Against the fears of this, the Apostle comforts the Heirs of Salvation,
assuring them that as the Estate they look for is Excellent, so it is Certain
and safe, laid up there where it i^ out of the reach of all adverse Powers.
Reserved in Heaven for you. Besides that this is a further evidence of the
worth and excellency of this Inheritance, it makes it sure, it confirms what
was said of its Excellency, for it must be a thing of greatest worth that is
laid up in the highest, and best place of the world, namely in Heaven for you.
Where nothing that is impure once enters, much less is laid up, and kept. Thus
the Land where this Inheritance lies, makes good all that has been spoken of
the Dignity and Riches of it.

But further, as it is a rich and pleasant Country where it lies, it has this
privilege, to be the alone Land of Rest, and Peace, free from all possibility
of Invasion. There is no spoiling of it, and laying it waste, and defacing its
Beauty, by leading Armies into it, and making it the seat of war, no noise of
Drums, nor Trumpets, no Inundations of one People driving out another, and
sitting down in their Possessions, In a word; as there is nothing there subject
to decay of it self, so neither is it in danger of Fraud or Violence. When our
Savior speaks of this same Happiness, St. Mat. 6.20. in a like term, what is
here called an Inheritance, is there called a Treasure. He expresses the
permanency of it, by these two, that it has neither Moth nor Rust in it self
to corrupt it, nor can Thieves break through and steal it. There is a worm at
the root of all our Enjoyments here, Corrupting causes within themselves, and
besides that, they are exposed to injury from without, that may deprive us of
them, how many stately Palaces that have been possibly diverse years in
building? has sire upon a very small beginning destroyed in a few hours? What
great hopes of gain by traffic has one Tempest mocked, and diss^pointed? How
many that have thought their Possessions very sure, yet have lost them by some
trick of Law, and others (as in time of war) driven from them by the Sword;
nothing free from all danger but this Inheritance, that is laid up in the hands
of God, and kept in Heaven for us. The highest stations in the world, namely
the Estate of Kings, they are but Mountains of prey, one robbing and spoiling
another: but in that holy Mountain above, there is none to hurt, nor spoil, nor
offer violence. What the Prophet speaks of the Church here, it is more perfectly
and Eminently true of it above. Is^i. 65.25.

This is indeed a necessary condition of our joy in the thoughts of this happy
Estate, that we have some persuasion of our Propriety, that it is ours: that we
do not speak, and hear of it as Travelers passing by a pleasant place do
behold, and discourse of its fair structure, the sweetness of the Seat, the
planting, of the Gardens, and Meadows that are about it, and so pass on;
having no further interest in it; but when we hear of this glorious
Inheritance, this Treasure, this Kingdom that is Pure, and Rich, and Lasting,
we may add, it is so called, and it is Mine, it is reserved in Heaven and
reserved for me, I have received the Evidences, and the Earnest of it, and as
it is kept safe for me, so I shall likewise be preserved to it, and that is the
other part of the Certainty, that compleats the Comforts of it. see Ephesians. 1.14.

The salvation that Christ has purchased is indeed laid up in Heaven, but we
that seek after it, are on Earth, Compassed about with Dangers, and Tentations.
What avails it us that our Salvation is in Haven, in the place of safety and
quietness, while we our selves are tossed upon the stormy Seas of this World,
amidst Rocks and shelves, every hour in hazard of shipwreck, our Inheritance is
in a sure hand indeed, our Enemies cannot come at it, but they may overrun and
destroy us at their pleasure, for we are in the midst of them. Thus might we
think, and complain, and lose the sweetness of all our other thoughts
concerning Heaven, if there were not as firm a Promise for our own safety in
the midst of our dangers, as there is of the safety of our Inheritance that is
out of Danger.

The assurance is full, thus, it is kept for us in Heaven, and we kept on Earth
for it, as it is Reserved for us, we are no less surely Preserved to it. There
is here. 1. The Estate it self, Salvation. 2. The preservation, or securing of
those that expect it. 3. The Time of full Possession. In the last time.

Unto Salvation] Before it is called an Inheritance, here more particularly what
meant by that, namely Salvation. This is more expressly sure, being a
deliverance from Misery, and imports withal the Possession of perfect
Happiness. The first part of our Happiness is to be freed from those Miseries
to which we are subject by our Guiltiness. To be set free from the Curse of the
Law, and the wrath of God, from everlasting death. 2. From all kind of
mortality or decaying. 3. From all power and stain of Sin. 4. From all
Temptation. 5. From all the Griefs and Afflictions of this Life. To have the
perfection of Grace, to be full of Holiness, and the perfection of Bliss, full
of joy, in the continual Vision of God, but how little are we able to say of
this our Apostle here teaches us, that it is veiled to us, only so much shines
through, as we are capable of here: but the Revealed knowledge of it is only in
the Possession. It Is to be revealed in the last time.

Then there is, their Preservation, Kept. 2. The causes of it. By the power of
God, through Faith* the Inheritance is kept not only in safety; but in
quietness. The Children of God for whom it is kept, while they are here, are
kept safe indeed, but not Unmollested, and Unassaulted, they have Enemies, and
such as are Stirring, and Cunning, and Powerful; but in the midst of them, they
are Guarded, and Defended, they perish not; according to the Prayer of our
Savior poured out for them, Ioh. 17.16. I pray not that thou should take
them out of the World: but that thou should keep them from the Evil.

They have the Prince of the power of the Air, and all his Armies, all the
forces he can make against them. Though his power is nothing but Tyranny, and
Usurpation, yet because once they were under his yoke, he bestirres himself to
pursue them, when they are led forth from their Captivity, as Exodus 14.5.9.
Pharaoh with all his Chariots, and Horses, and Horsemen pursues after the
Israelites going out of Egypt.

The word in the Original here translated Kept, is a Military term, used for
those who are kept as in a Fort, or Garrison Town besieged. So Satan is still
raising Batterries against this Fort, using all ways to take it, by Strength,
or Sratagem, unwearied in his Assaults, and very skilful to know his
Advantages; and where we are weakest, there to set on. And besides all this, He
has Intelligence with a Party within us, ready to betray us to him; so that it
were impossible for us to hold out, were there not another Watch, and Guard
then our own, and other walls, and Bulwarks then any that our skill and
Industry can raise for our own Defense. In this then is our safety, that there
is a Power above our own, yea, and above all our Enemies, that guards us.
Salvation it self our Walls and Bulwarks. We ought to watch, but when we do in
Obedience to our Commander, the Captain of our Salvation, yet it is his own
Watching, who sleeps not, nor so much as slumbers, it is that preserves us, and
makes ours not to be in vain. Psalm. 126.1. Isa. 27.3. And therefore those two,
are jointly Commanded* ^atch and Pray that ye enter not into Temtation. Watch,
there is the necessity of our Diligence. Pray, there is the Insufficiency of it,
and the necessity of his Watching, by whose Power we are effectually preserved,
and that Power is our Fort. Isa. 26.1. Salvation has God appointed for walls
and Bulwarks, what more safe then to be walled with Salvation it self, ^o Prove.
18.10. The Name of the Lord is a strong tower, the Righteous fly into it and
are safe.

Now the Causes are two. 1. Supreme, the Power of God, 2. Subordinate Faith.
The Supreme Power of God is that on which depends our Stability and
Perseverance. When we consider how weak we are in our selves, yea the very
strongest amongst us and how Assaulted, we wonder, and Justly we may, that any
can continue one day in the Estate of Grace: but when we look on the strength
by which we are guarded, the power of God; then we see the reason of stability
to the end. For Omnipotency supports us, and the Everlasting Arms are under us.

Then Faith is the 2d. cause of our Preservation; because it applies the first
Cause, the Power of God. our Faith lays hold upon this Power, and this Power
strengthens Faith, and so we are preserved. It puts us within those walls, set^
the Soul within the Guard of the Power of God, which by self confidence, and
vain presuming in its own strength is exposed to all kind of danger. Faith is a
humble self-denying Grace, makes the Christian nothing in himself, and all in
God.

The weastest Persons that are within a strong Place, Women and Children,
though they were not able to resist the Enemy if they were alone, yet so long
as the place wherein they are, is of sufficient strength and well manned and
every way accommodate to hold out, they are in safety, thus the weakest
Believer is safe, because by believing he is within the strongest of all
Defenses. Faith is the Victory, and Christ sets his strength against Satan's,
and when the Christian is hard beset with some Tentation, too strong for
himself, then he looks up to him that is the great Conqueror of the powers of
darkness, and calls to him, Now Lord assist thy Servant in this Encounter, and
put to thy strength, that the Glory may be thine. Thus faith is such an Engine
as draws in the power of God, and his Son Jesus into the works, and conflicts
that it has in hand. This is our victory even our faith. 1. John. 5.4.

It Is the property of a good Christian to magnify the power of God, to have
high thoughts of it, and therefore it is his Privilege to find safety in that
power. David cannot satifie himself with one, or two Expressions of it, but
delights in multiplying them* Psa. 18.1. The Lord is my Rock, and my Fortress
and my deliverer, my God, my strength, in whom I will trust, my Buckler, and
the horn of my salvation, and my high tower. Faith looks above all, both that
which the soul has, and that which it wants, and answers all Doubts, and Fears
with this Almighty Power upon which it rests.

To be revealed in the last time:] This Salvation is that great work wherein
God intended to manifest the Glory of his Grace, contrived before Time, And in
the several Ages of the world brought forward, after the decreed manner, and
the full accomplishment of it, reserved for the End of Time.

The souls of the faithful, do enter possession when they remove from their
houses of Clay; yet is not their happiness complete till that great day of the
appearing of Jesus Christ; they are naturally Imperfect till their bodies be
raised, and rejoyned to their Souls, to partake together of their Bliss. And
they are mistically Imperfect, till all the rest of the members of Jesus Christ
be added to them.

But then shall their joy be absolutely full when both their own bodies, and
the mystical body of Christ shall be Glorified, when all the Children of that
glorious Family shall meet, and sit down to that great Marriage Supper at their
Fathers Table. Then shall the Music of that new song be full, when there is
not one wanting of those that are appointed to sing it for Eternity. In that
day shall our Lord Jesus be glorified in his saints and admired in all them
that believe. 2 These. 1.10.

You see what it is that the Gospel offers you, and you may gather, how great
both your folly, and your guiltiness will be, if you neglect, and slight so
great salvation when it is brought to you, and you are entreated to receive it,
this is all that the preaching of the word aims at, and yet who hearkens to
it. How few lay hold on this Eternal life? This Inheritance, this Crown that is
held forth to all that hear of it.

Oh that you could be persuaded, to be saved, that you would be willing to
embrace salvation. You think you would, but if it be so, then I may say, though
you would be saved, yet your custom of sin, your Love to sin, and Love to the
world, will not suffer you. And these will still hinder you, unless you put on
holy Resolutions to break through them and trample them under foot, and take
this kingdom by a hand of violence, that God is so well pleased with, he is
willingly overcome by that force, and gives the kingdom most willingly, where
it is so taken, it is not attained by slothfullness, and sitting still with
folded hands. It must be invaded with strength of faith, with armies of
Prayers, and Tears, and they that set upon it thus are sure to take it.

Consider what we are doing, how we misplace our diligence on things that abide
not, or we abide not to enjoy them. We have no abiding City here (says the
Apostle) but he adds, that which comforts the Citizens of the new Jerusalem:
We look for one to come whose builder and maker is God. Hear not those things
idley, as if they concerned you not, but let them move you to Resolution and
Actions say, as they said of Canaan, it is a good land, Let Us go up and posses^,
it. Learn to use what you have here as Travelers, and let your home, your
Inheritance, your Treasure be on high, which is by far the richest and the
safest, and if it be so with you, then Where your Treasure is, there will your
hearts be also.

Verse. 6.
Wherein ye greatly Rejoice, though now for a season (if need be) ye are in
heaviness through manifold temptations.
THe same Motives cannot beget contrary passions in the soul, therefore the
Apostle reduces the mixture of sorrowing, and Rejoicing that is usual in the
heart of a Christian, to the different causes of them, and shows which of the
two has the stronger cause, and therefore is always predominant, Entertains
it and Considers it aright.

His Scope is to stir up, and strengthen spiritual joy in his afflicted
Brethen, and therefore having set the matter of it before them in the
preceding verses, he now applies it, and expressly opposes it to their
distresses.

Some read those words exhortatively, In which r^joyce ye, it is so intended,
but I conceive it serves that end better indicatively, as we now read it, in
which ye rejoice. It exhorts more insinuatively and perswasively that it may be
so, to urge it on them that it is so. Thus St. Paul, Acts. 26.27. King Agrippa
believe thou the prophets? I know that thou believe. And straight he
answered, Thou almost perswadest me to be a Christian. This implies how just,
and how reasonable it is, that the things spoken of should make them glad, they
will Rejoice in those: Yea do Rejoice, certainly if you know and consider what
the causes of your joy are, ye cannot choose but find it within you, and in such
a measure as it swallows up all your temporary Sorrows, how great and how
many soever their causes be.

We are then to consider severally those bitter waters, and sweet, this Sorrow,
and this Joy 1. in their Springs 2. in their Streams.

And first they are called Temptations, and manifold Temptations. The habits of
divine supernatural Grace, are not acquirable by humane study, or Industry or
by Exercise, they are of immediate Infusion from Heaven, yet are they infused
to that end, that they may act and exercise themselves in the several
conditions and occurrences of a Christians life, and by that they grow
stronger. Whatsoever oppositions or difficulties Grace meets with in its
acting, go under this general name of Temptations. It is not necessary to
reckon up the variety of senses of this word, in its full latitude, how God is
said to tempt man, and how it is said that he tempts him not, how man tempts
God, and how it is said that God is not tempted, how Satan tempts men, and men
one another, and a man himself. All those are several acceptations of this
word, But Temptations here meant, are they, by which men are tempted, and
particularly the Saints of God, and though there is nothing in the words, that
may not agree to all sorts of Temptations the godly are subject to, yet I
conceive it is particularly meant of their Afflictions, and Distresses as the
Apostle James likewise uses it Chap. 1. ver. 2.

And they are so called, because they give particular and notable proof of the
temper of a Christians spirit, and draw forth Evidence both of the Truth, and
the measure of the Grace that is in them, if they fail and are foiled as
sometimes they are, this convinces them of that humane frailty, and weakness
that is in them, and so humbles them, and drives them out of themselves to
depend upon another for more strength, and better success in after Encounters.
If they acquit themselves like Christians indeed (the Lord managing and
assisting that Grace which he has given them) then all their Valor, and
Strength, and Victories return to his praise, from whom they have received all.

A Man is not only unknown to others but to himself, that has never met with
such difficulties, as require Faith and Christian Fortitude and Patience to
surmount them, how shall a man know whether his meekness and calmness of spirit
be real or not while he meets with no provocation, nothing that contradicts or
crosses him: but when somewhat sets upon him that is in it self very unpleasant
and grievous to him, and yet if in that case he retains his Moderation of
spirit, and flies not out into Impatience, neither against God, nor Men, this
gives experiment of the truth and soundness of that Grace in him; whereas
standing water that is clear at top while it is untouched, yet if it have mudd at
the bottom, stir it a little, and it rises presently.

It Is not altogether unprofitable, yea it is much wisdom in Christians to be
arming themselves against such Temptations as may befall them hereafter, though
they have not as yet met with them, to labor to overcome them before hand, to
suppose the hardest things that may be incident to them, and to put on the
strongest Resolutions they can attain unto; yet all that, is but an imaginary
effect; and therefore there is no assurance that the victory is any more then
imaginary too, till it come to Action, and then they that have spoken, and
thought very confidently, may prove but (as he said of the Athenians) sorts in
tabula, Patient, and Courageous in Picture, or fancy, and notwithstanding all
their arms, and dexterity in handling them by way of exercise, may be foully
defeated when they are to fight in earnest. The Children of Ephraim being
armed, and carrying bows (says the Psalmist) Psa. 78.9. yet turned back in the
day of battle. It Is the battle tries the Soldier, and the storm the pilot,
how would it appear that Christians can be themselves not only patient but
cheerful in Poverty, in Disgrace, and atempts and Persecutions, if it were not
often their Lot to meet with those, He that framed the heart knows it to be but
deceitful, and he that gives Grace knows the weakness, and strength of it
exactly, yet He is pleased to speak thus, that by afflictions and hard tasks he
tries what is in the hearts of his Children: for the word of God speaks to Men,
and therefore it speaks the Language of the Children of Men: thus Genesis 22.12.
Now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not with held thy Son, thine
only Son from me.

God delights to call forth his Champions to meet with great Temptations, to
make them bear Crosses of more then ordinary weight, as Commanders in War put
Men of most valor, and skill upon the hardest services. God sets some strong
furious trial upon a strong Christian made strong by his own grace, and by his
victory, makes it appear, to the world that though there is a great deal of
counterfeit coin of profession in Religion, yet some there are, that have the
power, the reality of it, and that it is not an Invention, but there is Truth in
it, that the invincible Grace, the very spirit of God dwells in the hearts of
true believers, that he has a number that do not only speak big, but do
indeed and in good earnest despise the world, and overcome it by his strength.
Some men take delight to see some kind of beasts fight together, but to see a
Christian mind encountering some great Affliction and conquering it, to see his
valor, in not sinking at the hardest distresses of this life, nor the
affrightfullest End of it, the cruelest kinds of death for his sake, this is
(as he said) dignum Deo spectaculum, this is a combat that God delights to look
upon, and he is not a mere beholder in it; for it is the power of his own grace
that Enables and Supports the Christian in all those Conflicts and Temptations.

Multitude of Temptations, and of diverse kinds, many and manifold. It were no
hard condition to have a Trial now and then, and long ease, and prosperity
betwixt; but to be plied with one Affliction at the heels of another, to have
them come thronging in by multitudes, and of different kinds, uncouth,
unaccustomed evils, such as a Man has not been acquainted with before, this is
that which is often the portion of those that are the beloved of God. Psa.
42.7. Deep calls unto deep at the noise of thy water spouts, all thy waves,
and thy billows are gone over me.

Ye are in Heaviness] This the Apostle blames not, but aims at the moderating
of it, seek not altogether to dry up this stream, but to bound it, and keep it
within its banks. Grace does not destroy the life of Nature, but add's to it a
life more excellent, yea Grace does not only permit but requires some feeling
of Afflictions. There is an affected Pride of spirit in some men, instead of
Patience, Suitable to the Doctrine of the Stoics (as it is usually taken) they
strive not to feel at all the afflictions that are on them, but this is to
despise the Correction of the Lord, which is alike forbidden, as fainting under
it. Heb. 12. We should not stop our ears, but Mic. 6.9. Hear the Rod, and him
that has appointed it, as the Prophet speaks. Where there is no feeling at
all, there can be no Patience. Consider it as the hand of God, and thence argue
the soul into submission. Psa. 39.9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because
thou did it. But this Heaviness is mitigated, and set as it were within its
banks, betwixt these two Considerations. 1. The Utility of it. 2. The Brevity,
profitableness, and shortness of it.

To a worldly Man great Gain, sweetens the hardest Labor; and to a Christian,
Spiritual profit, and Advantage may do much to move Him to take well with those
Afflictions that are otherwise very unpleasant, though they are not joyous for
the present, Heb. 12.11. Yet this allayes the sorrow of them, the fruit that
grows out of them, that peaceable fruit of Righteousness.

Abundle of folly is in the heart of a Child, but the Rod of Correction shall
beat it out, says Solomon. Tho the Children of God are truly (as our Savior
calls them) the Children of wisdom: Yet being renewed only in part, they are
not altogether free from those follies that call for this Rod to beat them out,
and sometimes have such a bundle of follies as require a bundle of Rods to be
spent upon it, many and manifold afflictions.

It Is not an easy matter to be drawn from, nor to be beaten from the Love of
this World, and this is that which God mainly requires of his Children, that
they be not in Love with the World, nor the things of it, for that is contrary
to the Love of God, and so far as that is entertained, this is wanting. And if
in the midst of afflictions, they are sometimes subject to this disease, how
would it grow upon them with Ease and Prosperity? when they are beaten from one
worldly Folly or Delight, they are ready through Natures corruption to lay hold
upon some other, being thrust out from it at one door, to enter at some other,
and as Children unwilling to be weaned, if one breast be embittered, they seek
to the other, and therefore there must be somewhat to drive them from that too.
Thus it is clear, there is need, yea great need of Afflictions, yea of many
Afflictions, that the Saints be chastened by the Lord, that they may not be
Condemned with the World. 1 Cor. 11.32.

Many Resemblances there are for Illustration of this Truth, in things both of
Nature, and of Art. Some common, and others choycer. But this is not needful.
The experience of Christians tells them, how easily they grow Proud and Secure
and Carnal with a little Ease, and with outward things going smoothly with
them, and therefore what unhappiness were it for them to be much happy that way.

Let us learn then that in regard of our present frailty there is need of
afflictions, and so not promise our selves Exemption, how calm soever our Seas
are for the present; and then for the Number and Measure and Weight of them, to
Resign that wholly into the hands of our wise Father, and Physician, who
perfectly knows our mould, and our maladies, and what kind, and quantity of
chastisment is needful for our cure.

Though now for a season (if need be) ye are in heaviness] The other
Consideration that moderates this Heaviness is, its shortness: because we
willingly forget Eternity, therefore this moment seems much in our eyes, but if
we could look upon it aright, of how little concernment is it, what be our
condition here, if it were as prosperous as we could Wish or Imagine, it is but
for a little season, the Rich man in the Gospel talked of Many Years; but Thou
fool this night shall thy Soul be required of thee, was the longest period. The
many years quickly drawn to a very great abatement, and if full of pains and
griefs, those do help to put an end to themselves, and hasten to it. Then well
might St. Austin say. Hic ure, caede, modo ibi parcas, use me here as pleases
thee, so as that hereafter it may be well with me.

Wherein] This Word though it cannot fall amiss being referred to any
particular, to which Interpreters have appropriated it, yet it is rather to be
taken Relative to the whole complex sense of the preceding verses, concerning
the hope of Glory. In this thing ye rejoice, that ye are begotten again, that
there is such an Inheritance and you made heirs of it, that it is kept for you,
and you for it, that nothing can come betwixt you and it, to dissapoint you of
possessing and Enjoying it, though there be many Deserts and Mountains, and
Seas in the way yet you are ascertained, that you shall come safe thither.

This is but one thing, but the cause of your grief is Temptations, and
manifold Temptations, yet this one thing weighs down all that Multitude,
naturally the heart being grieved in one thing, looks out for its ease to some
other, and there is usually somewhat that is a man's great Comfort, that he
turns his thoughts to, when he is cros'd and afflicted in other things, but
herein is the folly of the world that the things they choose for their Refuge
and Comfort, are such as may change themselves, and turn into discomfort and
sorrow, but the godly man, that is the fool in the natural Man's eyes, goes
beyond all the rest in his wise choice in this. He rises above all that is
subject to change, pitches his Anchor within the Vail. That in which he
rejoices is still matter of joy unmovable and unalterable, though not only
his estate, but the whole world were turned upside down, yet this is the same,
or rather in the Psalmists words; Though the Earth were removed and the
greatest Mountains cast into the Sea; yet will not we fear. When we shall
receive that Rich, and Pure and Abiding Inheritance, that Salvation that shall
be revealed in the last time, and when Time it self shall cease to be, then
there shall be no more reckoning of our joys by d^yes and hours: But they
shall run parall^l with Eternity. When all our Love that is scattered and
parcell'd out upon the vanities amongst which we are here, shall be united and
gathered into o^e, and fixed upon God, and the soul filled with the delight of
his presence.

The Sorrow was limited, and bounded by these Considerations we spoke of, but
this joy, this Exaltation, and leaping for Joy (for so it is) is not bounded,
it cannot be too much; Its measure is to know no Measure, the Afflictions, the
matter of Heaviness are but a transient touch of pain; but that whereon this
joy is built is most permanent, the Meas^re of it cannot exceed, for the matter
of it is Infinite and Eternal, beyond all Hyperbole, there is no Expression we
have can reach it, much less go beyond it, it self is the Hyperbole, still
surpassing all that can be said of it, even in the midst of Heaviness it self,
such is this Joy, that can maintain it self in the depth of sorrow, this Oil of
gladness still swims above, and cannot be drowned by all the floods of
Affliction, yea it is often most sweet, in the greatest distress. Then the soul
relishes spiritual Joy best, when it is not glutted with worldly delights, but
finds them turned into Bitterness.

For Application. In that we profess our selves Christians, we all pretend to
be the Sons of God, and so Heirs of this Glory, and if each man were
particularly ask't, he would say, he hoped to attain it: but if there were
nothing else, this may abundantly convince us, that the greatest part of us
delude our selves and are deceived in this, for how few are there, that do
really find this height of Joy, Gladness and exultation, in their thoughts and
hopes of it, that do daily more refresh and glad themselves with the
Considerarion of that which is laid up for them above, then with all their
Enjoyments here below.

Consider how the news of some small outward advantage that is to come to us,
raises our light vain Hearts, and makes them leap within us, and yet this news
of a Kingdom prepared for us (if indeed we be Believers) stirs us not, our
hearts are as little affected with it, as if it concerned us not at all, and
this is too clear an Evidence against us, that indeed it concerns us not, our
portion as yet is not in it.

In what a fool's Paradise will Men be with the thoughts of worthless things,
and such things too, as they shall never obtain, nor ever shall have any
further being, then what they have in their Fancy. And how will men frequently
roll over in their minds the thoughts of any pleasing good they hope for? and
yet We, that say we have hopes of the Glory to come, can pass many days
without one hour spent in the Rejoicing thoughts of the Happiness we look for.
If any of a mean Condition for the present were made sure to become very Rich,
and be advanced to great honor within a week, and after that, to live to a
great age in that high Estate, enjoying Health and all immaginable Pleasures,
judge ye, whether in the few days betwixt the knowledge of those News, and
the enjoying them, would not the thoughts of that he were to attain t^, be
frequent with him, and be always welcome. There is no comparison betwixt all
we can Imagine this way, and the hopes we speak of, and yet how seldom are our
thoughts upon those, and how faint, and slender our Rejoicing in them? Can we
deny, that it is unbelief of those things, that causes this neglect and
forgetting of them? The discourse, the tongue of Men and Angels cannot beget
divine belief of the happiness to come, only he that gives it, gives Faith
likewise to apprehend it, and lay hold upon it, and upon believing to be filled
with Joy in the hopes of it.

Verse. 7.
That the trial of your faith being much more precious then of Gold that
perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and
honor, and Glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ.
THe way of the Just (says Solomon) is as the shining light that shines more
and more to the perfect day. Still making forward, and ascending toward
perfection, moving as fast when they are clouded with affliction as at any time
else, yea, all that seems to work against them, fu^thers them. Those graces
that would possibly grow heavy and unweildy, by too much ease; are held in
breath and increase their activity, and strength by Conflict. Divine grace even
in the heart of weak and sinful man, is an invincible thing. Drown it in the
waters of Adversity, it rises more beautiful, as not being drowned indeed, but
only washed throw it into the furnace of fiery trials, it comes out purer, and
loses nothing but the dross which our corrupt nature mixes with it. Thus here
the Apostle expounds the (if need be) of the former verse, and so justifies the
joy in Affliction, which there he speaks of, by their utility and Faiths
advantage by them, it is so tried that it shall appear in its full brightnes^ at
the Revelation of Jesus Christ.

The peculiar treasure of a Christian, being the Grace that he receives from
Heaven, and particularly that Sovereign Grace of Faith, whatsoever he can be
assured will better him any way in this, he will not only bear it patiently,
but gladly embrace it. Romans 5.3. Therefore the Apostle sets this before his
Brethren in those words of this verse. where is; 1. The Worth and Excellency of
Faith. 2. The usefulness of Temptations in relation to it.

The trial of Faith, is called more precious, a work of more worth then the
trial of Gold; because Faith it self is of more value then Gold, the Apostle
chooses this comparison, as fitting his purpose for both, for the Illustration
of the worth of Faith, and likewise the use of Temptations, representing the
one by Gold, and the other by the trying of Gold in the Fire.

The worth of Gold is. 1. Real, the purest and preciousest of all metals;
having many excellent properties beyond them, as they that write of the nature
of Gold observe. 2. Far greater in the Esteem and Opinion of Men. See how Men
hurry up and down, over Sea, and Land unwearied in their pursuit with hazard of
life, and often with the loss of Uprightness, and a good Conscience; and not
only thus Esteem it in it self; but make it the Rule of their Esteem, one of
another, valuing Men less, or more, as they are more, or less furnished with
it, and we see at what a height that is, for things we would commend much, we
borrow its name to them, viz. Golden Mediocrity, and that Age which they would
call the best of all, they name it the Golden Age, and as Seneca observes
describing heavenly things (as Ovid the Suns Palace, and Chariot) still Gold
is the word for all.

And the Holy Scriptures descending to our reach, do set forth the Riches of
the new Jerusalem, by it. Rev. 21. And the Excellency of Christ. Cant. 5.11.14.
And here the preciousness of Faith, whereof Christ is the Object, is said to be
more precious then Gold.

I will not insist in the parallel of Faith with Gold in the other Qualities of
it, as that it is pure, and sollid, as Gold. And that 'its most ductile, and
malleable as gold, beyond all other metals, it plies any way with the Will of
God. But then Faith truly Enriches the soul, And as Gold Answers all things, so
Faith gives the Soul propriety to all the rich Consolations of the Gospel, to
all the promises of Life, and salvation, to all needful Blessings, it draws
virtue from Christ to strengthen it self, and all other Graces.

And thus it is not only precious as Gold, but goes far above the Comparison
it is more precious, yea much more precious. 1. in its Original, the other is
dig'd out of the bowels of the Earth: but the Mine of this Gold is above, it
comes from Heaven. 2. In its Nature, answerable to its Original, it is
Immateriall, Spiritual and pure, we refine Gold, and make it purer, but when
we receive Faith pure of it self, we mix dross with it, and make it Impure, by
the allay of Unbelief. 3. in its Endurance flowing from the former, it
perishes not, Gold is a thing in it self Corruptible, and perishing, and to
particular owners, it perishes in their loss of it, being deprived of it any
way.

Other Graces are likewise tried in the same Furnace: but Faith is named as the
Root of all the rest* Sharp afflictions give a Christian a trial of his Love to
God, whether it be single, and for himself or not; for then it will be the same
when he strikes, as when he Embraces, and in the fire of affliction will rather
grow the hotter, and be more taken off from the world and set upon him. Again
the Grace of Pa^ience is put particularly upon trial in distresses: but both
these spring from Faith. for Love rises from a right and strong belief of the
Goodness of God, and patience, from a persuasion of the Wisdom and Love of God,
and the truth of his promises. He has said, I will not fail thee. And that we
shall not be tempted above our strength, and he will give the Issue. Now the
belief of those, Causes patience. The trial of faith works Patience. Iam.
^.3. For therefore does the Christian resign up himself, and all that
concerns him, his trial, the measure and length of them all, unto Gods
dispose, because he knows that he is in the hands of a wise and loving Father.
Thus the trial of those, and other particular Graces, do still resolve into
this, and are comprised under it, the trial of Faith.

This trial (as (...) of Gold) may be for a (...) ^old end. 1* for Experiment
of the truth, and p^reness of a Christians faith. 2. for r^fining it ye^ more*
and to raise it to a higher pitch or degree of p^reness.

1. The furnace of Affliction shows upright ^eal Faith to be such indeed,
remaining st^ll the same even in the fire, the same tha^ it was, undiminished,
as good Gold (...) none of its quantity in the fire. Doubtless many are
deceived in time of ease and prosperity with imaginary Faith, and Fortitude: so
that there may be still some doubt while a Man is under* set with outward
helps, as Riches, Friends, Esteem etc. whether he leanes upon those, or upon
God who is an Invisible support though stronger then all that are visible, and
is the peculiar, and alone stay of Faith in all Conditions. But when all these
outward props are plucked away from a Man, then it will manifest, whether
something else upholds him or not* for if there be nothing else then ^e falls,
but if his mind stand firm and unremoved as before; then it is evident he laid
not his weight upon these things he had them about him but was built upon a
foundation though not seen, which is able alone to stay him although he be not
only frustrated of all other supports, but beat^n upon with storms and
tempests; as our Savior says, the house fell not because it was founded upon
a rock. Mat. 7.25.

This testified the truth of David's Faith, who found it staying him upon God,
when there was nothing else near that could do it I had fainted unless, I had
believed. Psa. 27.13. So in his strait. 1. Sam. 30.6. Where its said, that
David was greatly distressed: but he encouraged himself in the Lord his God.
Thus Psa. 73.26. My flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strength of my
heart and portion for ever. The Hearts natural strength of spirit and
Resolution may bea^ up under outward weakness, or the failing of the flesh: but
when the Heart it self fails, that is the strength of the flesh, what shall
strengthen it? nothing but God; who is the strength of the heart and its
portion for ever. Thus Faith works alone, when the Case suites that of the
Prophets Haback. ^.17. Although the fig tree shall not Blossom neither shall
fruit be in the vine etc. yet verse. 18. I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy
in the God of my salvation.

In spiritual trials that are the sharpest and fieryest of all, when the
furnace is within a Man, when God does not only shut up his loveing kindness
from its feeling; but seems to shut it up in hot displeasure, when he writes
bitter things against it, yet then to depend upon Him, and wait for his
salvation, this is not only a true, but a strong, and very refined Faith
indeed, and the more he smites, the more to cleave to him; well might he say
When I am tried I shall come forth as Gold, who could say that word, though he
slay me yet will I trust in him; though I saw (as it were) his hand lifted up
to destroy me, yet from that same hand would I expect salvation.

As the furnace shows faith to be what it is, so also it betters it, and makes
it more precious and purer then it was.

The Graces of the spirit as they come from the hand of God that infuses them
are nothing but pureness: but being put into a heart where sin dwells, (which
till the body be dissolved and taken to pieces, cannot be fully purged out)
there they are mixed with Corruption and dross. And particularly Faith is mixed
with Unbelief, and Love of earthly things, and dependence upon the Creature, if
not more then God, yet together with him, and for this, is the furnace
needful, that the soul may be purified from this dro^s, and made more sublime
and spiritual in believing. It Is a hard talk and many times comes but slowly
forward to teach the heart by discourse and speculation to sit loose from the
world at all sides, not to cleave to the best things in it, though we be
compassed about with them, though Riches do increase, yet not to set our hearts
on them, not to trust in such uncertain things as they are, as the Apostle
speaks. Therefore God is pleased to choose the more effectual way to teach his
own the right and pure exercise of Faith, either by witholding, or withdrawing
those things from them, makes them relish the sweetness of spiritual Comfort,
by depriving them of those outward Comforts wherein they were in most danger of
excess to have doted on them, and so forget themselves and him; when they are
necessitate, and experimentally trained up easily to let go their hold of any
thing Earthly, and to stay themselves only upon their Rock, this is the very
refining of their faith, by those losses and afflictions wherewith they are
exercised; they that learn bodily Exercises, as fencing etc. Are not taught by
sitting still, and hearing Rules, or seeing others practice, but they learn by
exercising themselves. The way to profit in the art of believing or comeing to
this spiritual activity of faith, is, to be often put to that work, in the
difficultest way, to make up all wants and losses in God, and to sweeten the
bitterest griefs with his loving kindness.

Might be found unto praise and honor and glory] This is the end that is
intended, and shall be certainly obtained by all these hot trials. Faith shall
come through them all and shall be found unto praise. etc. An unskillfull
beholder may think strange to see Gold thrown into the fire, and left there for
a time, but he that puts it there would be loath to lose it, his purpose is to
make some costly piece of work of it,; every believer gives himself to Christ,
and he undertakes to present them blameless to the Father, not one of them
shall be lost, nor one dram of their faith, they shall be found, and their
Faith shall be found when he appears. That faith that is here in the furnace
shall be then made up into a Crown of pure Gold, it shall be found unto praise
and honor and Glory.

This Praise, and Honor, and Glory may be referred to believers themselves
according to the Apostle S. Paul's Expression Romans 2.7. or to Christ that
appears: but the two will agree well together, that it be both to their Praise,
and to the Praise of Christ; for certainly all their praise and glory, shall
terminate in the Glory of their Head Christ; who is God blessed for ever, they
have each their Crown, but their Honor is, to cast them all down before his
Throne. He shall be glorified in his Saints and admired in them that believe*
They shall be glorious in Him, and therefore in all their glory he shall be
glorified, for as they have derived the^r glory from him, it shall all return
back to him again.

At the appearance of Jesus Christ] This denotes the Time when this shall come
to pass. For Christ is faithful and true, he has promised to come again, and
to Judge the World in Righteousness, and he will come, and will not tarry, he
shall Judge Righteously, in that day, that was himself unrighteously judged
here on Earth. It Is called the Revelation; all other things shall be Revealed in
that day, the most hidden things, good and evil unvailed, but it is eminently
the day of His Revelation, it shall be by his Light, by the brightness of his
coming that all other things shall be revealed but he himself shall be the
worthiest sight of all: All eyes shall behold Him. He shall then gloriously
appear before all Men, and Angels, and shall by all be acknowledged to be the
son of God, and Judge of the World, some shall with joy know him, and
acknowledge him to be for others ^o their Horrors, and amazement.

How beautiful shall he be to those that Love him; when he as the glorious
Head shall appear with his whole body mystical together with him?

Then the Glory and Praise that all the Saints shall be honored with, shall
recompense fully all the Scorns and Ignominies, and Distresses they have met
with here. And they shall shine the brighter for them, Oh! if we Considered
often of that solemn day, how light would we se^ by the opinions of Men, and
all ou^ward hardships that can befall us, digest dispraise and dishonor here,
and pass through all cheerfully, providing we may be then found in him, and so
partakers of Praise, and Glory, and Honor in that day of his appearing.

Verses. 8, 9.
8. Whom having not seen, ye Love; in whom tho you see him not; yet believing
ye re^oyce, with joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

9. Receiveing the End of your faith even the Salvation of your Souls.


IT is a paradox to the world that the Apostle has asserted, that there is a
Joy that can subsist in the mid^^ of sorrow; therefore he insists in the
Confirmation of it, And in all those words proves it to the full, yea, with
advantage, that the Saints have not only some measure of Joy in the griefs that
abound upon them here, but excellent and eminent Joy, such as makes good all
that can be said of it, cannot be spoke too much of, for it is Unspeakable, nor
too much magnified for it is Glorious.

To Evidence the truth of this, and to confirm his Brethren in the experienced
knowledge of it, he expresses here more particularly, and distinctly the causes
of this their Joy which are.

1. The Object or Matter of it. 2. The Apprehension and appropriation of that
Object, which two conjoined are the entire cause of all Rejoyceing.

The Object is Jesus Christ, verse 8. And the Salvation purchased by him verse
9. For these two cannot be severed, and these two Verses that speak of them,
require (as is evident by their connection) to be considered together 2. The
apprehension of these, 1. set forth negatively, not by bodily sight. 2.
Positively, whereas that might seem to abate the certain^y and liveliness of
their Rejoyceing that it is of things they had not seen, nor do yet see, that is
abundantly made up by three for one, each of them more excellent then the mere
bodily sight of Christ in the flesh, which many had, which were never the
better by it; the three are, those three prime Christian Graces, Faith, Love,
and Hope: The two former in ver. 8. the 3 d. in ver. 9. Faith in Christ
begetting Love to him, and both these giving assured Hope of salvation by him,
making it as certian to them, as if it were already in their hand, and they in
possession of it. And from all those together results this Exultation, or
leaping for joy, Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

This is that one thing that so much concerns us. and therefore we mistake very
far, and forget our own highest interest too much when we either speak or hear
of it slightly, and apply not our hearts to it. What is it that all our
thoughts and endeavors drive at? What means all that we are doing in the
World, tho we take several ways to it, and wrong ways for the most part, yea
such ways as lead not to it, but set us further off from it, yet that which we
all seek after by all our labor under the Sun, is something that may be matter
of Contentment, and rejoicing to us when we have attained it, now here it is,
and in vain is it sought for elsewhere. And for this end it is represented to
you, that it may be yours, if ye will entertain it: not only that you may know
this to be a truth, that in Jesus Christ is laid up true Consolation and
Rejoyceing, that he is the Magazine and Treasury of it, but that you may know
how to bring him home into your hearts and lodge him there, and so to have the
spring of Joy within you.

That which gives full joy to the Soul must be something that is higher and
better then it self, in a word, he that made it, can only make it glad after
this manner, with unspeakable and glorious joy, but the Soul remaining guilty
of Rebellion against him, and unreconcil'd, cannot behold him, but as an Enemy,
any belief that it can have of him while it is in that posture, is not such as
can fetch Love, and Hope, and so Rejoicing: but such as the Faith of devils
produces, only begetting terror and trembling but the light of his
Countenance shining in the face of his Son the Mediator, glads the heart: and
it is the looking upon him so, that causes the soul to Believe, and Love, and
Hope, and Rejoice. Therefore the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. In his description of the
estate of the Gentiles before Christ was preached to them, joins these
together, without Christ, that was the cause of all the rest; therefore without
comfort in the Promises, without Hope and without God in the world; So he is
here by our Apostle expressed, as the object. In all these therefore he is the
matter of our Joy, because our Faith, and Love, and Hope of Salvation.

The Apostle writing to the dispersed Jews many of whom had not known nor seen
Christ in the flesh, commends their Love and Faith, for this reason, that it
did not depend upon bodily sight; but was pure, and spiritual, and made them of
the number of those, that our Savior himself pronounces blessed, who have not
seen and yet believe. You saw him not when he dwelt amongst men, and walked to
and fro Preaching, and working Miracles, Many of those that did then hear and
see him believed not, yea they scoffed, and hated, and persecuted him, and in
the end Crucified him, you that have seen none of all those things yet having
heard the Gospel that declares him, you have believed.

Thus Observe, the working, or not working of Faith, does not depend upon the
difference of the external Ministry and gifts of Men: for what greater
difference can there be that way, than betwixt the Master, and the Servants,
betwixt the great Prophet himself, and his weak sinful Messengers, and yet many
of those that saw, and heard him in Person, were not converted, believed not in
him, and thousands that never saw him, were converted by his Apostles, and as
it seems, even some of those that were some way accessory to his death, yet
were brought to Repentance by this same Apostles Sermon. Act. 2.

Learn then to look above the outward Ministry and any difference that in Gods
dispensation can be there, and know, that if Jesus Christ himself were on
Earth, and now Preaching amongst us, yet might his incomparable words be
unprofitable to us, not being mixed with faith in the bearers. But where that
is, the meanest despisable conveyance of his Message received with humility,
and affection will work blessed Effects.

Whom not seeing, yet believeing] Faith elevates the Soul not only above sense,
and sensible things; but above Reason it self, as reason corrects the Errors
that sense might occasion; So supernatural Faith corrects the Errors of
natural Reason, judging according to Sense.

The Sun seems less then the wheel of a Chariot: but Reason teaches the
Philosopher, that it is much bigger then the whole Earth, and the cause why it
seems so little is, its great distance.

The Naturally wise man, is as far deceived by this carnal Reason in his
estimate of Jesus Christ the ^un of Righteousness, and the cause is the same,
his great distance from him, as the Psalmist speaks of the wicked. Psalm. 10.5.
Thy Judgments are far above out of his sight. He accounts Christ, and his
Glory a smaller matter then his own Gain, Honor, or Pleasure for these are
near him, and he sees their quantity to the full, and counts them bigger, yea
far more worth then they are indeed, but the Apostle St. Paul and all they that
are enlightened by the same Spirit, they know by Faith, which is divine Reason,
that the Excellency of Jesus Christ far surpasses the worth of the whole Earth,
and all things earthly. Phil. 3.7.8.

To give a right assent to the Gospel of Christ is Impossible, without divine
and saving Faith infused in the Soul, to believe that the Eternal Son of God
clothed himself with humane flesh, and dwelt amongst Men in a Tabernacle like
theirs, and suffered death in the flesh, that he who was Lord of Life, has
freed us from the sentence of Eternal Death, that he broke the bars and chains
of Death, and rose again, that he went up into Heaven, and there at the Fathers
right hand sits in our flesh, and that glorified above the Angels. This is the
great Mystery of Godliness. And a part of this Mystery is. that he is Believed
on in the World. 1 Timothy 3.16. This Natural Men may discourse of, and that very
knowingly, and give a kind of natural Credit to it, as to a History that may be
true; but firmly to believe, that there is divine Truth in all these things,
and to have a persuasion of it stronger then of the very things we see with our
eyes, such an assent as this, is the peculiar work of the spirit of God, and is
certainly saving Faith.

The Soul that so believes, cannot choose but Love, it is commonly true, the Eye
is the ordinary door by which Love enters into the Soul, and it is true in this
Love, though it is denied of the Eye of sense yet (you see) it is ascribed to the
Eye of Faith. though you have not seen him you Love him, because you believe.
Which is to see him spiritually, Faith indeed is distinguished from that Vision
that is in Glory: but it is the Vision of the Kingdom of Grace, it is the Eye of
the New Creature, that quicksighted Eye, that pierces all the Visible Heavens,
and sees above them, that looks to things that are not seen. 2 Cor. 4.18. And
is the evidence of things not seen Heb. 11.1. that sees him that is invisible,
v. 27. It Is possible that one may be much Loved upon the report of their worth,
and Virtues, and upon a Picture of them lively drawn before sight of the party
so commended, and represented, but certainly when they are seen, and found
answerable to the former, it raises the Affection that it first begun, to a far
greater height. We have the report of the perfections of Jesus Christ in the
Gospel, yea, so clear a description of him, that it gives a picture of him, and
that together with the Sacraments, are the only lawful, and the only lively
pictures of our Savior. Gal. 3.1. Now this Report Faith believes and beholds
this picture, and so lets in the Love of Christ to the Soul: but further it
gives a particular experimental knowledge of Christ, and acquaintance with him.
It causes the Soul find all that is spoken of him in the Word, and his beauty
there represented, to be abundantly true, makes it really taste of his
sweetness, and by that possesses the heart more strongly with his Love,
persuading it of the truth of those things, not by reasons, and arguments; but
by an Inexpressible kind of Evidence, that they only know that have it. Faith
persuades a Christian of these two things, that the Philosopher gives as the
causes of all Love, Beauty, and Propriety, the Loveliness of Christ in himself,
and our interest in him.

The former it eff^ctua^s not only by the first apprehending, and believing of
those h^s Excellencies and Beauty, but by frequent beholding of him, and Eyeing
him in whom all Perfection dwells, and looks so of^ on him, till it sets the
very Impression of his Image (as it were) upon the Soul that it can never be
blotted out, and forgot. The latter it does by that particular Uniting Act,
which makes him our God and our Savior.

Ye Love] The distinctions that some make of Love, need not be taken as of
differing kinds, but different actings of the same Love, by which we may try
our so much pretended Love of Christ, which in truth is so rarely found. There
will then be in this Love, if it be right, these three qualities, Goodwill,
Delight, and Desire.

1. Goodwill, earnest wishing, and (as we can) promoting Gods Glory, and
stirring up others so to do. They that seek more their own things then the
things of Jesus Christ, more their own Praise, and Esteem then His, are
strangers to this divine Love-For it seeks not her own things. This bitter Root
of self-love, is most hard to pluck up: this strongest and sweetest Love of
Christ alone does it actually, though gradually. This Love makes the Soul as
the lower Heaven, slow in its own motion, most swift in the motion of that
first that wheels it about: so the higher degree of Love, the more swift. It
Loves the hardest tasks, And greatest difficulties, where it may perform God
service, either in doing, or in suffering for him. It is strong as death, and
many waters cannot quench it. The greater the task is, the more real is the
testimony, and expression of Love, and therefore the more acceptable to God.

2. There is in true Love, a complacency, and delight in God. A Conformity to
his will, Loving what he Loves, and studious of his will, ever seeking to know
more clearly, what it is that is most pleasing to him, contracting a likeness
to God in all his actions, by conversing with him, frequent contemplating of
God, and looking on his beauty as the Eye lets in this Affection, so it serves
it constantly, and readily looks that way that Love directs it, thus the soul
that is possessed with this Love of Jesus Christ has its eye much upon him,
thinks often on his former sufferings, and present Glory, the more it looks
upon Christ, the more it loves, and still the more it loves, the more it
delights to look upon him.

3. There is in true Love a Desire, for it is but small beginnings, and tastes
of his Goodness that the soul has here, therefore it is still looking out and
longing for the day of Marriage, the time is sad and wearisome, and seems much
longer then it is, while it is deteind here. I desire^ to be dissolved (says
St. Paul) and to be with Christ.

God is the Sum of all things lovely, thus excellen^ly Greg. Nazian expresses
himself Ovat. 1. If I have any Possessions, Health, Credit, Learning this is
all the contentment I have of them, that I have somewhat, I may despise for
Christ, who is totus, d^s^der^bilis, and totu^ desiderabile. And this Love is
the sum of all he requires of us, it is that which makes all our meanest
Services acceptable, and without which, all we offer to him is distasteful. God
does not only deserve our Love by his matchless Excellency, and Beauty: but by
his Matchless Love to us, and that is the strongest Loadstone of Love, He has
loved me, says the Apostle, Gal. 2.20. How appears that? in no less then this,
he has given himself for me. Certainly then, there is no other Character of
our Love then this, to give our selves to him, that has so loved us, and given
himself for us.

This affection must be bestowed somewhere, there is no Man but has some prime
choice, somewhat that is the predominant delight of his soul, will it not then
be our wisdom to make the worthiest choice? seeing it is offered us, and is
extreme folly to reject it.

Grace does not pluck up by the roots and wholly destroy the natural passions
of the mind, because they are distempered by sin: that were an extreme remedy,
to Cure by killing, and heal by cutting off, no, but it corrects the distemper
in them, it dries not up this main stream of Love, but purifies it from the Mud
it is full of in its wrong Course, or calls it to its Right Channel by which it
may run into Happiness, and empty it self into the Ocean of goodness. The Holy
Spirit turns the love of the soul toward God in Christ; for in that way only
can it apprehend his Love; so then Jesus Christ is the first Object of this
divine Love, he is Medium unionis, through whom God conveys the sense of his
Love to the soul, and receives back its Love to him.

And if we will consider his incomparable Beauty, we may look on it in the holy
Scriptures, particularly in that divine song of Loves, Wherein Solomon borrowes
all the beauties of the Creatures, dips his pencill in all their several
Excellencies, to set him forth unto us, who is the chief of ten Thousands.
There is an inseparable intermixture of Love with Belief, and a pious
Affection, receiving divine Truth, so that in effect, as we distinguish them,
they are mutually strengthened the one by the other, and so though it seem a
Circle, it is a divine one, and falls not under censure of the School's
Pedantry. If you ask how shall I do to Love? I Answer, Believe. If you ask how
shall I believe? I Answer, Love. Although the Expressions to a carnal mind are
altogether unsavory, by gross mistaking them, yet to a Soul taught to Read and
Hear them by any measure of that same Spirit of love, wherewith they were
penned, they are full of heavenly and unutterable sweetness.

Many Directions, and means of begetting and increasing this Love of Christ may
be here offered: but they that delight in number may multiply them, but sure
this One, will Comprehend the greatest, and best part, if not all of them.
Believe, and you shall Love; Believe much, and you shall Love much, labor for
strong, and deep persuasions of the glorious things that are spoken of Christ,
and this will command Love. Certainly did Men indeed believe his worth they
would accordingly Love him; for the Reasonable Creature, cannot but affect that
most, which it firmly believes to be worthy of affection. O this mischief of
Unbelief, is that which makes the heart cold, and dead toward God. Seek then
to believe Christ's Excellency in himself, and his Love to us, and our interest
in him, and this will kindle such a fire in the heart, as will make it ascend
in a Sacrifice of Love to him.

Many Signs likewise of this Love may be multiplied, according to the many
fruits, and workings of it: but in them all, it self is its own most infallible
Evidence. When the soul finds that all its Obedience, and endeavor to keep the
Commands of Jesus Christ, which himself makes its Character, do flow from Love,
then it is true and sincere: For do, or suffer what you will, withour Love, all
passes for nothing. All are Ciphers without it, they signify nothing. 1. Cor.
13.

This is the Message of the Gospel, and that which the Ministry aims at, and
therefore the Ministers ought to be Suitors, not for themselves, but for Christ
to Espouse souls to him, and to bring in many hearts to Love him. And certainly
this is the most compendious way to persuade to all other Christian duties,
this is to converse with Jesus Christ; and therefore where his Love is, no
other incentive will be needful. For Love delights in the presence and
converse of the party Loved. If we are to persuade to duties of the second
Table, the sum of those is Love to our Brethren resulting from the Love of
Christ, which diffuseth such a sweetness into the soul that its all Love, and
meekness, and Gentleness and long suffering.

If times be for suffering, Love will make the soul not only bear, but welcome
the bitterest afflections of life, and the hardest kinds of death for his sake.
In a word, there is in Love a sweet constraint, or tying of the heart to all
Obedience, and Duty.

The Love of God is requisite in Ministers, for their preaching of the word, so
our Savior to St. Peter. John, 21.15. Peter love thou me? then feed my
lambs. It is requisite for the people that they receive the Truth in the Love
of it, and that Christ preached be Entertained in the soul, and Embraced by
Faith, and Love.

You that have made choice of Christ for your Love, let not your hearts slip
out, to renew your wonted base familiarity with Sin. For that will bring new
bitterness to your souls and at least for some time will deprive you of the
sensible favor of your beloved Jesus, delight always in God, and give him
your whole heart; for he deserves it all, and is a satisfying good to it, the
largest heart is all of it too strait for the riches of consolation that he
brings with him, seek to Increase in this Love; for tho its at first weak, yet
Labor to find it daily rise higher, and burn hotter, and clearer, and consume
the dross of Earthly desires.

Receiving the end of your Faith,] Although the soul that Believes, and Loves,
is put in present possession of God, as far as it is Capable, in its sojourning
here: yet it desires a full Enjoyment; which it cannot attain to, without
Removing hence. While we are present in the body, we are absent from the Lord,
says the Apostle. And because they are assured of that happy Exchange, that
being united, and freed of this body, they shall be present with the Lord, and
that having his own word for it, that Where he is, they shall be also: this
begets such an assured Hope, as bears the name of possession* Therefore its
said here Receiveing the end of your faith.

This Receiveing likewise flows from Faith. Faith apprehends the present Truth
of the divine Promises, and so makes the things to come, present; and Hope
looks out to their after Accomplishment, which if the promises be true, as
Faith averrs, then Hope has good reason firmly to expect it. This desire, and
Hope are the very wheels of the Soul that carry it on, and Faith the common
Axis on which they rest.

In the words there are two things. 1. The good hoped for in Christ, so
Believed on, and Loved. 2. The assuredness of the Hope it self, yea as sure as
if it were already accomplished. As for the good hoped for it consists. 1. In
the nature of it Viz. The Salvation of their Soul. 2. in a Relative Property of
it, the End of their Faith.

The nature of it is, Salvation, and Salvation of the soul, it imports full
deliverance from all kind of misery, and the safe possession of perfect
happiness, when the soul shall be out of the reach of all Adversaries, and
adverse Accidents, no more subjected to those Evils that are its own properly,
namely the Conscience of Sin, and fear of Wrath, and sad Defections. nor yet
subject to those other Evils it endured by Society with the body, outward
distresses, and Affliction, Persecutions, Poverty, diseases etc.

It Is called Salvation of the soul, not excluding the body from the society of
that Glory, when it shall be raised and reunited to the Soul: but because the
soul is of it self an Immortal substance, and both the more Noble part of Man,
and the prime subject both of Grace and glory, and because it arrives first at
that blessedness, and for a time leaves the body in the dust to do homage to
its Original; therefore it is only named here: but Jesus is the Savior of the
body too, and he shall at his coming, change our vile bodies, and make them
like his glorious body.

The End,] End, or Reward, for it is both. Its the End, either at which Faith
aims, or wherein it Cease; its the Reward, not of their Works, nor of Faith,
as a work deserving it, but as the Condition of the New Covenant, which God
according to the tenor of that Covenant first works in his own, and then
Rewards, as if it were their work. And this Salvation, or Fruition of Christ,
is the proper Reward of faith, which Believes in him unseen, and so obtains
that happy sight* it is the proper work of faith to believe what thou see not,
and the Reward of faith, to see what thou have believed.

This is the Certainty of their Hope, that it is as if they had already received
it, if the promise of God, and the merit of Christ hold good; then they that
believe in him, and Love him, are made sure to salvation. The promises of God
in Christ are not yea and nay: but they are in him yea, and in him Amen; sooner
may the Rivers run back-ward, and the course of the Heavens change, and the
frame of nature be dissolved, then any one soul that is united to Jesus Christ
by Faith and Love can be severed from him, And so fall short of salvation hoped
for in him; and this is the matter of their rejoicing.

Ye Rejoice with Joy unspeakable.] The natural Man (says the Apostle)
receives not things of God, for they are foolishness unto him, and he adds the
Reason why he cannot know them, for they are spiritually discerned, he has
none of that faculty by which they are discerned, there is a vast disproportion
betwixt those things, and Natures highest Capacity, it cannot work beyond its
Sphere. Speak to the Natural Man of the matter of Spiritual grief, the sense
of Guiltiness, and the Apprehension of Gods displeasure, or the hiding of his
favor, and the Light of his countenance from the soul, these things stir not
him, he knows not what they mean; Speak to him again of the Peace of
Conscience, and sense of Gods Love, and the Joy that arises hence, He is no
less stranger to that: As our Savior speaks, mourn to him and he laments not,
pipe to him and he dances not, Mat. 11. but as it there follows, there is a
wisdom in those things though they seem Folly, and Nonsense to the foolish
world, and this wisdom is justified of her own Children.

Having said somewhat already of the Causes of this spiritual Joy, the
Apostle speaks of here. It remains now, that we consider those two things 1.
How Joy arises from those Causes. 2. the Excellency of this Joy as it is here
expressed.

There is here a sollid sufficient Good, and the heart made sure of it, being
partly put in present possession of it, and in a most certain Hope of all the
rest. And what can be more required to make it joyful? Jesus Christ the
treasure of all blessings received, and united to the soul by Faith and Love
and Hope.

Is not Christ the Light and Joy of the Nations? such a light as Abraham at the
distance of many ages, of more then two thousand years, yet saw by faith, and
seeing Rejoiced. Besides this brightness that makes, light a joyful object,
Light is often in Scripture put for Joy. Christ this Light brings Salvation
with him, He is the Sun of Righteousness, and there is healing under his wings.
I bring you, said the Angel, good tidings of great Joy, that shall be to all
people. And their Song has in it the matter of that Joy, Glory to God in the
Highest, peace on Earth, and good will toward Men.

But to the end we may Rejoice in Christ, we must find him ours, otherwise the
more Excellent he is, the more Cause has the heart to be sad, while it has no
portion in him: my spirit has Rejoiced (says the Blessed Virgin) in God my
Savior.

Thus 1. Ioh. 1.3. Having spoken of our Communion with Christ, he adds these
things I write that your Joy may be full. Faith works this Joy by uniteing
the Soul to Christ, and applying his merits, and from that application arises
the pardon of sin, and so that load of misery which was the great Cause of
Sorrow, is removed, and so soon as the Soul finds it self lightened, and
unloaded of that burden that was sinking it to Hell, it cannot choose but leap
for Joy in the Ease, and Refreshment it finds. Therefore that Psalm that David
begins with the doctrine of the Pardon of Sin, he Ends it with an Exhortation
to Rejoyceing. Blessed is the Man whose transgression is forgiven whose sin is
covered. Psalm. 32.1. Thus he begins, but he ends verse. 11. Be glad in the Lord,
and Rejoice ye Righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are ^pright in heart.
S. Peter speaks to his hearers of the Remission of sins. Act. 2.38. and verse
41. it is added, they received his words Gladly, and our Savior joins these
two together, be of good Comfort thy sins are forgiven thee; Thus Isaiah, 61.1.
Good tidings of Liberty to Captives is proclaimed, and a notable change there
is of their Estate Who mourn in Zion, Giving them beauty for ashes, the Oil of
joy for mourning, and the garment of praise for the Spirit of Heaviness. Think
with what Joy the long imprisoned debtor drowned in debt rec^^ves a full
Discharge, and his Liberty; or a condemned Malefactor the news of his Pardon,
and this will somewhat resemble it; but yet fall far short of the joy that
Faith brings, by bringing Christ to the Soul, and so forgiveness of sins in him.

But this is not all. This Believing Soul, is not only a debtor acquitted, and
set free, but Enriched besides, with a new and great Estate, not only a
pardoned Malefactor, but withal highly preferred and advanced to honor,
having a Right by the promises to the unsearchable Riches of Christ, as the
Apostle speaks, and is received into favor with God, and unto the Dignity of
Sonship, taken from the dunghill, and set with Princes.

As there is Joy from Faith, so also from Love. Though it is in it self the most
sweet and delightful passion of the Soul, yet as we foolishly misplace it, it
prove often full of bitterness, but being set upon Jesus Christ the only right,
and worthy Object, it Causes this unspeakable Delight and Rejoicing.

1. It Is matter of joy to have bestowed our Love so worthily, and though our
Savior seems to withdraw himself, and sometimes sadden the soul that loves
him, with absences, in regard of sense, yet even in those sad times, the soul
delights to Love him, and there is a pleasure in the very pains it has in
seeking after him. And this it knows that his mercies are Everlasting, and
that he cannot be long unkind; but will return and speak comfortably unto it.

2. Our Love to Christ gives us assurance of His to us, so that we have not
only chosen worthily, but shall not be frustrate and dissapointed, and it
assures us of his, not as following, but preceding and Causing ours: for our
Love to Jesus Christ is no other but the reflex of his on us. Wine makes glad
the heart; but thy love is better then wine, says the Spouse. And having this
persuasion that he has loved us, and washed us in his blood, and forgets us
not in our conflicts: that though he himself is in his Glory, yet that he
interceed's for us there, and will bring us thither, what condition can befall
us so hard, but we may Rejoice in it? And in them so far as we are sure to
arrive at that full Salvation, and fruition of him who has purchased it, Then
there is the third Cause of our Rejoyceing viz. our Hope.

Now Hope is our anchor pitched within the vail, that stays us against all the
storms that beat upon us in this troublesome Sea, that we are tossed upon. The
Soul that strongly Believes, and Loves, may confidently Hope to see what it
believes, and Enjoy what it loves, and in that rejoice. It may say whatsoever
hazards whether ontward, or inward, whatsoever Afflictions and Temptations I
endure, yet this one thing puts me out of hazard, and in that I will Rejoice,
the salvation of my Soul depends not upon my own strength, but is in my
Saviors hand, my life is hid with Christ in God, and when he who is my Life
shall appear, I likewise shall appear with him in Glory. The Childish world is
hunting shadows, and gaping and hoping after they know not what, but the
Believer can say, I know whom I have trusted, and am persuaded that he is able
to keep that which I have committed to him against that day. Now we have not
only right to those things; but withal there must be frequent Consideration of
them to work Joy. The Soul must often view them, and so Rejoice: My meditation
of him shall be sweet, says David, I will be glad in the Lord, Psalm. 104. And
the Godly failing in thi^, deprive themselves much of that Joy they might have,
and they that are most in these sublime thoughts, have the highest and truest
Joy.

The Excellency of this Joy the Apostle here expresses by these two words,
Unspeakable, and full of glory.

That it is Unspeakable, no wonder, seeing the matter of i^ is Inconceivable, it
is an Infinite Good. God reconciled in Jesus Christ, and testifying, and
sealing his Love unto the soul, and giving assured hope of that blessed Vision
of Eternity, what more unspeakable than this? And for the same Reason it is
Glorious, or glorified joy, having the highest and most glorious Object, for it
derives all its Excellency from thence.

Vnspeakable] The best worldly Joys are easily speakable, they may be
expressed to the u^most, yea usually more is spoke of them then they are
indeed. Their name is beyond their worth, they are very seldom found upon
experience equal to the opinion and expectation that men have of them. But this
spiritual Joy is above the report any can make of it, say what they can of it
who are of happiest Expression, yet when a Man comes to know it in his own
breast, he will say (as that Queen said of Salomons wisdom) the half was not
told me of it.

Again earthly Joys are Inglorious. Many of which, Men are ashamed of, and
those that seem most plausible, yet are below the Excellency of the Soul, and
cannot fill it, but the Joys that arise from Union with Christ, as they are
most avowable, a Man needs not blush to own them, so they are truly contenting,
and satisfying, and that's their Glory, and the Cause why we may glory in them*
My soul shall make her boast in God, says David.

For Application of all this. If these things were believed we would hearken no
more to the foolish prejudice that the World has taken up against Religion,
and wherewith Satan endeavors to possess men's hearts, that they may be scarr'd
from the ways of Holiness, it is, that they think it a Sour Melanel oly life,
that has nothing but Sadness and Mourning in it, but to remove this prejudice.

Consider, 1. Religion bars not the lawful delights that are taken in natural
things, but teaches the moderate, and regular use of them, which is far the
sweeter, for things lawful in themselves, are in their excess sinful, and so
prove Bitterness in the end, and if in some cases it require the forsaking of
lawful Enjoyments as of pleasure, or Profits, or Honor, for God and for his
Glory, this is Generous, and truly more delightful to deny them for this
reason, then to enjoy them. Men have done much this way for the Love of their
Country, and by a Principle of Moral Virtue, but to lose any delight or to
suffer any hardship for that highest End, the glory of God, and by the strength
of love to him, is far more Excellent, and truly Pleasant.

2. The delights and pleasures of sin, Religion indeed banishes, but it is to
change them for this Joy that is unspeakably beyond them, it calls men from
sordid and base delights, to those that are pure delights indeed, it calls to
Men, drink ye no longer of the pudle, here are the Crystal streams of a living
fountain. There is a delight in the very despising impure delights, Quam suave
est istis suavitatibus carere Aug.
as he said, how pleasant is it to want these pleasures. But for such a change,
to have in their stead such delights, as in comparison, the other deserve not
that name, To have such spiritual joy, as shall end in Eternal Joy, it is a
wonder we hasten not all to choose this joy; but it is indeed because we believe
it not.

3. It Is true the Godly are subject to great Distresses, and Afflictions; but
their Joy is not extinguished by those, no nor diminished either: but often
sensibly increas^d. When they have least of the Worlds joy, they abound most in
Spiritual Consolations, and then Relish them best. They find them sweetest,
when their taste is not depraved with Earthly enjoyments, We rejoice in
tribulation, says St. Paul, and here our Apostle insists on that, to verify
the subsistence of this Joy in the midst of the greatest afflictions.

4. Spiritual Grief that seems most opposite to this Spiritual Joy prejudgeth
it not, for there is a secret delight and sweetness in the tears of Repentance,
a Balm in them that refreshes the Soul, and even their saddest kind of
mourning, viz. The dark times of Desertion, has this in it, that is some way
sweet, that those mournings after their Beloved, who absents himself, is a
mark of their Love to him, and a true Evidence of it, and then all these
spiritual sorrows of what nature soever, are turned into Spiritual Joy, that is
the proper End of them, they have a natural tendency that way.

5. But the Natural Man still doubts of this Joy we speak of; because he sees
and hears so little of it from them that profess to have it, and seem to have
best right to it. If we consider the wretchedness of this Life, and especially
the abundance of Sin that is in the World, what wonder though this their Joy
retire much inward, and appear little abroad, where all things are so contrary
to it, and so few that are capable of it, Pauperis est numerare pecus.
to whom 'twere pertinent to vent it. Again we see here, it is Unspeakable, it
were a poor thing if he that has it could tell it all out. And when the Soul
has most of it, then it remains most within it self, and is so inwardly taken
up with it, that possibly it can then least of all express it. It Is with Joys,
as they say of Cares, and Griefs, Leves Loquuntur, ingentes stupent. Res
severae est verum gaudium. Sen.
The deepest waters run stillest, true Joy is a sollid grave thing, dwells more
in the heart, then the Countenance; whereas on the Contrary, base and false
Joys, are but superficial skin-deep, (as we say) they are all in the face.

Think not that it is with the godly, as the Prophet says of the wicked, that
there is no peace to them* and the LXX Reads it, no Joy. Certainly it is true.
There is no true Joy to the wicked, they may revel and make a noise; but they
Rejoice not, the Laughter of the fool, is as the crackling of thorns under the
pot, a great noise but little heat, and soon at an End. There is no continuing
Feast, but that of a good Conscience. Wickedness, and real Joy cannot dwell
together, as the very Moralist Seneca has it often, and at large: but he that
can say the Righteousness of Jesus Christ is Mine, and in him the favor of
God, and the hope of Eternal Happiness, has such a light as can shine in the
darkest Dungeon, yea in the dark valley of the shadow of death it self.

Say not thou, if I betake my self to the way of Godliness, I must bid farewell
to gladness, never a merry day more, no, on the contrary, never a truly Joyful
day till then, yea, no days at all, but night to the soul, till it entertain
Jesus Christ, and his kingdom, which consists in those, Righteousness, Peace,
and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Thou do not sacrifice Isaac, which signifies
Laughter, as St. Bern. but a Ram. Not thy Joy, but filthy sinful delights that
end in Sorrow.

Oh seek to know in your Experience what those Joys mean, for all describing
and commending it to you will not make you understand it, ^audaemel ^is
dulcedinem quantum potes qui non gustaverit non Intellige^. Aug.
but taste, and see that the Lord is good, you cannot see, and know it, but by
tasting it, and having tasted that goodness, all those poor Joys you thought
sweet before, will then be bitter and distasteful to you.

And you that have Christ yours by Believing know your happiness, and Rejoice,
and Glory in it. Whatsoever is your outward Condition, Rejoice always, and
again I say Rejoice: for Light is sow^ to the Righteous, and Joy for the
upright in heart.

Verses. 10, 11, 12.
10. Of which Salvation the Prophets have enquired, and searched dilligently,
who prophesied of the Grace that should come unto you

11. Searching what, or what manner of time* the Spirit of Christ which was in
them did signify, when he testified before hand the sufferings of Christ, and
the Glory that should follow.

12. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did
Minister the things which are now reported unto you by them that have Preached
the Gospel unto you, with the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven, which things
the Angels desire to look into.


IT is the Ignorance, or at least the Inconsiderance, of Divine things, that
makes Earthly things, whether good, or evil, appear great in our Eyes.
Therefore the Apostles great aim is, by representing the Certainty, and
Excellency of the Belief, and Hope of Christians to his afflicted Brethren, to
strenthen their minds against all discouragements, and oppositions. That they
may account nothing too hard to do, or suffer, for so high a Cause, and so
happy an End. It Is the low and mean thoughts, and the shallow perswassion we
have of things that are spiritual, that is the Cause of all our Remisseness,
and Coldness in them. The doctrine of Salvation he mentioned in the former
verse, at the End of our Christian Faith, is illustrated in these words, from
its Antiquity, Dignity, and infallible truth.

It Is no more Invention: for the Prophets inquired after it, and foretold it in
former ages from the beginning. Thus the prejudice of novelty is removed, that
usually meets the most ancient truth in its new discoveries.

Again, it is no mean thing that such Men as were of unquestioned Eminency in
Wisdom, and Holiness did so much study, and search after, and having found out,
were careful not only to publish it in their own times, but to record it to
posterity, and this not by the private motion of their own spirits, but by the
Acting, and Guidance of the Spirit of God, which sets likewise the truth of
their Testimony above all doubtfulness, and uncertainty.

But taking those three Verses entirely together, we have in them those three
things, testifying how Excellent the Doctrine of the Gospel is. 1. We have the
Principal Author of it. 2. The matter of it 3. The worth of those that are
exercised about it; viz. The best of Men the Prophets, and Apostles in
administering it, and the best of all the Creatures the Angels, in admiring it.

The first Author is the absolutely first, the Spirit of God in the prophets
Ver. 11. in the Apostles Ver. 12. but Ver. 11. The spirit of Christ there, is
the same spirit that He sent down on his Disciples after his Ascending to
Glory, and which spoke in his Prophets before his Descending to the Earth. It
is the spirit of Christ, proceeding jointly from him with the Father, as he is
the son of God, and dwelling most richly, and fully in him as the son of Man.

The Holy Ghost is in himself Holiness, and the Source, and worker of Holiness,
and Author of this holy doctrine that breaths nothing but holiness, and urges
it most pressingly upon all that receive it.

This is the very life of divine Faith touching the Mysteries of Salvation,
firmly to believe their Revelation by the Spirit of God, this the Word it self
testifies, as we see, and it is really manifest in it, it carries the lively
stamp of divine Inspiration, but there must be a spiritual Eye to discern it,
he that is blind knows not that the Sun shines at noon, but by the report of
others; but they that see, are assured they see it, and assured by no other
thing; but by its own Light, To ask one that is a true Believer, how know you
the Scriptures to be divine? is the same as to ask him, how know you Light to
be Light.

The Soul is nothing but Darkness, and blindness within, till that same spirit
that shines without in the Word, shine likewise within it, and Effectually make
it Light, but that once done, then is the word Read with some measure of the
same spirit by which it was written; and the Soul is ascertained that it is
divine, as in bodily fight, there must be a meeting of inward Light Viz. the
visuall spirits with the outward Object.

The spirit of God within, brings Evidence with it, and makes it self
discernable in the word, this all arguments, all Books, and study cannot attain
unto. it is given to believe.

No Man knows the things of a Man but the spirit of Man. 1. Cor. 2.11. But how
holds that here* for if a Man speak out the things that are in his spirit then
others may know them, But the Apostle's aim is there, to conclude, that the
things of God, even such as were Revealed in his Word, could not be known but
by his own spirit, 'its so, though Revealed, yet they remain still unreveal'd,
till the spirit teach within, as well as without: Because intelligeable by
none, but by those, that are the private Scholars and Hearers of the holy
Ghost, the author of them; and because there are so few of these, therefore
there is so little real Believeing amongst all the noise, and profession that
we make of it, who is there (if you will believe them) that Believes not, and
yet truly there is too much Cause to continue the Prophets regret. who has
believed our Report?

Learn then to suspect your selves, and to find out your own Unbelief, that
you may desire this Spirit to teach you inwardly those great Mysteries, that he
outwardly Reveals, and Teaches by his Word. Make use of that promise and press
the Lord with it. They shall be all taught of God.

But 2. There is here the Matter of this Doctrine which we have in three
several Expressions 1. That which is Repeated from the foregoing Verse, it is
the Doctrine of Salvation, that is the end of it* and 2. The Doctrine of
sufferings and glory of Christ as the means. 3. The Doctrine of Grace, the
spring of both.

And 1. Salvation, the only true Doctrine of true happiness, which the wisest
of natural Men have grop't and sought after with much earnestness; but with no
success, they had no other then the dark Moon light of Nature, and that is not
sufficient to find it out, only the Sun of Righteousness shining in the Sphere
of the Gospel, brings Life and Immortality to Light. 2. Tim. 1.10. No wonder
that natural Wisdom, the deepest of it, is far from finding out the true
method, and way of cure, seeing it cannot discover the disease of miserable
Mankind, Viz. the sinful and wretched Condition of nature by the first
Disobedience.

Salvation expresses not only that which is Negative; but Implies likewise
positive and perfect Happiness, thus forgiveness of sins is put for the whole
nature of Justification frequently in scripture, it is more easy to say of this
unspeakable Happiness, what it is not, then what it is, there is in it a full
and final freedom from all Annoyance, all tears are wiped away, and their
fountain dried up, all feeling, and fear, or danger of any the least evil
either of sin, or punishment banished for ever, no Invasions of Enemies, no
robbing nor destroying in all this holy Mountain no voice of complaining in the
streets of the new Jerusalem here, it is at the best but interchanges of
Mornings of joy, with weeping of sad evenings, but there, there shall be no
Light, no need of Sun, nor Moon, For the glory of the Lord shall lighten it and
the Lamb shall be the Light thereof.

Well may the Apostle (as he does here throughout this Chap.) lay this
Salvation to Counter balance all sorrows, and Persecutions, and whatsoever
hardships can be in the way to it. The soul that is persuaded of this, in the
midst of Storms, and Tempests enjoys a Calm, Triumphs in Disgraces, grows
Richer by all its Losses, and by Death it self, attaines this Immortal life.

Happy are they that have their eye fixed upon this Salvation, and are longing
and waiting for it, that see so much of that brightness, and Glory, as darkn^
all the lusture of Earthly things to them, and makes them trample upon those
things, which formerly they admired, and doted on with the rest of the foolish
world. Those things we account so much of, are but as rotten wood, or
Glow-wormes that shine only in the night of our Ignorance, and Vanity: so soon
as the Light beam of this Salvation enters into the soul, it cannot much esteem
or affect any thing below it, and if those glances of it that shine in the
Word, and in the Soul of a Christian be so bright, and powerful, what then
shall the full sight and real possession of it be?

The worker of this Salvation whom the Prophets and Apostles make the sum of
all their doctrine is Jesus Christ, and the sum of that work of Redemption,
as we have it here, is his Humiliation and Exaltation. His Sufferings, and the
Glory that followed thereupon, now, though this serve as an Encouragement to
Christians in their Sufferings, that this is the way by which their Lord went
into his Glory, and is true also of Christ mystical, the Head with the
Members, as the scriptures often teach us. Yet I conceive it is here main^ly
intended as a summary of the work of our Redemption by Jesus Christ, relateing
to the salvation mentioned Verse 10. And as the Cause for the Effect, so it is
put for it here. The Prophets enquired, and prophesied of that Salvation. How?
By searching out, and foretelling the Sufferings, and Glory of Christ: His
sufferings then, and his after Glories are our Salvation His sufferings is the
purchase of our Salvation, and His Glory is our assurance of it, He as our head
having Triumphed, and being Crowned, makes us likewise sure of Victory, and
Triumph. Having entered possession to glory makes our Hope certain; this is his
prayer, that where he is there we may be also and this his own assertion, the
glory which thou gave Me, I have given them. Ioh. 17.22, 24. this is his
promise, because I live ye shall live also Ioh. 14.19. Christ, and the Believer
are One, this is that Great Mystery the Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 5. though 'its
a common known truth, the words and outside of it obvious to all, yet none can
understand it, but they that indeed partake of it, by virtue of that Unction
their sins were accounted His, and Christ's sufferings are accounted theirs, and
by consequence, His Glory the consequent of his sufferings is likewise theirs,
there is an indissoluble connection betwixt the life of Christ, and of a
Believer. Our life is hid with Christ in God; and therefore while we remain
there, our life is there, though hid, and when he who is our life shall appear
we likewise shall appear with him in glory. Colos. 3.14. Seeing the sufferings,
and Glory of our Redeemer, are the maine subject of the Gospel and the Causes
of our salvation, and our comfortable persuasion of it, 'its a wonder that they
are not more the matter of our thoughts, should we not daily consider the
bitterness of that cup of Wrath he drunk for us, and be wrought to Repentance,
and Hatred of sin, to have sin embittered to us by that Consideration, and find
the sweetness of his Love in that he did drink it, and by that, be deeply
possessed with Love to him, these things we now and then speak of, but they
sink not. As our Savior exhorts, where he is speaking of those same
sufferings. O that they were engraven on our hearts and that sin were Crucified
in us, and the world Crucified to us, and we unto the world by the cross of
Christ.

And then considering the Glory wherein he is, And to have our eye often upon
that, and our hearts solaceing and refreshing themselves frequently with the
thoughts of that Place, and condition wherein Christ is, and where our hopes
are ere long to behold lin. Both to see his Glory, and to be Glorified with
him, is it not reason? Yea 'its necessary it cannot be otherwise, if our
Treasure, and Head be there, that our hearts be there likewise.

The Third Expression here of the Gospel, is, that it is the Doctrine of Grace.
The work of Redemption it self, and several parts of it, and the Doctrine
revealing it, have all the name of Grace: because they all flow from free
Grace, that is their spring, and first Cause.

And it is this wherein the Doctrine of Salvation is mainly comfortable, that it
is free, ye are saved by Grace. Ephesians. 2.8. it is true God requires faith, it is
through faith, but he that requires that* gives it too, that is not of your
selves it is the gift of God it is wonderful Grace to save upon believing,
believe in Jesus for Salvation, and live accordingly and it is done; there is no
more required to thy pardon; but that thou receive it by faith. But truly
Nature cannot do this, it is as impossible for us of our selves to Believe, as
to do, this then is that which makes it all Grace from Beginning to End, that
God not only saves upon believeing, but gives believeing it self, Christ is
called not only the Author and finisher of our Salvation, but even of our
Faith.

Free Grace being rightly apprehended, is that, which stays the heart in all
Estates, and keeps it from fainting, even in its saddest times, what though
there is nothing in my self, but matter of sorrow, and discomfort, it cannot be
otherwise, 'its not from my self that I look for Comfort at any time: but from
my God, and his free Grace. Here is Comfort enough for all times, when I Am at
the best, I ought not, I dare not rely upon my self, when Im at the worst, I
may, and should rely upon Christ and his sufficient Grace. Though I be the
vilest sinner that ever came to him, yet I know he is more Gracious then I am
sinful, yea, the more my sin is, the more Glory will it be to his Grace to
pardon it, it will appear the richer, does not David argue thus. Psa. 25.11.
For thy names sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity for it is great: But It Is an
empty fruitless notion of Grace, to Consider it only in the General, and in a
wandering way, we are to look upon it particularly, as addressed to us, and it is
not enough, that it comes to us, in the message of him that brings it only to
our ear, but that we may know what it is, it must come into us, then it is ours
indeed; but if it come to us in the message only, and we send it away again, if
i^ shall so depart, we had better never have heard of it, it will leave a
Guiltiness behind it, that shall make all our sins weigh much heavier then
before.

Enquire whether you have entertained this grace, or not, whether it be come to
you, and into you, or not, whether the kingdom of God is within you. As our
Savior speaks, it is the woefullest condition that can be, not to be far from
the kingdom of God, and yet to fall short, and miss of it. The Grace of God
revealed in the Gospel is entreating you daily to receive it, is willing to
become yours, if you Reject it not, were your eyes open to behold the Beauty,
and Excellency of this Grace, there would need no deliberation, yea, you would
endure none, desire your eyes to be opened, and light from above, that you may
know it, and your hearts opened, that you may be happy by receiving it.

The Apostle speaking of Jesus Christ, as the foundation of our Faith, calls
him the same yesterday, and to day and for ever. Yesterday under the Law, to
day in those primitive times, nearest his Incarnation, and for ever, in all
succeeding ages. And the Resemblance holds good between the two Cherubims over
the Mercy-seat, and the two Testaments, those had their faces toward one
another, and both toward the Mercy-seat, and these look to one another in their
Doctrine, agreeing perfectly, and both look to Christ the true Mercy-seat, and
the great Subject of the scriptures. This we see here, the things that the
Prophets foretold to come, and the Apostles reported were accomplished, were
the same, and from the same spirit, they were the sufferings of Christ, and his
after Glory, and in them our Salvation by free Grace. The Prophesies look
forward to the times of the Gospel, and the things then fulfilled, look back to
the Prophesies, and each confirms the other, meeting all in Christ who is their
truth and Center.

We have spoken already of the Author, and subject of this salvation; Now we
come to say something of those who are Employed about it, as well in
Administering to it, as in Admiring it. And those are, the Prophets, and
Apostles, the first foretold what was to come, the second Preached them when
they came to pass.

In the Prophets there are three things here remarked. 1. Their Diligence. 2.
The Success of it. 3. The Extent of its usefulness.

This disparages not their extraordinary Visions, and Revelations, and that
which is added, that the Spirit of Christ was in them, and did foretell the
things to come.

It was their constant Duty, and they being sensible of their duty, made it
their constant Exercise, to search into Divine Mysteries by Meditation, and
Prayer: yea, and by Reading such holy writers as were already extant in their
times, as Dan. 9. and 10. For which Cause, some taking the word actively,
Conceive Daniel, to be called there a Man of desires, because of his great
desire, and dilligent search after the knowledge of those High things. And in
this dilligent way, they constantly waited for these Revelations, which
sometimes, when it seemed good unto the Spirit of God, were imparted unto them.

Prophecy resideth not (say the Hebrew Doctors) but in a Man that is great in
Wisdom and Virtue, whose affections overcome him not in any worldly things; but
by his knowledge, he overcomes his Affections continually; on such a Man the
Holy Spirit comes down. And his Soul is associated to the Angels, and he is
changed to another Man. thu^ Maimonides.

'Twas the way of the Prince of darkness amongst the Idolatrous Gentiles, to
speak either through senseless Statues, or where they uttered his Oracles, it
was by such profane Prophets as he had, to cause them in a fury tumble forth
words they understood not, and knew not what they said, but the Spirit of God
being Light, and the Holy Prophets Inspired with it, they being dilligent
attendants on its Motions and Searchers of the Mysteries of Salvation,
understood well what their business was, and to what purpose tended those
things of the Kingdom of Christ, which they by Inspiration did foretell; and
therefore bended their thoughts this way, praying, and searching, and waiting
for Answers, studying to keep the passage, as it were open, for the beams of
those Divine Revelations to come in at; not to have their Spirits clogged, and
stopped with earthly and sinful Affections, endeavoring for that calm and quiet
Composure of Spirit in which the voice of Gods Spirit might be the better
heard. Thus Psalm. 85.8. and Hab. 2.1. In both which places follows an
excellent Prophecy Concerning Christ, and that Salvation which he wrought for
his People.

Were the Prophets not exempted from the pains of Search, and Inquiry, that had
the Spirit of God not only in a high measure, but after a singular manner? how
unbeseeming then is slothfulness and Idleness in us? whether is it, that we
judge our selves advantaged with more of the spirit then those holy men? or
that we Esteem the Doctrine, and Mysteries of Salvation on which they bestowed
so much of their labor, unworthy of ours? these are both so gross that we will
be loath to own either of them, and yet our laziness, and negligence in
searching after those things, seems to charge us with some such thought as one
of those.

You will say, this concerns those that succeed to the work of the Prophets,
and Apostles in ordinary, the Ministers of the Gospel. And it does indeed, fall
first upon them. It is their task indeed to be dilligent, and as the Apostle
exhorts his Timothy, to attend on reading, but above all to study to have much
Experimental knowledge of God, and his Son Jesus Christ, and for this end, to
disentangle, and free themselves as much as is possible, from lower things to
the search of heavenly Mysteries, Prove. 18.1. As they are called Angels, so
ought they to be as much as they can attain to it, in a constant nearness unto
God, and attendance on him, like unto the Angels, and look much into these
things, as the Angels here are said to do, to endeavor to have their souls
purified from the affections of sin, that the light of Divine truth, may shine
clear in them, and not be fogg'd, and misted with filthy vapors, to have the
Impressions of God clearly written in their breasts, not mixed and blurred with
earthly characters, seasoning all their readings and common way of studies with
much Prayer, and divine Meditation. They that Converse most with the King, and
are inward with him, know most of the affairs of state, and even the secrets of
them, that are hid from others, and certainly those of Gods Messengers that are
oftenest with himself, cannot but underdand their business best, and know most
of his meaning, and the affairs of his Kingdom. And to that End it is confessed,
that singular diligence is required in them; but seeing the Lord has said
without exception, that his secret is with them that fear him, and that he will
reveal himself and his saving truths to those that humbly seek them. Do not any
of you your selves so much injury, as to bar your selves from sharing in your
measure of the search of these same things, that were the study of the
Prophets, and which by their study, and publishing them, are made the more
accessible, and easy to us. Consider that they do concern us universally, if
we would be saved; for it is Salvation here that they studied, Search the
Scriptures, says our Savior, Ioh. 5. And that is the motive, if there can be
any that may be thought in reason pressing enough, or if we do indeed think
so, For in them ye think to have Eternal life, And it is there to be found,
Christ is this Salvation, and that Eternal life, and he adds further it is they
(those Scriptures) that testify of me. These are the Golden mines in which
alone the abiding treasures of Eternity are to be found, and therefore worthy
all the digging, and pains we can bestow on them.

Besides their Industry in this enquiry, and search, there is here expressed
their ardent affection to the thing they Prophesied of, and their Longings, and
Wishes for its Accomplishment viz. The coming of Jesus Christ, the promised
Messiah, the top of all their desires, the great Hope and the Light of Israel.
No wonder they desired his day, that had so much joy in the seeing it: So far
off, as over the head almost of two thousand years, Faith overlooking them, and
foreseeing it so in Abraham, his heart danced for joy, Ioh. 8.36. Abraham saw
my day and Rejoiced.

And this is conceived to be the meaning of those Expressions in that mistical
Song, as they suit those times of the Jewish Church, breathing out her longings
for the coming of her Beloved, his speaking by the Prophets, were his voice as
afar off: but his incarnation was his coming near, and kissing his Church, with
the kisses of his mouth, as Cant. Chap. 1. Verse 1. and to omit other
expressions throughout the Song, the last Chapter Verse 1. is tender and
pathetical. Oh that thou were as my Brother, etc. and the last words of it,
Make have my Beloved, and be thou like a Roe, or a young Heart upon the Mountain
of Spices. And when this salvation came in the fullness of time, we see how
joyfully good old Simeon embraces it, and thought he had seen enough, and
therefore upon the sight desired to have his eyes closed. Now let thy Servant
depart in Peace, for my eyes have se^n thy salvation. Therefore our Savior
says to his Apostles. Math. 13.16. Blessed are your eyes for they see, for
many Prophets and righteous men have desired to see those things which ye see,
and have not seen them. This is he whom we disesteem and make so small account
of, being now so clearly Revealed that they studied, and sought, and wished so
much for, so many ages before.

Now the sucess is, in seeking they found the certainty, and the time of that
his coming, they sought out till they found, and then they prophesied of that
Salvation, and Grace, they searched what, and what manner of time, and the
Spirit did manifestly foretell it them.

They sought to know what manner of time it should come to pass, viz. In a time
of great distress, and bad Estate of the People, as all the Prophets testify,
and particularly that place Genesis 49.10. gives an express character of the time,
though there be some diversity of Exposition of the particular words, yet the
main sense is agreed on by all sound Interpreters, and the Chal. Parah. has it
expressly, that that Shiloh, is the Messiah.

And of his sufferings, and after glories they prophesied very clearly as Psalm.
22. Isa. 53. etc. And our Savior himself makes use of their testimony in both
these points, S. Luke 24.25, 26, 27.

Then there is the benefit of their search, and finding, in the extent of it,
in Verse 13. to the Believers in the Apostles times, and to the succeeding
Christian Church, and so to us in these days; but in some peculiar sense the
Prophets ministered to them of those times, wherein Christ did suffer, and enter
into glory; for that they were the first that enjoyed the accomplishment of
those Prophesies, they being fulfilled in their own days.

They knew well that the things they Prophesied were not to be fulfilled in
their own times, and therefore in their Prophesying concerning them, though
both themselves, and People of God that were contemporary with them did reap
the comfort of that Doctrine, and were by faith partakers of the same
Salvation, and so it was to themselves as well as to us, yet in regard of the
accomplishment, they knew it was not to themselves, it was not to be brought to
pass in their days, and therefore, speaking of the Glory of Christ's Kingdom,
they often foretell it for the Latter days, as their phrase is, And as we have
the things they Prophesied of, so we have this peculiar benefit of their
Prophesies, that their fuiting so perfectly with the event, and performance,
serves much to confirm our Christian Faith.

There is a foolish, and miserable way of verifying this, Men ministering the
Doctrine of Salvation to others, and not to themselves, carrying it all in
their heads, and tongues, and none of it in their hearts, not hearing it even
while they Preach it, reaching the Bread of Life to others, and eating none of
it themselves. And this the Apostle says, that he was most careful to avoid,
and therefore dealt severely with his body, that it might not this way endanger
his soul. I beat down my body, says he, and keep it in subjection, lest when I
have Preached to others I my self should be a Castaway. It Is not in this
sense, that the Prophets ministered to others, and not to themselves. No, they
had Joy and Comfort in the very hopes of the Redeemer to come, and the belief
of the things that any others had spoke, and that themselves spoke concerning
him, and thus the true Preachers of the Gospel though their Ministerial gifts,
are for the use of others, yet that Salvation they Preach, they lay hold on,
and partake of themselves, as your boxes wherein perfumes are kept for
Garments, and other uses, are themselves perfumed by keeping them.

We see how the Prophets Ministered it, as the great and never failing
Consolation of the Church in those days, in all their distresses it is a wonder
when they are foretelling either the sorrows and afflictions or temporal
restorement, and deliverances of that People of the Jews, what sudden outleaps
they will make to speak of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the days of the
Gospel, that who considers not the spirit they were moved by, would think it
were Incoherence, and Impertinency; but they knew well what they meant, that
those news were never unseasonable, nor besides the purpose, that the
sweetness of those thoughts, viz. The Consideration of the Messiah was able (to
such as belie'v'd it) to allay the bitterest distresses, and that the great
deliverance he was to work, was the top and sum of all deliverances. Thus
their Prophecies of him were present Comfort to themselves, and other believers
then, and further, were to serve for a clear evidence of the divine truth of
those Mysteries in the days of the Gospel in and after their fulfilling.

These sweet streams of their Doctrine do as the Rivers, they made their own
banks fertile, and pleasant as it ran by, and flowed still forward to after
Ages and by the Confluence of more such Prophecies grew greater as it went,
till it fell in with the main current of the Gospel in the New Testament, both
acted, and Preached by the great Prophet himself, whom they foretold to come,
and recorded by his Apostles and Evangelists, and thus united into one River,
clear as Crystal, This doctrine of Salvation in the Scriptures, has still
refreshed the City of God, his Church under the Gospel, and still shall do so,
till it empty it self into the Ocean of Eternity.

The first discovery we have of this stream nearest its source, the Eternal
purpose of divine mercy, is in that Promise which the Lord himself preached in
few words, to our first parents, that had newly made themselves, and their Race
miserable The seed of the Woman shall break the head of the serpent. Genesis 3.15.

The agreement of their Predictions with the things themselves, and the
preaching of the Apostles following, the other kind of Men employed in this
Salvation make up one Organ, or great Instrument, Tuned by the same hand, and
sounding by the same breath of the spirit of God, and that is expressed here,
as the common Authority of the Doctrine in both, and the cause of their
harmony, and agreement in it.

And all these extraordinary Gifts of the holy Ghost, the Calling of Prophets,
and Apostles, and Evangelists, and the ordinary Ministry of the Gospel by
pastors, and Teachers, tends to that great design, that God has in building
his Church; making up that great assembly of all the Elect, to enjoy and praise
him for all Eternity. Ephesians. 4.11. For this end sent he his Son out of his
bosom, and and for this end sends he forth his messengers to divulge that
salvation, that his Son has wrought, and sends down his spirit upon them, that
they may be fitted for so high a service. Those Cherubims wonder how guilty man
escapes their flaming swords, and Reenters paradise, The Angels see that their
Companions that fell are not restored, but their room filled up with the
spirits of just men, and they envy it not, which Mystery the Angels desire to
look into, and this is added in the close of these words for the extolling of
it.

The Angels look upon what they have seen already fulfilled with delight and
admiration, and what remains, namely, the full accomplishment of this great
work in the end of time, they look upon, with desire to see it finished, it is
not a slight glance they take of it, but they fix their eye, and look
steadfastly on it, viz. That mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh,
and it is added, seen of Angels.

The word made flesh draws the eyes of those glorious Spirits, and possesses
them with wonder to see the Almighty Godhead joined with the weakness of a
Man, yea, of an Infant. He that stretches forth the heavens, bound up in
swaddling clothes. And to pass all the wonders of his life, this is beyond all
admiration, that the Lord of Life, was subject to death, and that his Love, and
Rebellious mankind, moved him both to take on, and lay down that life.

It Is no wonder the Angels admire those things and delight to look upon them,
but it is strange that we do not so. They veiw them steadfastly, and we neglect
them, either we consider them not at all, or give them but a transient look,
half an eye. That which was the great business of the Prophets, and Apostles,
both for their own times, and to convey them to us, we regard not; and turn
our eyes to foolish wandering thoughts, which Angels are ashamed at. They are
not so concerned in this great mystery as we are, They are but mere beholders
in comparison of us, yea, they seem rather to be losers someway, that our
nature in it self inferior to theirs, is in Jesus Christ exalted above theirs.
Heb. 2.16. We bow down to the earth, and study, and grovell in it,, take into
the very bowels of it, and content our selves with the outside of the
unsearchable riches of Christ, and look not within it, but they having no will,
nor desir^, but for the glory of God, being pure flames of fire burning only
in love to him, are no less delighted then amazed with the bottomless wonders
of his wisdom, and goodness shining in the work of our Redemption.

It Is our shame, and our folly that we lose our selves, and our thoughts in
poor childish things, and trifle away our days we know not how, and let these
rich mysteries lie unregarded, they look up, upon the deity in it self with
continual admiration, but that they look down, to this mystery is another
wonder. We give them an ear in public, and in a cold formal way stop
Conscience's mouth, with some religious performances in private, and no more:
But to have deep and frequent thoughts, and to be ravished in the meditation of
our Lord Jesus once on the cross and now in glory, how few of us are acquainted
with this?

We see here excellent Company, and Examples, not only of the best of Men that
have been, but we have them fellow servants, and fellow-Students, if that can
persuade us, we may all study the same Lesson with the very Angels, and have
the same thoughts with them, this the soul does, that often entertains it self
with the delightful admiration of Jesus Christ, and the Redemption he has
wrought for us.

Verse. 13.
Wherefore Gird up the loins of your mind be sober and hope to the End, for the
grace that is to be brought unto you at the Revelation of Jesus Christ.
THe great error of Man's mind, and the cause of all his Errors of Life, is the
diverting of the soul from God, and turning down-ward to in feriour
confidences, and comforts; and this mischoyce is the very root of all our
miseries, therefore the maine end of the holy word of God, is, to untye the
hearts of Men from the world, and reduce them. To God as their only rest, and
solid comfort; and this is here the Apostles mark at which all the preceding
discourse aims, it all meets and terminates in this exhortation. Wherefore
gird up the loins of your mind etc.

In the words are those 3 things 1. the great stay, and comfort of the soul,
which the Apostle repeats, and represents to his afflicted brethren. 2. his
Exciting them to the right apprehension, and confident Expectation of it. 3.
the Inference of that Exhortation.

The matter of their comfort is, the grace which is brought to them at the
Revelation of Jesus Christ. some for grace read joy, having as it seems for
(...) read (...) the words are not more near one to an other, than the things
they signify. Grace and joy, but 'its most commonly thus read.

The estate of Grace, and that of glory are not only so inseparably connexed,
but so like one to the other, yea, so essentialy the same, that the same
expressions in scripture do often fit both of them, and so fit them, that it is
doubtful for which of the two to understand them, but the hazard is not great,
seeing they are so near, and so one, grace being glory begun, and glory grace
completed, both often called the Kingdom^ of God. So grace here brought to
them, is either the doctrine of grace in the Gospel, wherein Jesus Christ, is
revealed, and that Grace in him, for all the whole tenor of the Covenant of
Grace, and every Clause of it holds in him. His precious name runs throw it
all, it is the Grace of salvation to be fully perfected at the last, and
clearest Revelation of Jesus Christ, and for this rather I take it here, for
that the Apostles nearest foregoing words were concerning that, and it is set
up here as the object of hope, which though often put for faith, yet in its
proper notion, looks out to that which is to come.

This is the last act of Grace, and yet still it is called by it self, and not
turned into the name of merit, notwithstanding all the obedience, and all the
sufferings of the Saints that have gone before it, yea, even the salvation to
be revealed to them is called Grace* but it is needless to insist on this, for
certainly none that partake of Grace, will be of another mind, or ever admit
the mixture of the least notion of self deserving.

Though much dispute has been bestowed on this, and Questions multiplying in
the disputants hands, (as is usual in Controversies) one growing out of
another, yet truly, I think, the debate in this, to be but waste, it is not
only against the voice of the scriptures, and of Grace it self in the soul;
but even against sound Reason, to imagine any meriting, properly taken, in any
mere Creature at his Creators hands, who has given him his being of which gift
all his services, and obedience fall short, so that he can never come to be
upon even disengaged terms, much less to oblige a new, and deserve somewhat
further. besides, that same Grace by which any serves, and obeys God, is
likewise his own gift, as it is said, All things come of thee, and of thine own
have I given thee; both the ability, and the will of giving to him, is from
him, so that in these respects, not Angels; nor Man in Innocence could properly
merit at the hands of God, much less Man lost, redeemed again, and so coming
under the new obligation of Infinite Mercy. And this is so evident a truth,
that the learned and most ingenuous Jesuits, and Schoolmen have in diverse
passages of their writings acknowledged it, that there cannot be any
Compensation, and much less merit from the creature to God. but only in
relation to his own free purpose, and the tenor of his word, and Covenant,
which is inviolable, because he is unchangeable, and truth it self.

His first grace he gives freely, and no less freely the increases of it, and
with the same gracious hand sets on the Crown of glory upon all the Grace that
he has given before. It Is but the following forth of his own work, and
fulfilling his own thoughts of free Love, which love has no cause, but in
himself, and finds none worthy: But gives them all the worthiness they have,
and accepts of their Love, not as worthy in it self to be accepted, but because
he himself has wrought it in them, not only the first tastes, but the full
draught of the waters of life is freely given Reve. 22.17. nothing brought with
them but thirst.

That is to be brought] not that is brought, or that shall be brought, but if
we will render it strictly, it is, that is a bringing to you. That blessedness,
that Consummation of grace the Saints are hastening forward to, walking on in
their way wheresoever it lies indifferently, through honor, and dishonor,
through evil report, and good report. And as they are hastening to it, it is
hastn'ng to them in the course of time, every day brings it nearer to them than
before, and notwith standing all difficulties, and dangers in the way, they
that have their eye and hopes upon it, shall arrive at it, and it shall be
brought safe to their hand, all the malice of men and Devils shall not be able
to cut them short of this grace, that is a bringing to them against the day of
the Revelation of Jesus Christ.

At the Revelation of Jesus Christ.] This is repeated from the 7 th. Verse. and
it is a day of Revelation, a Revelation of the just judgment of God* Romans 2,
5. And thus it would be to all, were it not, that it is withal, the Revelation
of Jesus Christ; therefore is it a day of Grace, all Light, and blessedness to
them that are in him, because they shall appear in him, and if he be glorious,
they shall not be inglorious, and ashamed, indeed were our secret sins then to
be set before our own eyes, in their affrightfullest visage, and to be set open
to the view of Angels, and Men, and to the eye of divine Justice, and we lest
alone so revealed, who is there that could gather any comfort? and would not
rather have their thoughts filled with horror at the remembrance and
expectation of that day, and thus indeed all unbelieving and ungodly Men may
look upon it, and find it terrible, but to those that are shadowed under the
Robe of Righteous Jesus, yea that are made one with him, and shall partake of
his glory in his appearing, it is the sweetest, the most comfortable thought
that their souls can be entertained, and possessed withal, to remember this
glorious Revelation of their Redeem^r.

It Is their great grief here, not that themselves are hated, and vilified; but
that their Lord Jesus is so little known and therefore so much despised in the
world, he is veiled, and hid from the world, many Nations acknowledge him not
at all, and many of those that do in word confess, yet in deed deny him, that
have a form of Godliness and do not only want but mock and scoff the power of
it, and to such Christ is not known, his Excellencies are hid from their eyes,
now this glory of their Lord being tender to them that Love him, they rejoice
much in the consideration of this, that there is a day at hand, wherein he
shall appear in his bright, and full glory to all nations, and all shall be
forced to acknowledge him it shall be with out doubt, and unquestioned to all,
that here is the Messiah, the Redeemer, the Judge of the world.

And as it is his day of Revelation, 'its also the Revelation of all the
adopted sons of God in him, Romans 8.9. they are now accounted the refuse of the
world, exposed to all kind of comtempts, but then; the beams of Christ's glory
shall beautify them, and they shall be known for his 1 Ioh. 3^ 2. Col. 3, 4.

Next there is, The Exhortation. Hope to the end. The difference of these two
graces, faith and hope is so small, that the one is often taken for the other
in Scripture, it is but a diverse aspect of the same confidence, faith
apprehending the infallible truth of those divine Promises, of which Hope does
assuredly expect the accomplishment, and that is their truth, so that this
immediately results from the other^ This is the Anchor pitched within the vail
that keeps the soul firm against all the tossings on these swelling Seas, and
the winds and tempests that arise upon them. The firmest thing in this
Inferior world is a believing soul.

Faith establishes the heart on Jesus Christ, and Hopelifts it up, being on
that Rock over the head of all intervenient Dangers, Crosses, and Tentations,
and sees the glory and happiness that follows after them.

To the end] Or perfectly, and therefore the Christian seeks most earnestly,
and yet waits most patiently, Psalm. 130.6. Indeed this hope is perfect in
continuance, it is a hope unto the end, because it is perfect in its nature,
although imperfect in degree, sometimes doubtings intermixed with it in the
Christian soul, yet this is their infirmity, as the Psalmist speaks, not the
infirmity, and insufficiency of the object of their hope. Worldly hopes are in
their own nature imperfect, they do imply in their very being doubtfulness, and
wavering, because the things whereon they are built are inconstant, and
uncertain and full of deceit, and disappointments, how can that Hope be
immovable, that is built upon moving sands or quagmire. It Is that which is it
self unfixed, cannot give stability to any other thing resting on it, but
because the truth and goodness of the immutable God is the foundation of
spiritual hope, therefore it is assured, and like Mount Sion that cannot be
removed, and this is its perfection.

Now the Apostle exhorts his Brethren, to endeavor to have their hearts
possessed with as high a measure, and degree of this hope, as may be, seeing in
it self it is so perfect and firm, so assured an Hope, that they aspire to all
the assurance and perfection of it they can attain.

This Hope, as I conceive, is not only to have the habit of it strong in the
Soul, but to act it often, to be often turning that way; to view that
approaching day of Liberty. Lift up your heads for the day of your Redemption
draws nigh. Where this hope is often acted, it will grow strong, as all
habits do and where it is strong, it will work much, and delight to act often,
and will control both the doubtings and the other many impertinent thoughts of
the mind, and force them to yield the place to it: Certainly they that affect
that coming of Christ much, will look often out to it, we are usually hoping,
after other things, that do but offer themselves to draw us after them, and to
scorn us. What are the breasts of most of us, but so many nests of foolish
hopes, and fears intermixed, that entertain us day and night, and steal away
our precious hours from us, that might be laid out so gainfully upon the wise
and sweet thoughts of Eternity, and upon the blessed and assured hope of the
coming of our beloved Savior.

The other words of Exhortasion hereu^ed are subservient to this end, that this
hope may be the more perfect and firm, and is much after the same manner joined
by our Savior. Luke. 12.35. with the expectance and waiting for his coming,
and in this posture the Israelites eating the passover were expecting their
deliverance, so we our full and final freedom.

If you would have much of this, call off your affections from other things,
that they may be capable of much of it. The same eye cannot both look up to
Heaven, and down to earth at the same time; the more your affections are
trussed up, and disentangled from the world, the more expedite and active will
they be in this hope; the more sober they are, the less will they fill
themselves with the course delights of earth, the more room will there be in
them, and the more they shall be filled with this hope. It is great folly in
our spiritual warfare, to charge our selves superfluously. All fullness of one
thing hinders the receiving, and admittance of any other; especially of things
so opposite, as these fulnesses are opposed. Be not drunk with wine wherein is
excess but be ye filled with the Holy Ghost, says the Apostle, that is a
brutish fullness, makes a Man no Man, this Divine, makes him more than a Man,
'twere happy to be filled thus, as that it might be called a kind of
drunkenness, as it is was with the Apostles. Act. 2.

Be sober] Or Watch, the same word signifies both, and with good reason; for
you know the unsober cannot watch. Now though one main part of sobriety is that
which more properly and particularly bears this name, temperance in meat, and
drink, and against this, not only the purity, and spirtualness of Religion; but
even moral virtue inveighs as its special Enemy; yea nature it self, and they
that only naturally consider the body, and its interest of Life, and health,
find reason enough to cry down this base intemperance, which is so hateful by
its own deformity, and withal carries its punishment along with it. But this
sobriety is indeed most necessary for the preservation of grace, and spiritual
temper of the soul, and is here intended; yet I conceive it is not all that is
here meant, the word is more general, for the moderate and sober use of all
things worldly, as he says, Gird up the loins of your mind, so it is to be
understood, let your minds be sober, all your affections inwardly attempered to
your spiritual condition, not glutting your selves with fleshly, and perishing
delights of any kind, for the more you take in of these, the less you shall
have of spiritual comfort, and of this perfect hope. They that pour out
themselves upon present delights look not like strangers, and hopeful
expectants of another Life, and better pleasures.

And certainly the Captain of our Salvation will not own them for his
followers, that lie down to drink of these waters, but only such as in passant
take of them with their hand. As excessive eating or drinking makes the body
sickly, and lazy, fit for nothing, but sleep, and besots the mind, cloyes up
the way with filthy crudities through which the spirits should pass, bemires
them, and makes them move heavily as a coach in a deep way; thus does all
immoderate use of the world, and its delights wrong the soul in its spiritual
condition, makes it sickly and feeble, full of spiritual distempers, and
inactivity; benummes the graces of the spirit, and fills the soul with sleepy
vapors, makes it grow secure, and heavy in spiritual exercises, and obstructs
the way and motion of the spirit of God in the soul: therefore if you would be
spiritual, healthful, and vigorous, and enjoy much of the consolation of
heaven, be sparing, and sober in those of the earth, and what you abate of the
one shall be certainly made up in the other. Health, and a good constitution of
body is a more constant remaining pleasure then that of excess and momentany
pleasing of the palate, thus the comfort of this hope is a more refined, and
more abiding contentment than any is in the passing enjoyments of this world,
and it is a foolish bargain to exchange a drachme of the one for many pounds of
the other. Consider how pressingly the Apostle St. Paul reasons. 1 Cor. 9.25.
And take withal our Saviors exhortation. Be sober and watch, for ye know not
at what hour your Lord will come.

The double minded man (says S. James) is unstable in all his ways; although
the word signifies usually deceitfulness and dissimulation of mind, answering
to the Hebrew phrase of a heart and a heart: Yet here I conceive it has
another sense agreeable to the Apostles present discourse and scope; it is
doubtfulness, and unsettled wavering of mind.

It Is impossible that the course of Life can be any other but uneven, and
incompos'd, if the spring of it, the heart, whence are the issues of Life, be
so, a Man that is not agreed within, not of one mind with himself, although
there were nothing to trouble, nor alter him from without, that inward
commotion is a sufficient principle, and cause of inconstancy: How much more
then must he waver, when he is assaulted, and beat upon by outward oppositions
he is like the waves of the Sea, of himself ever fluctuating to and fro
according to the Natural Instability of that Element: and then being exposed to
the tossings of all the waves that arise.

It Is therefore in Religion a main thing to have the heart established, and
fixed in the belief, and hope of the great things we look for, this will beget
strength of resolution, and constancy in action, and in suffering too. And this
is here our Apostles great intent to ballast the souls of his Brethren with
this firm belief, that they might sail even, and steady in those Seas of
trouble. Wherefore (says he) if these things we have spoken be thus, if there
i^ indeed truth in them, and you believe it so, what remains then, but to
resolve for it upon any terms, to fit for the journey whatsoever be the
difficulties, and in them all to keep up the soul by that certain hope that
will not dissappoint us.

What he has said before, is as it were showing them some fruits, some
clusters of grapes of that promised Land, and this Exhortation is answerable to
Caleb's word there Number. 13. Seeing it is so good a Land, let us go up and
possess it, though there be fleshly objects, Sons of Anak, Giants of tentations
and afflictions, and sins to be overcome ere it be ours, yet it is well worth
all our labor, and our God has ascertained us of the victory, and given us by
his own word undoubted hope of possessing it.

That which he principally exhorts in this Verse, is the right placing and firm
continuing of our hope. When we Consider, how much of our Life is taken up this
way, in hoping for things we have not, and that even they who have most of what
others are desiring and pursuing; yet are still hoping for somewhat further,
and when Men have attained one thing, though it be something they promised
themselves to rest contented withal, yet presently upon obtaining it, Hope
begins to find out some new matter for it self. I say considering the
uncessant working of this passion throughout our life, it is of very much
concernment for us to give it a right object, and not still to be living in
vanity, and uncertainty. Here is then that for our hope to apply it self to,
after which it needs not change, nor can change without the greatest loss. Hope
for the Grace that is coming at the Revelation of Jesus Christ, bestow all your
hope on this, and recall it not. Hope perfectly and to the end.

The other part of the Exhortation relates to this as the main end, and in the
Original runs in this form, wherefore girding up the loins of your mind being
sober, hope, and, to the end hope may be the more perfect, and endure to the
end, and more like it self heavenly, your minds must be freed from the Earth,
that they may set for heaven, and this is expressed in two several words but
both meaning much the same thing; that temper of sobriety, and posture of being
girt, are no other, but the same removal of earthly mindedness, and incumbring
cares and desires of earthly things.

Gird up the loynes] The custom of those Countries was, that wearing long
garments they trussed them up for work or journey. Chastity is indeed a
Christian grace, and a great part of the souls freedom and spiritualness, and
fits it much for Divine things, yet I think it is not so particularly, and only
intended in this expression, as St Ierom and others take it, for, though the
girding of the loins seem to them to favor that sense, it is only in allusion
to the manner of girding up used, and besides the Apostle here makes it clear,
he meant somewhat else; for he says, the Loins of your minds, gather up your
affections that they hang not down to hinder you in your Race, and so in your
Hopes of obtaining, and do not only gather them up, but tie them up, that they
fall not down again, or if they do, be sure to gird them straiter then before,
thus be still as men for your journey, tending to another place. This is not
our home, nor the place of our rest, therefore our loins must be still girt
up, our affections kept from training and dragging down upon the Earth.

Men that are altogether earthly and profane, are so far from girding up the
loins of their mind, that they set them whole downwards, the very highest part
of their soul is glued to the Earth, and they are daily partakers of the
Serpents curse, they go on their Belly, and eat the dust they mind earthly
things. Now this disposition is inconsistent with Grace; but they that are in
some measure truly godly, though they grovel not so, yet may be somewhat guilty
of suffering their affections to fall too low, that is, too much conversant
with vanity, and further engaged than is meet to some things that are worldly,
and by this means abate of their heavenly hopes, and make them less perfect,
less clear and sensible to their souls.

And because they are most subject to take this Liberty in the fair and calm
weather of porsperity, God does often, and wisely, and mercifully cause rough
blasts of affl^ction to arise upon them to make them gather their loose
garments nearer to them and gird them closer.

Let us then remember our way, and where we are* and keep our garments girt up,
for we walk amidst thorns and briers, that, if we let them down, will entangle
and stop us, and possibly tear our garments, we walk through a world where
there is much mire of sinful pollutions, and therefore cannot but defile them,
and the crowd we are among will be ready to ^read on them, yea our own feet may
be entangled in them, and so make us stumble, and possibly fall. Our only
safest way is to gird up our affections wholly.

This perfect hope is enforced by the whole strain of i^: for well may we fix
our Hope on that happiness to which we are appointed in the Eternal Election
of God. Ver. 2. and born to it by our new birth. Ver. 3, 4. and preserved to it
by his almighty power. Ver. 5. and cannot be cut short of it by all the
afflictons and oppositions in the way, no nor so much as deprived by them of
our present Joy, and comfort in the assurance of it. Ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. And then
being taught the Greatness and Excellency of that blessed Salvation by the
doctrine of the prophets, and Apostles, and the admiration of Angels, all these
conspire to confirm our Hope, to make it perfect, and persevering to the End.

And we may also Learn by the foregoing doctrine that this is the place of our
trial and conflict, but the place of our rest is above, we must here have our
Loins girt, but when we come there, we may wear our long white Robes at their
full length without disturbance, for there is nothing there, but peace and
without danger of defilement, for no unclean thing is there, yea the streets of
that new Jerusalem ar^ paved with pure gold, to him then that has prepared
that City for us let us ever give praise.

Verses. 14.15, 16.
Verses, 14. As obedient Children not fashioning your selves according to the
former Lusts, in your Ignorance.

Verse. 15. But as he who has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner
of Conversation.

Verse. 16. Because it is written, be ye holy for I am holy.


THy word is a Lamp unto my feet, says David, and a Light unto my paths, not
only comfortable as Light is to the eyes, but withal directive, as a Lamp to
his feet. Thus here the Apostle does not only furnish consolation against
distress, but Exhorts and directs his Brethen in the way of Holiness, without
which the apprehension, and feeling, of those comforts cannot subsist.

This is no other but a clearer and fuller expression, and further pressing of
that sobriety, and spiritualness of mind, and life that he jointly exhorted
unto with that of perfect hope, ver. 13. as in separably connext with it; if
you would enjoy this Hope be not conform to the lust of your former ignorance,
but be holy.

There is no doctrine in the world either so pleasant, or so pure, as that of
Christianity. It Is matchless, both in sweetness, and holiness. The Faith, and
Hope of a Christa in have in them an abiding precious balm of comfort, but this
is never to be so lavished away, as to be poured into the puddle of an impure
Conscience. No, that were to lose it unworthily, As many as have this hope
purify themselves, even as he is pure, 1. Ioh. 3, 3. Here they are commanded to
be holy as he is holy, Acts. 15. Faith first purifies the heart, Empties it of
the love of sin, and then fills it with the Consolation of Christ, and hope of
Glory.

It Is a foolish misgrounded fear, and such as argues inexperience of the
nature, and workings of divine Grace, to imagine that the assured hope of
salvation will beget unholiness and presumptuous boldness in sin, and therefore
that the doctrine of that assurance is a doctrine of Licentiousness. Our
Apostle, we see is not so sharp sighted as these men think themseves, he
apprehends no such matter, but indeed supposes the contrary as unquestionable
he takes not assured hope, and holiness as Enemies, but joins them as nearest
friends, hope perfectly and be holy.

They are mutually strengthened, and increased each by the other, the more
assurance of salvation, the more holiness, the more delight in it, and study of
it as the only way to that End, and as labor is then most pleasant when we
are made surest it shall not be lost, nothing does make the soul so nimble, and
actitve in obedience as this oil of gladness, this assured hope of glory.
Again the more holiness is in the soul, the clearer always is t^is assurance,
as we see the face of the heavens best, when there are fewest clouds^ The
greatest affliction does not damp this hope so much, as the smallest sin; yea,
it may be the more lively and sensible to the soul by affliction, but by sin it
always suffers loss as the Experience of all Christians does certainly teach
them.

The Apostle exhorts to Obedience, and enforces it by a most persuasive
Reason. His exhortation is 1. Negative, not fashioning your selves. 2.
Positive, Be ye holy.

That which he would remove and separate them from is Lusts, This is in
Scripture the usual name of all the irregular, and sinful desires of the
heart, both the polluted habits of them, and their corrupt streams, both as
they are within, and outwardly vent themselves in the Lives of Men. The Apostle
St. John (1 Ioh. 2, 17.) calls it the Lust of the world, and Verse 15. love of
the world. And then Verse, 16. Branches it into those three, that are indeed
the base Anti-trinity that the world worships, the lust of the eyes, the lust
of the flesh, and the pride of Life.

The soul of Man unconverted, is no other but a den of impure Lusts, wherein
dwells, pride, Uncleanness Avarice, Malice etc, just as Babylon is described.
Revelation* 18.2. or as Isa. 13.21. Were a Man's eyes opened he would as much
abhor to remain with himself in that condition, as to dwell in a house full
of Snakes, and Serpents as S. Austin says, and the first part of conversion is
once to rid the soul of these noisome Inhabitants, for there is none at all
found naturally vacant and fr^e from them; thus the Apostle here expresses it
of the believers he wrote to, that these lusts were theirs before in their
Ignorance.

There is a truth in it, that all sin arises from some kind of Ignorance, or at
least, from present Inadvert^nce, and Inconsideration, turning away the mind
from the light, which therefore, for the time, is as if it were not, and is all
one with Ignorance in the ^ffect, and therefore the works of sin are all called
works of darkness; for were the true visage of sin seen at a full light,
undressed, and unpainted, it were impossiable while it so appeared, that any
one soul could be in love with it, but would rather fly it as hideous, and
abominable; but because the soul unrenewed is all darkness, therefore it is all
lust, and love of sin, no order in it, because no light, as at the first in the
world, confusion and darkness went together, and darkness was upon the face of
the deep, it is so in the soul, the more Ignorance the more abundance of Lusts.

That light that frees the soul and rescues it from the very kingdom of
darkness must be somewhat beyond that which nature can attain to; all the
light of Philosophy, natural, and moral is not sufficient, yea, the very
knowledge of the Law severed from Christ, serves not so to enlighten, and renew
the soul, as to free it from the darkness or Ignorance here spoke of; for our
Apostle writes to Jews, that knew the Law, and were instructed in it before
their conversion, yet he calls those times wherein Christ was unknown to them
the times of their Ignorance, though the stars shine never so bright, and the
moon with them in its full, yet they do not all together make it day, still
it is night till the sun appear. Therefore the Hebrew doctors upon that word of
Solomon's, Vanity of vanities all is vanity, say, vana etiam Lex, done^ venerit
Messiah. Therefore of him Zacharias says, that the day spring from on high
has visited us to give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of
death, and to guide our feet into the way of peace.

A natural Man may attain to very much acquired knowledge of the doctine of
Christ, and may discourse excellently of it, and yet still his soul be in the
chains of darkness, fast locked up under the Ignorance here mentioned, and so
still of a carnal mind in subjection to these lusts of Ignorance.

The saving light of faith is a beam of the sun of Righteousness himself, that
he sends into the soul, by which he makes it discern his incomparable beauties,
and by that sight alienates it from all those lusts, and desires that do then
appear to be what indeed they are, vileness, and filthiness it self, makes the
soul wonder at it self, how it could love such base trash so long, and so fully
resolves it now, on the choice of Jesus Christ the chief among ten thousands,
yea, the fairest of the Children of men, for that he is withal the only
begotten Son of God, the brightness of his fathers glory and the express image
of his Person. Heb. 1.3.

The soul once acquainted with him, can with disdain turn off all the base
solicitations, and importunities of sin, and command them away, that formerly
had command over it, though they plead former familiarities, and the interest
they once had in the heart of a Christian before it was enlightened, and
renewed. He can well tell them after his sight of Christ, that it is true,
while he knew no better then they were, he thought them lovely and pleasing,
but that one glance of the face of Jesus Christ, has turned them all into
extreme blackness, and deformity, that so soon as ever Christ appeared to him,
they straightway lost all their credit, and esteem in his heart, and have lost
it for ever, they need never look to recover it any more.

And 'its from this, that the Apostle enforces this dehortation, 'its true the
lusts, and vanities that are in request in the world were so with you, but
'twas when you were blind, they were the lusts of your Ignorance, but now you
know how ill they will suite with the light of that Gospel which you profess,
and that inward light of faith which is in the souls of such as be really
believers.

Therefore seeing you have renounced them, keep them still at that distance, do
not ever admit them more to lodge within you, that sure you cannot do, but do
not so much as for custom sake, and compliance with the world about you,
outwardly conform your selves to any of them, or make semblance to partake of
them as S. Paul says, have no more fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness; but rather reprove them, reprove them by your carriage, and let the
light of your holy lives discover their soulness.

2. Positive Be yea holy. This includes the former, the renouncing of the
lusts, and pollutions of the world, both in heart, and life; and adds farther,
filling of their room being cast out, with the beauti^ying graces of the spirit
of God, and the acting of those in their whole conversation in private, and
abroad, ^n conversing with themselves, and conversing with others, whether good
or bad, in a constant even cour^e, still like themselves, and like him who has
called them, for it is a most unseemly, and unpleasant thing to see a Man's life
full of ups and downs, one step like a Christian, and another like a wordling,
it cannot choose but both pain himself and disedifie others.

But as he that calls you is holy, Consider whose you are, and you cannot
deny, that it becomes you to be holy, your near Relation to the holy God, this
is expressed two ways, namely, As children, and as he which has called you.
Which is all one as if he had said, has begotten you again, the v^ry outward
vocation of those that profess Christ, presses holiness upon them, but the
inward far more, you were running to destruction in the way of sin, and there
was a voice together with the Gospel preached to your ear that spoke into your
heart and called you back from that path of death, to the way of holiness,
which is the only way of life. He has severed you from the mass of the
perfane world, and picked you out to be jewels for himself, he has set you
apart for this end, that you may be holy to him, as the Hebrew Word that
signifies holiness is from seting ^part, or fitting for a peculiar use, be not
then u^true to his design, he has not called you to uncleanness, but unto
holiness. These. 4. Therefore be ye holy, it is sacrilege for you to dispose of
your selves, after the impure manner of the world, and to apply your selves to
any profane use, whom God has consecrated to himself.

As children] This is no doubt relative to that which he spoke, Verse 3. by way
of thanksgiving, and that wherefore, of the 13. Verse, draws it down hither by
way of Exhortation. Seeing you are by a spiritual and new birth the Children of
so great, and good a Father, he commands you holi^^ss, be obedient Children, in
being holy, and seeing he himself is most holy, be like him as his Children, be
ye holy as he is holy.

As obedient Children] Opposite to that Ephesians. 2^ Sons of disobedience, or
unbelief, as the word may be rendered, and that is always the spring of
dissobedience. Sons of misperswasibleness, that will not be drawn, and
persuaded by the tenderest mercies of God. Now though this Hebrew manner of
speech Sons of obedience and disobedience signify no more but obedient or
disobedient Persons, yet it does signify it most emphatically and means a high
degree of obedience, or disobedience, these Sons of disobedience, Verse 2. are
likewise Sons of wrath, Verse 3.

Of all Children the Children of God are most obliged to Obedience, for he is
both the wisest, and the lovingest of fathers. And the sum of all his
Commands is that which is their glory and happiness, that they endeavor to be
like him, to resemble their heavenly father, be ye perfect as your heavenly
father is perfect, says our Savior. And here the Apostle citing out of the
Law, be ye holy for I am holy. Levit. 11.44. Law and Gospel agree in this. And
as Children that resemble their Fathers, as they grow up in years, they grow
the lik^r to them, thus the Children of God do increase in their resemblance,
and are dai^y more and more renewed after his Image. There is in them an innate
likeness by his Image impressed on them in their first renovation, and his
spirit dwelling within them, and there is a continuing increase of it, by their
pious imitation, and study of conformity which is here exhorted to.

The imitation of vicious Men, and the corrupt world is here forbid, the
imitation of Men's indifferent customs is base and servile, the imitation of
the virtues of good Men is commendable: but the imitation of this highest
pattern this Primitive goodness the most holy God, is the top of Excellency.
And it is well said: Summa Religionis est imitari quem colis. All of us offer
him some kind of worship, but few seriously study, and endeavor this blessed
conformity.

There is no question among those that profess themselves the People of God, a
select number, that are indeed his children, and bear his Image both in their
hearts and in their lives, this Impression of holiness is on themselves, and
their conversation; but with the most, a name and a form of godliness is all
they have for Religion. Alas! We speak of holiness, and we hear of it, and it
may be we commend it, but we act it not, or if we do, it is but acting of it, in
that sense the word is taken, for a personated acting, as on a stage in the
sight of Men, not as in the sight of our lovely God, lodging it in our hearts,
and from thence diffusing it into all our actions. A child is then truly like
his father, when not only his visage resembles him, but more his mind and
inward disposition. Thus are the true children of God, like their heavenly
father in their words, and in their actions; but most of all in heart.

It Is no matter though the profane world (that so hate God that it cannot
endure his Image) do mock and revile, it is thy honor as David said to be thus
more vile, in growing still more like unto him in holiness, and though the
civil Man count thy fashion a little odd, and too precise, it is because he
knows nothing above that model of goodness he has set himself, and therefore
approves of nothing beyond it, he knows not God, and therefore does not
discern, and esteem what is likest him. When Courtiers come down into the
Country, the common homebred People possibly think their habit strange, but
they care not for that, it is the fashion at Court. What need then the Godly be
so tender foreheaded, as to be out of countenance because the world looks on
holiness as a singularity, it is the only fashion in the highest Court, yea, of
the King of Kings himself.

For I am holy] As it will raise our endeavor high to look on the highest
pattern, so it will lay our thoughts low concerning our selves: Men compare
themselves with Men, and readily with the worst, and flatter themselves with
that comparative betterness; this is not the way to see our spots, to look into
the muddy streams of profane Men's lives; but look into the clear fountain of
the Word, and there we may both discern and wash them, and consider the
infinite holiness of God, and this will humble us to the dust, when Isaiah, saw
the glory of the Lord, and heard the Seraphims cry, holy, holy, holy, he cried
out of his own and the Peoples unholiness. Woe is me for I am undone, for I am
a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a People of unclean lips;
for mine eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hosts.

Verse 17.
And if ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons judges according
to every man's work, pass the time of your sojurning here in Fear.
THe tentations that meet a Christian in the world to turn him aside from the
straight way of obedience and holiness, are either such as present the hope of
some apparent good, to draw him from that way; or the fear of some evil to
drive and affright him from it: And therefore the word of God is much in
strengthening the Christian mind against these two, and it does it mainly by
possessing it, both with hopes, and fears of a higher nature, that do by far
weigh down the other.

The frequentest assaults of tentation are upon these two passions of the mind,
therefore they are mainly to be fortified and defended by a hope and fear
opposite to those that do assault us, and sufficiently strong to resist and
repel them.

These two therefore our Apostle here exhorts. 1. The hope of that glory that
the Gospel propounds, and so outbids all the proffers of the World, both in the
greatness, and the certainty of its promises. 2. The fear of God, the greatest
and justest judge, only worthy to be feared and reverenced; the highest anger
and enmity of all the world being less then nothing in comparison of his
smallest displeasure. There is here.

1. This fear. 2. The reason enforcing it. 3. The The term or continuance of it.

In fear.] But how suites this with the high discourse that went before of
perfect assured hope? of faith and Love; and Joy, yea, Joy unspeakable, and
glorious, arising out of these: How are all those excellencies fallen as it
were into a dungeon? when fear is mentioned after them, does not the Apostle
St. John say that true love casts out fear, and is it not more clearly
opposi^e to perfect or assured hope and to faith and joy?

If ye understand it aright, this is such a fear as does not prejudge, but
preserve those other graces and the comfort and joy that arises from them. And
they all agree so well with it, that they are naturally helps each to other.

It were superfluous to insist on the defining this passion of fear, and the
manifold distinctions of it, either with Philosophers or Divines. The fear here
recommended is out of question, a holy self suspicion and fear of offending
God, which may not only consist with assured hope of salvation, and with faith,
and love, and spiritual joy, but is their inseparable companion as all Divine
Graces are linkt together, as they said of their three graces, and as they
dwell together they grow or decrease together. The more a Christian believes,
and loves, and rejoices in the love of God, the more unwilling sure to
displease him, and if in danger the more afraid of it; and on the other side
this fear being the true principle of a wary and holy Conversation, flying sin,
and the occasions and tentations of sin, and resisting them when they set on,
is as a watch or guard, that keeps out the Enemies, and disturbers of the soul,
and so preserves its inward peace, keeps the assurance of faith and hope
unmolested, and that joy which they cause, and the intercourse and societies of
love betwixt the soul and her beloved uninterrupted; all which are then most in
danger when this fear abates, and falls to slumbring; for then readily some
notable sin or other breaks in, puts all into disorder; and for a time makes
those graces and the comfort of them to present feeling, as much to seek, as if
they were not there at all.

No wonder then if the Apostle having stirred up his Christian Brethren,
whatsoever be their estate in the World, to seek to be rich in those Jewels of
faith, and hope, and love, and spiritual joy, and then considering that they
travel amongst a world of Thieves and Robbers (no wonder I say) that he adds
this, advises them to give those their jewels in custody, under God, to this
trusty and watchful grace of godly fear; and having earnestly exhorted them to
holiness, he is very fitly particular in this fear, which makes up so great a
part of that holiness, that its often in Scripture named for it all.

Solomon calls it the beginning, or the top of wisdom; the word signifies both,
and it is both. The beginning of it is the beginning of wisdom, and the
progress and increase of it, is the increase of wisdom That hardy rashness that
many account valor is the companion of ignorance, and of all rashness boldness
to sin, is the most witless and foolish. There is in (...) as in all fear an
apprehension of an evil, whereof we are in danger. The evil is sin, and the
displeasure of God and punishing following upon sin. The Godly Man judges
wisely as the truth is, that sin is the greatest of evils and the cause of all
other evils, it is a transgression of the just Law of God, and so a provocation
of his just anger, and the cause of those punishments temporal and spiritual
and Eternal which he inflicts. And then considering how mighty he is to punish,
both the power and reach of his hand, that it is both most heavy and
unavoidable. All these things may and should concur to the working of this
fear.

There is (no doubt) a great difference betwixt those two kinds of fear that
are usually differenced by the name of servile and filial fear, but certainly
the most genuine fear of the Sons of God, that call him father, does not
exclude the consideration of his justice, and of the punishment of sin that his
justice inflicts; we see here it is used as the great motive of this fear, that
he judges every Man according to his works. And David in that Psalm wherein
he so much breaths forth those other sweet affections of love, and hope, and
delight in God, and in his Word, yet expresses this fear even of the justice
of God. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments.
Psalm. 119.120. The flesh is to be enaw'd with divine judgments, though the
higher and surer part of the soul is strongly and freely tied with the cords of
Love, temporal corrections indeed* they fear not so much in themselves, as that
Impression of wrath that may be upon them for their sins. Psalm. 6.1 etc. That
is the main matter of their fear, because their happiness is in his Love and
the light of his countenance, tha^'^ their life, they regard not how the world
look^^ upon them, care not who frown so he smile (...) and because no other
enemy nor evil in (...) can prejudge them in this but their own sin, (...) it
is that they fear most.

As the evil is great, so the Christian has great reason to fear in regard of
his danger of it, considering the multitude, and strength, and craft of his
enemies, and his own weakness and unskilfulness to resist them, and his sad
experience in being often foiled, reaches him that it is thus; he cannot be
ignorant of it, he finds how often his own resolves and purposes de^eive him.
Certainly a godly Man is sometimes driven to wonder at his own frailty and
unconstancy, what strange differences will be, betwixt him and himself, how
high and how delightful at some times are his thoughts of God, and the glory of
the life to come, and yet how easily at another time, base tentations will
bemire him, or at the least molest and vex him, and this keeps him in a
continual fear, and that fear in continual vigilance and circumspectness. When
he looks up to God and considers the truth of his Promises, and the sufficiency
of his grace and protection, and the Almighty strength of his Redeemer, these
things fill his soul with confidence and assurence: But when he turns his eye
downward again upon himself, and finds so much remaining corruption within, and
so many tentations and dangers and adversaries without, this forces him not
only to fear but to despair of himself; and it should do so, that his trust
in God may be the purer and more entire: That confidence in God will not make
him secure and presumptuous in himself, nor that fear of himself make him
diffident of God. This fear is not opposite to faith but high-mindedness and
presumption is, Romans 11.20. To a natural mind it would seem an odd kind of
reasoning that of the Apostle Phil. 2.12.13. It Is God that works in you to
will and to do of his good pleasure. Therefore (would he think) you may save a
labor you may sit still, and not work, or if you work you may work fearlesly,
being so sure of his help, but the Apostle is of another mind, his inference is
therefore Work out your own salvation and work it with fear and trembling.

But he that has assurance of Salvation why should he fear, if there is truth
in his assurance nothing can disappoint him, not sin it self; it is true, but it
is no less true, that if he do not fear to sin, there is no truth in his
assurance: it is not the assurance of faith, but the mispersuasion of a secure
and profane mind. 2. Suppose it so; that the sins of a godly Man cannot be such
as to cut him short of that salvation whereof he is assured, yet they may be
such as for a time will deprive him of that assurance, and not only remove the
comfort he has in that, but let in horrors, and anguish of conscience in its
stead; though a Believer is freed from hell (and we may overstrain this
assurance in our doctrine, beyond what the soberest and devoutest Men in the
world can ever find in themselves, though they will not trouble themselves to
contest and dispute with them that say they have it) so that his soul cannot
come there, yet some sins may bring as it were a piece of hell into his soul
for a time, and this is reason enough for any Christian in his right wits to be
afraid of sin. No man would willingly hazard himself upon a fall that may
break his leg, or some other bone, though he could be made sure, both that he
should not break his neck, or that his life were not at all in danger, and that
he should be perfectly cured; yet the pain, and trouble of such a hurt would
scarre him, and make him warry and fearful when he walks in danger. The broken
bones that David complains of after his fall, may work fear and warriness in
these that hear him, though they were ascertained of a like recovery.

This fear is not cowardice, it does not debase, but Elevates the mind, for it
drownes all lower fears, and begets true fortitude, and courage to encounter
all dangers, for a good Conscience, and the obeying of God. The Righteous is
bold as a Lion, he dares do any thing, but offend God; and to dare that is the
greatest folly, and baseness, and weakness in the world. From this fear have
sprung all the generous Resolutions, and patient sufferings of the Saints, and
Martyrs of God, because they durst not sin against him; therefore they durst be
imprisoned, and impoverished, and tortured, and dye for him. Thus the Prophet I
say sets carnal, and godly fear as opposite, and the one expelling the other.
Isa. 8.12.13. And our Savior, Luke 12.4. Fear not them that kill the body: But
fear him which after he has killed has power to cast into hell* yea, I say
unto you, fear him. fear not, but fear, and therefore fear, that you may not
fear. This fear is like the trembling that has been observed in some great
Courages before their battles, Moses was bold, and fearless in dealing with a
proud and wicked King, but when God appeared he said, says the Apostle, I
exceedingly fear, and quake. Heb. 12.21.

The Reason that we have here to persuade this Fear, is twofold. 1. Their
Relation to God. 2. Their Relation to the world.

First. To God as their Father, as their Judge, because you do call him father,
and profess your selves his Children, begotten again by him (for this looks
back to that) it becomes you as obedient Children to stand in awe, and fear to
offend him your father, and a father so full of Goodness, and tender love, but
as he is the best father, so consider, that he is withal, the greatest, and
justest judge, Judges according to every man's work.

God always sees, and discerns Men, and all their work, and judges, that is,
accounts of them as they are, and sometimes in this life declares, this his
judgment of them to their own Consciences, and in some to the view of others,
in visible punshments, and rewards: but the most solemn judgment of all is
reserved to that Great day which he has appointed Wherein he will judge the
world in righteousness by his son Jesus. Act. 17, 32.

There is here, The Sovereignty of this judge, the universality of his
Judgment, and the Equity of it. all must answer at his great Court, he is
supreme Judge of the world, he made it, and has therefore unquestionable right
to Judge it, he judges everyman; and it is a most righteous Judgment, which
has these two in it. First, an exact and perfect knowledge of all Men's works.
2. impartial judgment of them so known. This Second is expressed negatively,
by removing the crooked Rule which man's judgment often follows, 'its without
Consideration of those personal differences that men eye so much. And the
first is according to the work it self. Job. 34.19. He accepteh not the person
of princes, nor regards the rich more than the poor, and the reason is added,
therefore they are all the work of his hands. He made all the persons, and he
makes all those differences himself as it pleases him, therefore he does not
admire them as we do, no, nor at all regard them: we find very great odds
betwixt stately palaces, and poor Cottages, betwixt a Princes Robes, and a
Beggars Cloak; but to God, they are all one, all these petty differences vanish
in Comparison of his own greatness, Men are great, and small compared one with
another, but they all together amount to just nothing in respect of him: We
find high mountains and low valleys on this Earth, but compared with the vast
compass of the heavens it is all but as a point, and has no sensible greatness
at all.

Nor regards he any other differences to byasse his Judgment, from the works
of men, to their persons. You profess the true Religion, and call him Father;
but if you live devoid of his fear, and be disobedient Children, he will not
spare you because of that Relation, but rather punish you the more severely,
because you pretended to be his Children, and yet obeyed him not, therefore you
shall find him your Judge and an impartial Judge of your works. Remember
therefore that your father is this Judge, and fear to offend him: But then
indeed a Believer may look back to the other for comfort, that abuses it not to
a sinful security. He resolves thus willingly, I will not sin, because my
father is this just Judge; but for my frailties I will hope for mercy, because
the Judge is my father.

Their works, comprehends all actions, and words; yea, thoughts, and each work
entirely taken outside and inside together, for he sees all alike and judges
according to all together, he looks on the wheels, and paces within, as well as
on the handle without, and therefore ought we to fear the least crookedness of
our intentions in the best works; for if we entertain any such, and study not
singleness of heart this will cast all, though we pray, and hear the word, and
preach it, and live outwardly unblameably. And in that great Judgment, all
secret things shall be manifest; as they are always open to the eye of this
Judge, so he shall then open them before Men, and Angels: therefore let the
Remembrance, and frequent Consideration of this all-seeing Judge, and of that
great Judgment wean our hearts, and beget in us this fear. 2 Cor. 5.10.11. If
you would have confidence in that day, and not fear it when it comes, fear it
now, so as to avoid sin, for they that now tremble at it, shall then, when it
comes, lift up their faces with joy, and they that will not fear it now, shall
then be overwhelmed with fears, and terror, they shall have such a burden of
fear then, as that they shall account the hills and mountains lighter than it.

Pass the time of your Sojourning here in Fear, In this I conceive is Implied
another persuasive of this fear. You are Sojurners, and Strangers, as here the
word signifies, and a warry circumspect carriage becomes strangers, because
they are most exposed to wrongs and hard accidents: You are encompassed with
enemies and snares, how can you be secure in the midst of them? this is not
your rest, watchful fear becomes this your sojurning. Perfect peace, and
security is reserved for you at home, and that is the last term of this fear, it
continues all the time of this sojurning life, dies not before us, we and it
shall expire together.

Blessed is he that fears always says Solomon, in secret, and in society, in
his own house, and in Gods, we must hear the word with fear, and preach it with
fear, afraid to miscarry in our Intentions, and Manners. Serve the Lord with
fear: yea, in times of inward comfort, and joy; yet, rejoice with trembling.
Psa. 2.11. Not only when he feels most his own weakness, but when he finds
himself strongest: None so high advanced in Grace here below, as to be out of
need of this Grace; but when their sojourning shall be done, and they are come
home to their fathers house above, then no more fearing. No entry for dangers,
there and therefore no fear: A holy Reverence of the Majesty of God they shall
indeed have then most of all, as the Angels still have, because they shall see
him most clearly, and the more he is known, the more Revernc'd: but this Fear
that relates to danger shall then vanish: For there, there is neither sin, nor
sorrow for sin, nor tentation to sin, no more Conflicts; but after a full, and
final victory an Eternal peace an Everlasting Triumph. Not only fear; but
faith and hope do imply some Imperfection not consistent with that blessed
Estate, and therefore all of them having obtained their End, shall end; Faith
in sight, and Hope in possession, and fear in perfect safety, and Everlasting
Love and delight shall fill the whole soul in the vision of God.

Verse. 18.
For as much as ye know, that ye were not Redeemed with corruptible things, as
Silver, and Gold, from your vain Conversation received by tradition from your
fathers.
IT is Impossible for a Christian to give himself to conform with the world's
ungodliness, unless first, he forget who he is, and by what means he attained
to be what he is; therefore the Apostle persuading his Brethren no holiness,
puts them in mind of this, as the strongest incentive; not only have you the
Example of God set before you as your father, to beget in you the love of
holiness, being your liveliest resemblance of him; and the justice of God as
your Judge, to argue you into a pious fear of offending him; but Consider this,
that he is your Redeemer, he has bought out your liberty from sin, and the
world to be altogether his, and think on the price laid down in this Ransom,
and these out of question will prevail with you.

We have here The evil dissuaded from, viz. A vain Conversation, 2. the
dissuasion it self. 1. it is called Their vain Conversation. 2. Received by
tradition from their fathers. By this I conceive, is not only understood the
superstitions, and vain devices in Religion, that abounded amongst the Jews by
tradition, of which our Savior often reproved them while he was conversant
amongst them, as we find in the Gospel, and all this was meant, Verse, 14. by
the Lusts of their former ignorance: but generally all the corrupt, and sinful
customs of their lives: for it seems not so pertinent to his purpose exhorting
to Holiness of life, to speak of their superstitious* Traditions as their other
sinful habitudes, which are no less hereditary, and by the power of Example
traditionall; which by reason of their common Root in Man's sinful nature, do
so easily pass from parents to Children, Nature making their Example powerful,
and the Corruption of Nature giving i^ most power in that which is Evil. And
this is the rather mentioned to take away the force of it, and cut of that
influence which it might have had into their minds, there is a kind of
Conversation that the authority of your fathers pleads for* but Remember, that
it is that very thing from which you are delivered, and called to a new estate
and form of life, and have a new pattern set before you instead of that
corrupt Example.

It Is one great Error, not only in Religion and manners, but even in humane
science, that Men are ready to take things upon trust unexamin'd, from these
that went before them, partly out of easiness, and sparing the pains of
trial* partly out of a superstitious overesteem of their Authority: but the
chief Reason why corruptions in Religion, and practice of preceding ages, take
so much with posterity, is that before mentioned, the universal sympathy, and
agreement that those evils have with the corrupt Nature of Man,

The Prophet Ezekiel observes this particularly in the Jews, Chap. 20. Verse
24. That their eyes were after their Fathers Idols, Contrary to Gods express
forewarning, Verse 18. This was the great quarrel of the Heathens against the
Christian Religion in the Primitive times, that it was new, and unknown to
their Fathers, and the ancient Writers of those times are frequent in showing
the vanity of this exception, particularly Lactantius, Instit. lib. 2. cap. 7,
8. The same prejudice does the Church of Rome sing over continually against the
Reformed Religion, where was it before Luther, etc. But this is a foolish and
reasonless diversion from the search of Truth, because Error is more at hand,
or from the entertaining it being found, because falsehood is in possession.

As in Religion, so in the course and practice of Men's lives, the stream of sin
runs from one age into another, and every age makes it greater, adding somewhat
to what it receives, as Rivers grow in their course, by the accession of
Brooks that fall into them, and every Man when he is born falls like a drop
into this main current of Corruption, and so is carried with it down, and this
by reason of its strength, and his own nature which willingly dissolves into
it, and runs along with it. In thi^ is manifest the power of Divine Grace in a
Man's Conversion, that it severs him so powerfully from the profane World, and
gives him strength to run contrary to the great current of wickedness, that is
round about him, in his Parents possibly, and in his Kindred, and Friends, and
in the most of Men that he meets withal. The voice of God* that powerful word
of Effectual calling that he speaks in to the heart, makes a Man break through
all, and leave all to ^ollow God, as Abraham did, being called out from his
kindred and Fathers house, to journey toward the Land that God had promised
him. And this is that which is spoke to the Church, and to each believing soul
by the spirit of God. Forget also thine own People and thy Fathers house so
shall the King greatly delight in thy beauty, regard not what others think,
though thy nearest friends; but study only to please him, and then thou shall
please him indeed, do not deform thy face with looking out a squint to the
custom of the World, but look straight forward on him, and so thou shall be
beautiful in his eyes. When God calls a Man in a remarkable manner, his
profane Friends are all in a tumult, what needs this, to be more precise then
we, and all your Neighbors; But all this is a confused noise, that works
nothing on the heart that the Lord has touched; it must follow him, though by
trampling upon friends, and kindred if they lie in the way, we see how
powerfully a word from Christ drew his Disciples to leave all and follow him.

The Exhortation, is against all sinful and unholy conversation, by what
Authority, and Example soever recommended to us, the Apostles Reasons in those
words are strong, and pressing, there is one expressed in the very Name he
gives it, it is vain Conversation.

The mind of Man the Guide, and source of his actions, while it is Estranged
from God, is nothing but a forge of vanities, the Apostle St. Paul speaks this
of the Gentiles, that they became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish
heart was darkened, Romans 1.21. Their great Naturalists and Philosophers not
excepted, and the more they strove to play the wise men, the more they
befooled, themselves, thus likewise Ephesians. 4.17. and thus the Lord complains by
his Prophet of the extreme folly of his People, Isay. 44.20. and by Jeremy that
their bear^s are lodges of vain thoughts, and these are the true cause of a
vain Conversation.

The whole course of a Man's life out of Christ, is nothing but a continual
trading in Vanity, running a Circle of toil and labor, and reaping no profit
at all. This is the vanity of every natural Man's Conversation, that not only
others are not benefited by it, but it is fruitless to himself, there arises*
to him no solid good out of it. That is most truly vain, that attains not its
proper end: Now all a Man's endeavors aiming at his satisfaction, and
Contentment, that Conversation that gives him nothing of that, but removes him
further from it, is justly called vain conversation. What fruit had ye says
the Apostle, in those things whereof ye are now ashamed; Either count that
shame that (at the best) grows out of them, their fruit, or confess they have
none, therefore they are called the unfruitful works of darkness.

Let the Voluptuous Person say it out upon his deathbed, what pleasure, or
profit does then abide with him of all his former sinful delights. Let him tell
if there remain any thing of them all, but that, that he would gladly not have
to remain, the sting of an accusing Conscience, which is as lasting as the
delight of sin was short, and evanishing. Let the covetous, and ambitious,
declare freely, even those of them that have prospered most in their pursuit of
Riches, and Honor, what ease all their Possessions, or titles do then help
them to, whether their pains are the less, because their Chests are full, or
their Houses stately, or multitude of friends, and servants, waiting on them
with Hat and Knee, and if all these things cannot ease the body, how much less
can they quiet the mind. And therefore is it not true, that all pains in these
things, and the uneven ways into which they sometimes stepped aside to serve
those ends, and generally that all the ways of sin, wherein they have wearied
themselves, were vain Rollings, and tossings up and down, not tending to
acertain Haven of peace and happiness, it is a lamentable thing to be deluded
all a Life time with a false dream, Isa. 2.8.

You that are going on in the common Road of sin, although many, and possibly
your own Parents have trod it before you, and the greatest part of these you
now know are in it with you and keep you Company in it; yet be persuaded to
stop a little, and ask your selves, what it is you seek, or expect in the end
of it, would it not grieve any laboring Man to work hard all the day, and have
no wages to look for at night, it is a greater loss to wear out our whol^ life,
and in the evening of our days find nothing, but anguish and vexation. Let us
then think this, that so much of our life as is spent in the ways of sin, is
all lost fruitless and vain Conversation.

And in so far as the Apostle say here. You are redeemed from this
Conversation, this Imports it a ^ervile slavish Condition, as the other word
expresses it, to live fruitless. And this is the Madness of a sinner, that he
fancies Liberty in that which is the basest thraldom, as those poor frentique
Persons that are lying ragged* and bound in Chains, yet Imagine that they are
Kings, that their Irons are Chains of gold, their rags Robes, and their filthy
Lodge a Palace. As it is misery to be liable to the sentence of death, so it is
slavery to be subject to the dominion of sin, and he that is delivered from the
one is likewise set free from the other. There is one Redemption from both. He
that is redeemed from destruction by the blood of Christ, is likewise redeemed
from that vain, and unholy Conversation that lead^ to it. So Tit. 2.14. Our
Redeemer was anointed for this purpose, not to free the Captives from the
sentence of death, and yet leave them still in Prison, but to proclaim liberty
to them, and the opening of the Prison to those that are bound, Isa. 61.1.

You easily persuade your selves that Christ has died for you, and Redeemed
you from Hell, but you Consider not, that if it be so, he has likewise
Redeemed you from your vain Conversation, and both set you free from the
service of sin^* Certainly while you find not that, you can have no assurance
of the other, if the Chains of sin continue still upon you* for any thing you
can know, these Chains do bind you over to the other Chains of darkness, the
Apostle speaks of. Let us not delude our selves, if we find the love of sin,
and of the World work stronger in our hearts, than the love of Christ, we are
not as yet partakers of his Redemption.

But if we have indeed laid hold upon him, as our Redeemer, then are we
Redeemed from the service of sin, not only from the grossest Profaness, but
even from all kind of fruitless, and vain Conversation. And therefore ought to
stand fast in that Liberty and not entangle our selves again to any of our
former vanities.

Not redeemed with Corruptible things] From the high price of our Redemption
the Apostle does mainly enforce our Esteem of it, and the preservation of that
liberty so dearly bought, and the avoiding all that unholiness, and vain
conversation, from which we are freed by that Redemption. 1. He expresses it
negatively, not with corruptible things, (Oh foolish we, that hunt them, as if
they were Incorruptible* and Everlasting treasures) no, not the best of them,
these that are in highest account with Men, not with Silver and Gold, these are
not of any value at all toward the Ransom of Souls, they cannot buy off the
death of the Body, nor cannot purchase the continuance of temperal life, much
less can they reach to the worth of Spiritual and Eternal life. The precious
soul could not be redeemed but by blood, and by no blood but that of this
spotless Lamb Jesus Christ, who is God equal with the Father. And therefore his
Blood is called the blood of God. Act. 20. So that the Apostle may well call it
here precious, exceeding the whole World, and all things in it in value.
Therefore frustrate not the sufferings of Christ, if he shed his blood to
Redeem you from sin, be not false to his End.

As of a Lamb without blemish.] He is that great and everlasting Sacrifice that
gave value, and virtue to all the Sacrifices under the Law; their blood was of
no worth to the purging away of sin, but by Relation to his blood, and the Laws
concerning the choice of the Pascall Lamb, or other Lambs for Sacrifice, were
but obscure and imperfect shadows of his purity and perfections, who is the
undefiled Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World. A Lamb in
meekness, and silence, he opened not his mouth. Isa. 53.7. And in purity, here,
without spot or blemish. My well beloved, says the Spouse, is white and ruddy,
white in spotless Innocence, and red in suffering a bloody death.

For as much as ye know] It Is that must make all this effectual, the right
Knowledge, and due Consideration of it: Ye do know it already, but I would have
you know it better, more deeply and practically, turn it often over, be more in
the study, and meditation of it, there is work enough in it still for the
discerningest mind, it^ a mystery so deep, that you shall never reach the
bottom of it, and withal so useful, that you shall find always new profit by
it: Our folly is, we gape after new things and yet are in effect Ignorant of
the things we think we know best, that learned Apostle that knew so much, and
spoke so many tongues, yet I determined, says he, to know nothing among you,
save Jesus Christ and him Crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. And again he expresses this as
the top of his Ambition, that I may know him, and the power of his
Resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto
his death; That Conformity is this only knowledge. He that has his lusts
unmortified, and a heart unweaned from the World, though he know all the
history of the death, and sufferings of Jesus Christ, and can discourse well of
them, yet indeed he knows them not.

If you would increase much in holiness, and be strong against the Tentations
of sin, this is the only art of it, view much, and so seek to know much of the
death of Jesus Christ, Consider often at how high a ra^e we were redeemed from
sin, and provide this answer for all the enticements of sin, and the world*
except you can offer my soul something beyond that price, that was given for it
on the cross, I cannot hearken to you. Far be it from me (will a Christian say,
that considers this Redemption) that ever I should prefer a base lust, or any
thing in this World, or it all to him that gave himself to death for me, and
paid my Ransom with his blood: his matchless love has freed me from the
miserable Captivity of sin, and has for ever fastened me to the sweet yoke of
his Obedience: Let him alone to dwell and rule within me and let him never go
forth from my heart* who for my sake refused to come down from the Cross.

Verse. 20.
Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world; but was
manifest in these last times for you.
OF all those Considerations (and there are many) that may move Men to
Obedience, there is none that persuades both more sweetly, and strongly then
the sense of Gods goodness, and mercy toward Men, and amongst all the
Evidences of that, there is none like the sending, and giving of his Son for
Man's redemption, therefore the Apostle having mentioned that, insists further
in it, and in these words expresses the performance, and the Application of it.

1. The purpose, or Decree foreknown, but it is well rendered, fore ordained, for
this knowing is Decreeing, and there is little either solid truth or profit in
the distinguishing them,

We say usually, that where there is little wisdom there is much chance, and
comparitively amongst Men, some are far more foresighted, and of further Reach
then others, yet the wisest, and most provident Men, both wanting skill to
design all things a^ight, and power to act as they contrive, meet with many
unexpected Casualties, and often Disappointments in their undertakings, but
with God, where both wisdom, and power are infinite, there can be neither any
Chance, nor Resistance from without, nor any Imperfection at all in the
contrivance of things neither himself can give that cause to add or abate or
alter any thing in the frame of his purposes. The model of the whole world,
and of all the course of time was with him one and the same from all Etenity,
and whatsoever is brought to pass, is exactly answerable to that pattern, for
with him there is no change, nor shadow of turning. Iam. 1.17. There is
nothing dark to the father of lights, he sets at one view through all things,
and all ages, from the beginning of time to the end of it, yea, from Eternity
to Eternity. And this Inccomprehensible wisdom is too wonderful for us, we do
but childishly stammer, when we offer to speak of it.

It is no wonder that Men beat their own brains, and knock their heads one
against another, in the contest of their opinions to little purpose, in their
several Mouldings of Gods Decree. Is not this to cut, and square Gods thoughts
to ours, and Examine his Sovereign purposes, by the low principles of Humane
wisdom, how much more learned, then all such knowledge; is the Apostles
Ignorance, when he cries out, O the depth of the Riches, both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out. Romans 11.33. Why then should any man d^bate what place, in the
series of Gods decree, is to be assigned to this purpose of sending his son in
the flesh, Let us rather (seeing it is manifest that it was for the Redemption
of lost Mankind) admire that same Love of God to mankind that appears in that
purpose of our recovery by the word made flesh, that before Man had made
himself miserable, yea, before either he or the world was made this thought of
boundless love was in the bosom of God to send his son forth from thence, to
bring fallen Man out of misery and restore him to happiness and to do this not
only by taking on his nature* but the curse, to shift it off from us, that
were sunk under it, and to bear it himself, and by bearing it to take it away,
he laid on him the iniquity of us all, And to this he was appointed says the
Apostle. Heb. 3, 2.

Before the foundation of the world] This we understand by Faith, that the
world was framed by the word of God; Although the Learned probably think it
evincible by humane Reason, yet some of those that have gloried most in that,
and are reputed generally masters of Reason, have not seen it by that light,
therefore, that we may have a divine belief of it, we must learn it from, the
word of God and be persuaded of its truth by the spirit of God, that the whole
world, and all things in it, were drawn out of Nothing by his almighty power,
that is the only Eternal, and Increated being, and therefore the fountain and
source of being to all things*

Foundation*] In this word is cl^ar the Resemblance of the world to a building,
and such a building it is, as does evidence the greatness of him that framed
it, so spacious, Rich, and comely, so firm a foundation and raised to so high,
and stately a roof, and set it with variety of stars as with Jewels, therefore
called, as some conceive it, Psa. 8. the work of his fingers* to express the
curious artifice that appears in them. Though Naturalists can give the reason
of the earth's stability from its heaviness, which stays it necessarily in the
lowest part of the world* yet* that abates nothing our admiring the wisdom, and
power of God, in laying its foundation so, and establishing it for it is his
will that is the first cause of that its nature, and has appointed that to be
the property of its heaviness to fix it there, and therefore Job alledeges this
amongst the wonderful works of God, and evidences of his power that he hangs
the earth upon nothing.

Before there was Time, or place, or any Creature, God, the blessed Trinity,
was in himself (and as the Prophet speaks) inhabiting Eternity, completely
happy in himself; but intending to manifest, and communicate his goodness, he
gave beginning to the world, and to time with it, made all to set forth his
goodness, and the most excellent of his Creatures to contemplate, and enjoy it:
But amongst all the works that he intended before time, and in time effected,
this is the master piece, that is here said to be for^ordained the manifesting
of God in the flesh, for man's Redemption; and that by his son Jesus Chirst, as
the first born amonst many brethren. That those appointed for salvation should
be rescued from the common misery, and be made one mystical body whereof
Christ is the head, and so entitled to that Everlasting glory and happiness
that he has purchased for them.

This, I say, is the great work, wherein all those glorious attributes shine
jointly, the Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness, and Justice, and Mercy of God; as
in great Maps, or Pictures, you will see the border decor'd with Meadows, and
fountains, and flowers etc. Represented in it; but in the middle you have the
main design, thus is this foreordained Redemption amongst the works of God,
all his other works in the world, all the beauty of the Creatures, and the
succession of Ages, and things that come to pass in them, are but as the border
to this as the main piece: But as a foolish unskillfull beholder, not
discerning the excellency of the principal piece in such Maps, or Pictures
gazes only on the fair border, and goes no futher, thus do the greatest part
of us; our eyes are taken with the goodly show of the world and appearnce of
earthly things, but this great work of God, Christ foreordained, in time sent
for our Redemption, though it most deserves our attentive regard, yet we do not
view and consider it as we ought.

Was manifested in those last times for you.] This is the performance of that
purpose, he was manifested, both by his Incarnation, according to that word of
the Apostle St. Paul, Manifested in the flesh, etc. manifested by his
mavelous Works, and Doctrine, and by his Sufferings, and Death, and
Resurrection, and Ascension* by the sending down of the Holy Ghost according to
his promise, and by the preaching of the Gospel, in the fullness of time that
God had appointed, wherein all the prophecies that foretold his comeing, and
all the Types, and Ceremonies that prefigur'd him had their accomplishment.

The times of the Gospel are called the last times often by the Prophets; for
that the Jewish Priesthood, and Ceremonies being abolished, that which
succeeded was appointed by God to remain the same to the End of the world,
besides this, the time of our Saviors Incarnation may be called the last
tiemes, because, although it were not near the End of time by many ages, yet in
all probability it is much nearer the end of time then the beginning of it,
some resemble the time of his sufferings in the end of the world, to the
paschal Lamb in the Evening.

It was doubtless the (...) time, but not withstanding the Schoolmen offer at
reasons to prove the fitness of it, as their humor is to prove all things.
None dare I think conclude, but if God had so appointed, it might have been
either sooner, or later, and our safest is to rest in that, that it was the fit
time, because so it pleased him, and to seek no other Reason, why having
promised the Messiah so quickly after Man's fall, he deferred his coming about
Four Thousand years, and a great part of that time shut up the knowledge of
himself, and the true Religion, within the narrow compass of that one nation of
which Christ was to be born: Of these and such like things we can give no other
reason but that which he teaches us in a like case, even so Father because it
seems good unto thee.

For you*] The Apostle represents these things to those he writes to
particularly for their use, therefore he applies it to them, but without
prejudice of the Believers that went before, or of those that were to follow in
after ages. He that is here said to be foreappointed before the foundation of
the world, is therefore called* a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.
And as the virtue of his death looks backward to all preceding ages, whose
Faith and Sacrifices looked forward to it, so the same death is of force and
perpetual value to the End of the world* after he had offered one sacrifice
for sins for ever, says the Apostle, to the Heb^ He sat down on the right hand
of God* for by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified. The Cross on which he was extended points in the length of it to
Heaven and Earth reconciling them together, and in the breadth of it to former
and following ages, as being equally salvation to both.

If this appropriating, and peculiar interest in Jesus Christ is not happiness
without which it availes not that he was ordained from Eternity, and in Time
manifested, it is not the General contemplation, but the peculiar possession of
Christ that gives both solid Comfort and strong persuasion to Obedience, and
Holiness which is here the Apostle's particular sc^^e.

Verse 21.
Who by him do believe in God that raised him up from the dead, and gave him
glory that your Faith and hope might be in God.
NOW because it is Faith that gives the soul this particular title to Jesus
Christ, the Apostle adds that, to declare who he meant by You; (says he) who
by him do believe in God, etc.

Where we have. 1. The complete Object of Faith. 2. The Ground, or Warrant of
it. The object, God in Christ. The Ground or warrant, In that he raised him up
from the dead and gave him glory.

A Man may have (living out of Christ) yea, he must, he cannot choose but have a
conviction within him that there is a God, and further he may have, even out of
Christ, some kind of belief of those things that are spoken concerning God, but
to repose on God, as his God, and his Salvation which is indeed to believe in
him, this cannot be, but where Christ is the mids through which we look upon
God; for so long as we look upon God through our own Guiltiness, we can see
nothing, but his wrath, and apprehend him as an armed enemy, and be so far off
from resting on him, as our happiness, that the more we view it, it puts us
upon the more speed to fly from him, and to cry out, Who can dwell with
Everlasting burnings, and abide with a consuming fire: But our Savior taking
sin out of the way, put himself betwixt our sins, and God, and so makes a
wonderful change of our apprehension of him. When you look through a red
glass, the whole Heavens seem bloody: But through pure unco^our'd glass, you
receive the clear light, that is so refreshing and comfortable to behold: When
Sin unpardoned is betwixt, and we look on God through that, we can perceive
nothing but Anger, and Enmity in his Countenance: But make Christ once the
Medium, our pure Redeemer, and through him as clear transparent Glass, the
beams of Gods favorable Countenance shine in upon the soul, the Father cannot
look upon his wellbeloved son, but graciously and pleasingly. God looks on us
out of Christ, sees us rebels, and fit to be condemned, we look on God as being
just and powerful to punish us* but when Christ is betwixt, God looks on us in
him, as justified, and we look on God in him as pacified, and see the smiles of
his favorable countenance: Take Christ out, all is terrible; interpose him,
all is full of peace. Therefore set him always betwixt, and by him we shall
believe in God.

The warrant and ground of believing in God by him is this that God raised him
from the dead, and gave him glory, which evidences the full satisfaction of his
death, and in all that work both in his humiliation, and exaltation standing in
our room, we may repute it his as ours: if all is paid that could be exacted
of him, and therefore he set free from death, then are we acquitted and have
nothing to pay: If he was raised from the dead and exalted to glory then so
shall we, he has taken possession of that glory for us and we may judge our
selves possessed in it, already, because he our head possesses it. And this
the last words of the Verse confirm to us, in meaning this to be the very
purpose and end for which God having given him to death raised him up and gave
him glory, its for this end expressly that our faith and hope might be in God:
The last end is that we may have life and glory through him; the nearer end,
that in the mean while, till we attain them, we may have firm belief and hope
of them, and rest on God as the giver of them, and so in part enjoy them before
hand, and be upheld in our joy and conflicts by the comfort of them; and as St.
Steven in his vision, faith does in a spiritual way look through all the
visible heavens, and see Christ at the Fathers right hand, and is comforted by
that in the greatest troubles, though it were amidst a shower of stones, as he.
The comfort is no less than this, that being by faith made one with Christ, his
present glory wherein he ^its at the Fathers right hand is assurance to us,
that where he is we shall be also.

Verse 22.
Seeing ye have purified your Souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit,
unto unfeigned Love of the brethren; see that ye Love one another with a pure
heart fervently.
JEsus Christ is made unto us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification,
and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. It Is a known truth, and yet very needful to be
often represented to us, that Redemption and holiness are undivided Companions,
yea, that we are redeemed on purpose for this End, that we should be Holy. The
pressing of this, we see is here the Apostles scope, and having by that reason
enforced it in the general, he now takes that as concluded, and confessed, and
so makes use of it particularly to exhort that main Christian Grace of
brotherly love.

The Obedience, and holiness mentioned in the foregoing Verses, comprehends the
whole duties, and and frame of a Christian life toward God, and Men and having
urged that in the general, he specifies this Grace of mutual Christian Love, as
the great Evidence of their sincerity, and the truth of their Love to God: for
Men are subject to much hypocrisy this way, and deceive themselves if they
find themselves diligent in religious Exercises, they scarce once ask their
hearts, how they stand affected this way, Namely, in love to their Brethren.
They can come constantly to the Church, and pray, it may be, at home too, and
yet cannot find in their hearts to forgive an Injury.

As forgiving Injuries argues the truth of Piety, so it is that which makes all
converse both sweet and profitable, and besides it Graces, and commends Men,
and their holy profession to such as are without and strangers to it, yea, even
to their Enemies.

Therefore is it, that our Savior does so much recommend this to his
Disciples, and they to others as we see in all their Epistles.. He gives it
them as the very badge and Livery by which they should be known for his
followers, by this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye Love one
another. And St. Paul is frequent in exhorting and extolling this Grace Romans
12.10. and 13.8. 1 Cor. 1.13 Gal. 5.13. Ephesians. 4.2. and in many other places.
Colloss. 3.14. he calls it the bond of perfectness, that Grace which unites,
and binds all together. Our Apostle here, and often in this and the other
Epistle, and that beloved Disciple St. John who leaned on our Saviors breast,
drunk deep of that spring of Love that was here, and therefore it streams forth
so abundantly in his writings, they contain nothing so much as this divine
Doctrine of Love.

We have here 1. The due Qualifications of it^ 2. A Christians Obligation to it.

The Qualifications are three: Namely, sincerity, purity and fervency. The
sincerity expressed in the former clause of the Verse, unfeigned Love and
repeated again in the latter part, that it be with a pure heart, as the purity
is in fervency.

It appears that this dissimulation is a disease that is very incident in this
particular. The Apostle St. Paul has the same word, Romans 12.9. And the the
Apostle St. John to the same sense, 1 Ioh. 3.18. That it have that double
reality, which is opposed to double dissembled love, that it be Cordial, and
Effectual that the professing of it arise from truth of affection, and as much
as may be, be seconded with action; that both the heart, and the hand may be
more the seal of it than the tongue. Not Courtholy water, an empty noise of
Service, and affection, that fears nothing more than to be put upon trial.
Although thy Brother with whom thou conversest cannot, it may be, see through
thy false appearances, he that commands this Love looks most within, seeks it
there, and if he find it not there, hates them most that most pretend it; so
that art of dissembling, never so well studied, cannot pass in this Kings
Court, to whom all hearts are open, and all desires known. When after Variances
Men are brought to an agreement, they are much subject to this, rather to cover
their remaining malices with superficial verbal forgiveness, than to dislodge
them, and free the heart of them, this is a poor self deceit, as the
Philosopher said to him that being ashamed that he was espied by him in a
Tavern in the outer Room withdrew himself to the inner, he called after him,
that's not the way out, the more you go that way you will be the further within
it. When hatreds upon admonition are not thrown out, but retire inward to hide
themselves, they grow deeper, and stronger than before, and those constrained
semblances of reconcilement are but a false healing, do but skin it over, and
therefore usually it breaks forth worse again.

How few are there that have truly maliceless hearts, and find this entire
upright affection toward their Brethren meeting them in their whole
Conversation, this Law of love deeply impressed on their hearts, and from
thence expressed in their words, and actions, and that is unfeigned love as
real to their Brethren as to themselves.

2. It must be pure, from a pure heart, this is not all one with the former as
some take it: It Is true doubleness, and hypocrisy is an impurity, and a great
one, but all impurity is not doubleness, one may really mean that friendship,
and affection he expresses and yet it may be most contrary to that which is
here required, because impure; such a brotherly Love, as that of Simeon and
Levi brethen in Iniquity as the expressing them brethren Genesis 49. is taken to
mean. When hearts are cemented together by impurity it self, by ungodly
conversation and society in sin, as in uncleanness, or drunkenness, etc. This
is a swinish fraternity, and friendship that is contracted as it were by
wallowing in the same mire, call it good fellowship or what you will, all the
fruit that in the end can be expected out of unholy friendliness, and
fellowship in sinning together, is to be tormented together, and add each to
the torment of another.

The mutual Love of Christians must be pure, arising from such causes as are
pure and spiritual, from the sense of our Savior's Command, and of his
example: For he himself joins that with it. A new Commandment give I you,
says he, that as I have loved you so you also love one another. They that are
indeed Lovers of God they are united, by that their hearts meet in him, as in
one center. They cannot but love one another; where a godly Man sees his
Fathers Image, he is forced to love it, he he loves those he perceives Godly,
so as to delight in them, because that Image is in them, and those that appear
destitute of it, he loves them so, as to wish them partakers of that Image. And
this is all for God, he loves Amicum in Deo and inimicum propter Deum. That is,
he loves a friend in God, and an Enemy for God. And as the Christians love is
pure in its Cause, so in its Effects, and Exercise, his society, and converse
with any, tends mainly to this, that he may mu^ually help, and be helped in the
knowledge, and love of God, desires most, that he and his brethren may jointly
mind their journey heavenwards, and further one another in their way to the
full Enjoyment of God. And this is truly the love of a pure heart, that both
begins and ends in God.

Fervently] Not after a cold indifferent manner. Let the Love of your Brethren
be as a fire within you, consuming that selfishness that is so contrary to it,
and is so natural to Men, let it set your thoughts on work to study how to do
others good, let your love be an active Love, intense within you, and extending
it self in doing good to the souls, and bodies of your Brethren as they need,
and you are able, Alium re, alium concilio, alium gratia. as Sen. de benef.
Lib. 1. cap. 2.

It is self-love that contracts the heart, and shuts out all other Love both
of God and Men, save only so far as our own Interest carries, and that is still
self-love: But the Love of God dilates the heart, purifies Love, and extends it
to all Men, but after a special manner directs it to those that are more
peculiarly beloved of him, and that is hero the particular love required.

Love of the Brethren] In this is Implied our Obligation to it after a special
manner, to love those of the household of faith, because they are our Brethren.
This concludes not only, as Abraham said that there ought to be no strife; but
it binds most strongly to this sincere and pure and fervent love; and therefore
the Apostle in the next Verse repeats expressly the Doctrine of the mysterious
New Birth, and explains it more fully, which he had mentioned in the entrance
of the Epistle and again referred to it, Verse 14, 17.

There is in this fervent Love, sympathy with the griefs of our Brethren,
desire and endeavor to help them, bearing their Infirmities, and recovering
them too, if it may be; raising them when they fall, admonishing and reproving
them as is needful, sometimes sharply, and yet still in Love, Rejoicing in
their good, in their Gifts, and Graces, so far from envying them, that we be
glad as if they were our own, there is the same blood running in their veins,
you have the same Father, and the same spirit within you, and the same Jesus
Christ the head of that glorious fraternity, the first born among many
Brethren, of which the Apostle says, Ephesians. 1.10. that he has, recollected into
one, all things in heaven and in earth. The word is, gathered them into one
head. And so suits very fitly to express that our union in him, in whom, says
he, in that same Epistle c. 4.16. The whole body is fitly compacted together,
and adds that which agrees to our purpose, that this body grows up and edifies
it self in love. All the members receive spirits from the same head and are
useful and serviceable one to another, and to the whole body. Thus these
Brethren receiving of the same spirit from their head Christ, are most strongly
bent to the good one of another. If there be but a thorn in the Foot, the Back
boweth, the Head stoops down, the Eyes look, the Hands reach to it, and
endeavor its help, and case. In a word, all the members partake of the good,
and evil one of another. Now by how much this body is more spiritual, and
lively, so much the stronger must the union and love of the parts of it be each
to other. You are brethren by the same new birth, and born to the same
Inheritance, and such an one as shall not be an Apple of strife amongst you, to
beget debates and contentions. No, it is enough for all, and none shall prejudge
another, but you shall have joy in the happiness one of another, seeing you
shall then be perfect in love, all harmony, no difference in judgment, nor
affection, all your harps tuned to the same new Song, which you shall sing for
ever, let that love begin here which shall never end.

And this same union (I conceive) is likewise pressed in the first words of the
verse, seeing you are partakers of that work of sanctification by the same
word, and the same spirit that works it in all the faithful, and by that are
called, and incorporate into that fraternity; therefore live in it and like it.
You are purified to it, therefore love one another after that same manner
purely, Let the profane world scoff that name of Brethren, you will not be so
foolish as to be scorned out of it, being so honorable, and happy, and the day
is at hand wherein those that scoff you, would give much more than all that
the best of them ever possessed in the world to be admitted into your number.

Seeing you have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit]
Here is. 1. The chief seat, or subject of the work of sanctification, the Soul.
2. The subordinate means, Truth. 3. The Nature of it, obeying of truth. 4. The
chief worker of it, The Holy Spirit.

For the first,] It Is no doubt a work that goes through the whole man, renews
and purifies all. Heb. 10.22. 2 Cor. 7.1. But because it purifies the soul,
therefore it is, that does purify all. There begins impurity, Mat. 15. not
only evil thoughts, but all evil actions come forth from the heart, which is
there all one with the soul, and therefore this purifying begins there, makes
the tree good that the fruit may be good. it is not so much external
performances that are the difference of Men, as their inward temper, we meet
here in the same place, and all partake of the same word, and prayer. But how
wide a difference is there in Gods eye, betwixt an unwash'd profane heart, in
the same exercise, and a soul purified in some measure in obeying the truth,
and desirous to be further purified by further obeying it.

2. That which is the subordinate means of this purity is the Truth, or the
word of God. it is truth, and pure in it self, and begets truth, and purity in
the heart, by teaching it concerning the holy and pure nature of God, showing
it, and his holy will, which is to us the rule of purity. And by representing
Jesus Christ unto us as the fountain of our purity, and Renovation, from whose
fullness we may receive grace for grace.

3. The nature of this work, that wherein the very being of this purifying
consists, is, the Receiving, or Obeying of this Truth So Gal. 3.1. Where it is
put for right believing. The chief point of obedience is believing, the proper
obedience to Truth is, to give credit to it; and this divine belief does
necessarily bring the whole soul into obedience, and conformity to that pure
Truth, which is in the word, and so the very purifying, and renewing of the
soul is this obedience, of faith, as unbelief is its chief impurity and
disobedience, therefore Act. 15.9. faith is said to purify the heart.

4. The chief worker of this sanctification is the Holy spirit of God, they are
said here to purify themselves. For it is certain, and undeniable that the soul
it self does act in believing, or obeying the truth, but not of it self* it is
not the first principle of motion. They purify their souls, but it is by the
spirit. They do it by his enlivening power, and a purifying virtue recevied
from him, Faith, or obeying the truth works this purity: But the Holy Ghost
works that faith, as in the forecited place, God is said to purify their
hearts by faith. Verse, 8. He does that by giving them the Holy Ghost. The
truth is pure, and purifying, yet can it not of it self purify the soul, but
by the obeying or believing it, and the soul cannot obey, or believe, but by
the spirit, which works in it that faith, and by that faith purifies it, and
works Love in it, 'its the Impurity and Earthliness of Men's minds that is the
great cause of disu^ion, and disaffection amongst them, and of all their
stri^es. Iam. 4.1.

This spirit is that fire that refines, and purifies the soul from the dross of
earthly desires that possess it, and sublimates it to the love of God, and of
his Saints because they are his, and are purified by the same spirit. It Is the
property of fire to draw together things of the same kind, the outward fire of
Enmities, and persecution that are kindled against the godly by the world, does
somewhat, and if it were more considered by them would do more in this
knitting their hearts closer one to another, but it is this inward pure and
purifying fire of the Holy Ghost that does most powerfully unite them.

The true reason why there is so little truth of this Christian mutual Love
amongst those that are called Christians, is, because there is so little of
this purifying Obedience to the truth whence it flows, Faith unfeigned would
beget this Love unfeigned, men may exhort to them both, but they require the
hand of God to work them in the heart.

Verse 23.
Being borne again not of Corruptible seed: But of Incorruptible, by the word
of God, which lives and abides for ever.
THE two things that make up the Apostles Exhortation, are the very sum of a
Christians duty to walk as obedient children toward God, and loving brethen
one toward another: And that it may yet have the deeper impression he here
represents to them anew, that new birth he mentioned before, by which they are
the children of God, and so brethren.

We shall first speak of this Regeneration. And then of the Seed. This is the
great dignity of believers, that they are the sons of God Io. 1.12. and the
great Evidence of the love of God, that he has bestowed this dignity on them 1
Io. 3.1. For they are no way needful to him* he had from Eternity a Son
perf^ctly like himself, the character of his person, and one Spirit proceeding
from both, and there is no Creation, neither the first, nor the second, can add
any thing to those, and their happiness, it is most true of that blessed
Trinity. Satis amplum alter alterj Theatrum sumus. But the gracious purpose of
God, to impart his goodness appears in this, that he has made himself such a
multitude of sons, not only Angels, that are so called, but man, a little
lower than they in nature* yet dignified with this name in his Creation, St.
Luke, 3.38. Which was the Son of Adam, which was the son of God. He had not
only the Impression of Gods footsteps (as they speak) which all the Creatures
have, but of his Image; and most of all in this is his rich Grace magnified,
that sin having defaced that Image, and so degraded Man from his honor, and
divested him of that title of sonship, and stamped our polluted nature with the
marks of vileness and bondage, yea, with the very Image of Satan, Rebellion,
and Enmity against God; that out of Mankind thus ruined, and degenerated, God
should raise to himself a new Race, and Generation of sons.

For this design was the word made flesh, Io. 1. The son made Man, to make men
the sons of God, and it is by him, alone we are restored to this, they that
receive him, receive with him, and in him, this privilege Verse. 12. And
therefore it is a sonship by Adoption, and is so called in scripture, in
difference from his Eternal, and Ineffable Generation, who is, and that was
the only begotten son of God, yet that we may know that this divine adoption
is not a mere outward Relative Name, as that of men; The sonship of the Saints
is here, and often elsewhere in scripture expressed by new Generation, and new
birth. They are begotten of God. Io. 1.13. 1. Io. 2.29. There is a new being, a
spiritual life communicated to them, they have in them of their Fathers
spirit, and this is derived to them through Christ, and therefore called his
spirit. Gal. 4.6. They are not only accounted of the family of God by
Adoption, but by this new birth they are indeed his Children, partakers of the
divine nature as our Apostle expresses it.

Now though it be easy to speak, and hear the words of this Doctrine, yet the
truth it self that is in it, is so high and mysterious, that it is altogether
impossible without a portion of this new nature to conceive of it. Corrupt
nature cannot understand it, what wonder that there is nothing of it in the
subtilest Schools of Philosophers, when a very doctor in Israel mistook it
grossly. Io. 3. It is indeed a great mystery, and he that was the sublimest of
all the Evangelist, and therefore called the Divine, the soaring Eagle (as they
compare him) he is more abundant in this subject than the rest.

And the most profitable way of considering this Regeneration, and Sonship, is
certainly to follow the light of those holy writings, and not to jangle in
disputes about the order, and manner of it, of which though somewhat may be
profitably said, and safely, Namely, so much as the scripture speaks, yet much
that is spoke of it, and debated by many, is but an useless expense of time and
pains. What those previous dispositions are and how far they go, and where is
the march, or point of difference betwixt them and the infusion of spiritual
life, I conceive not so easily determinable.

If Naturalists, and Physicians cannot agree upon the order of ^ormation of the
body's parts in the womb, how much less can we be peremptory in the other* If
there be so many wonders (as indeed there be) in the natural structure and
frame of Man, how much richer in wonders must this divine and supernatural
Generation be, see how David speaks of the former Psalm. 14.15. Things
spiritual being more refined than Material things their workmanship must be
far more wonderful and curious. But then it must be with a spiritual eye.
There is an unspeakable luster and beauty of the new Creature, by the mixture
of all divine Graces, each setting off another, as so many rich several
colors in embroidery, but who can trace that invisible hand that works it, so
as to determine of the order, and to say, which was first, which second, and so
on, whether, Faith, or Repentance, and all Graces etc. This is certain, that
these and all graces do inseparably make up the same work, and are all in the
new formation of every soul that is born again.

If the ways of Gods universal providence be untraceable, then most of all
the workings of his Grace in a secret unperceivable way in this new birth: He
gives this spiritual being, as the dew which is silently and insensibly
formed, and this Generation of the sons of God compared to it by the Psalmist;
they have this original from heaven as the dew; Io. 3.3. Except a man be born
from above, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. And it is the peculiar work
of the spirit of God as he himself speaks of the dew to Job. Job. 38.28. has
the Rain a Father, or who has begotten the drops of the dew. The sharpest
wits are to seek in the knowledge and discovery of it, as Job speaks of a
way that no fowl knows, and which the vultures eye has not seen, Job. 28.7.

To contest it much how in this Regeneration he works upon the will, and renews
it, is to little purpose providing this be granted, that it is in his power to
Regenerate, and Renew a Man at his pleasure: And how is it possible not to
grant this? unless we will run into that Error to think, that God has made a
Creature too hard for himself to Rule, or has willingly exempted it, and shall
the works of the Almighty, and of all others, especially this work wherein he
glories most, fail in his hand, and remain Imperfect? shall there be any
abortive births whereof God is the father? shall I bring to the birth (says
he) and not cause to bring forth? No, no sinner so dead but there is virtue in
his hand to revive out of the very stones. Tho the most impenitent hearts are
as stones within them, yet he can make of them children to Abraham, He can digg
out the heart of stone, and put a heart of flesh in its place, otherwise he
would not have made such a promise. Io. 1.13. Not of flesh nor of the will of
Man, but of God. If his sovereign will is not a sufficient principle of this
Regeneration why then says the Apostle, St. James Of his own will begat he us,
and he adds the subordinate Cause, by the word of truth, which is here called
the Immortal seed of this new birth.

Therefore it is, that the Lord has appointed the continuance of the Ministry
of this word, to the end that his Church may be still fruitful bringing forth
sons unto him. That the Assemblies of his people may be like flocks of sheep
coming up from the washing, none harren amongst them.

Though the Ministers of this word, by reason of their employment in dispensing
it, have by the Scriptures the Relation of Parents imparted to them, which is
an exceeding great dignity for them as they are called co-workers with God. And
the same Apostle that writes so calls the Galatians his little Children of whom
he traveled in birth again till Christ were formed in them. and the Ministers
of God have often very much pain in this travel, yet the privilege of the
Father of spirits remains untouched, which is effectually to beget again these
same Spirits which he creates, and to make that seed of the word fruitful that
way, where, and when he will. The Preacher of the Word be he never so powerful
can cast this seed only into the Ear, his hand reaches no further, and the
hearer by his attention may convey it into his head, but it is the Supreme
Father, and Teacher above that carries it in to the heart, the only soil
wherein it proves lively and fruitful. One Man cannot reach the heart of
another, how should he then renew its fruitfulness? If natural births has been
always acknowledged to belong to Gods prerogative, Psalm. 127.3. Lo Children
are an heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his reward, And so
Jacob answered wisely to his Wife's foolish passion, am I in Gods stead, how
much more is this new birth wholly dependant on his hand.

But though this word cannot beget without him, yet it is by this Word that he
begets, and ordinarily not without it. it is true that the substantial Eternal
word is to us (as we said) the spring of this New birth, and life, the head
from whom the spirits of this supernatural life flow, but that by the Word here
is meant the Gospel the Apostle puts ou^ of doubt, Verse last, and this is the
Word which by the Gospel is preached unto you. Therefore it is indeed that this
Word is thus the seed of this New birth, because it contains and declares that
other word, the Son of God as our life. The word is spoken in common, and so is
the same to all hearers, but then all being naturally shut against it, God does
by his own hand open some hearts to receive it, and mixes it with faith, and
those it renews, and restores in them the Image of God, draws the traits of
it anew, and makes them the Sons of God. My Doctrine shall drop as the dew
says, Moses, the word as a heavenly dew not falling beside, but dropped in to
the heart by the hand of Gods own spirit makes it all become spiri^ual and
heavenly, and turns it into one of those drops of dew that the Children of God
are compared to. Psalm. 110. Thou have the dew of thy youth.

The natural estate of the soul is darkness, and the word as a divine light
shining into it transforms the soul into its own nature; that as the word is
called Light, so is the soul renewed by it, ye were darkness but now are ye,
not only enlightn'd, but light in the Lord. All the evils of the natural mind,
are often comprised under the name of darkness, and Error, and therefore the
whole work of conversion likewise signified by light and truth, he begat us by
the word of truth. So 2 Cor. 4 6. alluding to the first fiat Lux, or Let there
^e Light, in the Creation: The word brought within the soul by the spirit lets
it see its own necessity, and Christ's sufficiency, convinces it thoroughly, and
causes it to cast over it self upon him for life, and this is the very
begetting of it again to Eternal life,

So that this Efficacy of the word to prove successful seed, does not hang upon
the different abilities of Preachers, their more or less Rhetoric, or
Learning. It Is true Eloquence has a great advantage in civil, and moral things
to persuade, and and to draw the hearers by the Ears, almost which way it will:
but in this spiritual work to revive a soul, to beget it anew, the Influence of
heaven is the main, there is no way so common and plain (being warranted by God
in the delivery of saving truth) but the spirit of God can revive the soul by
it, and all the skilful, and most autoritative way, yea, being withal very
spiritual, yet may effect nothing, because left alone to it self: One word of
holy Scripture, or of truth conform to it, may be the principle of Regeneration
to him that has heard multitudes of excellent Sermons, and has often read the
whole Bible, and still unchanged, if the spirit of God preach that one or any
such word to the Soul, God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever should believe in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. It will be cast down with the fear of perishing, and driven
out of it self by that, and raised up and drawn to Jesus Christ by the hope of
everlasting life, it will believe on him, that it may have life, and be
inflamed with the Love of God, and give it self to him, that so loved the
World, as to give his only begotten Son to purchase us that everlasting life.
Thus may that word prove this Immortal Seed, which tho very often read and
heard before, was but a dead letter: A drop of those liquors that are called
Spirits operates more than large draughts of other waters; one word spoke by
the Lord to the heart, is all Spirit, and does that which whole streams of Man's
eloquence could never effect.

In hearing of the Word, Men look usually too much upon Men, and forget from
what spring the Word has its power, they observe too narrowly the different
hand of the Sowers, and too little depend on his hand that is great Lord both
of Seedtime and Harvest: Be it sown by a weak hand, or a stronger, the
Immortal seed is still the same, yea, suppose the worst that it be a foul hand
that sowes it, that the Preacher himself be not so sanctified, and of so
edifying a life as you would wish, yet the seed it self being good contracts no
defilement, and may be effectual to Regeneration in some, and strengthening of
others; Although he that is not renewed by it himself, cannot have much hope of
such success nor reap much comfort by it, and usually does not seek nor regard
it much; but all Instruments are alike in an Almighty hand.

Hence learn. 1. That true conversion is not so slight a work, as we commonly
account it. It Is not an outward change of some bad customs, which gains the
name of a reformed Man in the ordinary dialect, it is a New birth, and Being,
and elsewhere called a new Creation, though it be but a change in qualities as
it is such a one, and the qualities so far distant that it bears the name of the
most substantial productions, from Children of disobedience, and that which is
linked with it, heirs of wrath, to be sons of God and heirs of glory: They have
a new spirit given, a free princely noble spirit, as the word is Psalm. 51. and
this spirit acts in their life and action.

2. Consider this dignity, and be kindled with the ambition of it, how does a
Christian pity that poor vanity that men make so much noise about, of of their
kindred, and extraction; this is worth glorying in indeed, to be of the highest
blood royal and in the nearest Relation, Sons of the King of Kings by this new
birth, and adds Matchless honor to that birth which is honorable.

But we all pretend to be of this number. Would we not study to cozen our
selves, the discovery would not be so hard to know whither we are or not.

In many their false confidence is too evident: No appearance of the spirit of
God, not a foot-step like his leading, and that character, Romans 8.14. not a
lineament of God's visage, as their father, if ye know that he is righteous,
(says St. John 2.29.) ye know then that every one that does righteousness is
born of him. And so on the contrary, how contrary to the most holy God the
lover and fountain of holiness are they, that Swinishly love to wallow in the
mire of unholiness. Is Swearing and Cursing the accent of the Regenerate, the
Children of God? No, it is the language of Hell. Do children delight to
indignifie, and dishonor their Fathers Name? No, Earthly mindedness is a
countersign. Shall the King's Children, they that were brought up in scarlet
(as Jeremy laments) embrace the dunghill? Princes by their high birth and
Education have usually their hearts filled with far higher thoughts than mean
persons, the children of the poorer sort being pinched that way, their greatest
thoughts as they grow up, are ordinarily how they shall shift to live, how they
shall get bread, but Princes think either of the conquest, or governing of
Kingdoms. Are you not born to a better Inheritance, (if indeed born again) why
then do you vilify your selves? why not more in Prayer? no dumb children among
those that are born of God? they have all that spirit of Prayer by which they
not only speak, but cry Abba Father.

2. The most part of us esteem the Preaching of the Word, as an evanishing
discourse, that amuses us for an hour, we look for no more, and therefore we
find no more, we receive it not as the Immortal seed of our Regeneration, as
the ingrafted Word that is able to save our Souls. Oh! learn to Reverence this
holy, and happy Ordinance of God, this word of life, and know that they that
are not Regenerated, and so saved by it, shall be judged by it.

Not of Corruptible seed] It is a main cause of the unsuitable, and unworthy
behavior of Christians (those that profess themselves such) that a great part
of them either do not know, or at least do not seriously, and frequently
consider what is indeed the Estate and Quality of a Christian, how excellent
and of what descent their new Nature is, therefore they are often to be
remembered of this. Our Apostle here does so, and by it binds on all his
Exhortations.

Of this New being we have here these two things. 1. Its high Original from
God, begotten again of his word. 2. That which so much commends good things,
its duration, and this follows of the other* for if the Principle of this
life, be Incorruptible, it self must be so too. The word of God is not only a
living and ever abiding word in it self; but likewise in reference to this New
birth, and spiritual life of a Christian, and so it is here intended that is
spoke of it, and therefore called not only an abiding word, but Incorruptible
seed, which expressly relates to Regeneration. And because we are most sensible
of the good and evil of things by comparison, The everlastingness of the word
and that spiritual life which it begets is set off by the frailty, and
shortness of natural Life, and all the good that concerns it. This he
expresses in the words of Isay in the next Verse.

Verse 24.
For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of Grass,
the Grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away.
IN expressing the vanity and frailty of the natural life of Man, it is very
agreeing with the subject to call him flesh, giving to the whole man the name
of his corruptible part, both to make the wretched and perishing Condition of
this life more sensible, and Man the more humble by it: For though by providing
all for the flesh, and bestowing his whole time in the endeavors which are of
the flesh's concernment, he remembers it too much, and forgets his spiritual
and Immortal part; yet in that over eager care for the flesh, in some sense he
seems to forget that he is flesh, or at least that flesh is perishing, because
Flesh, extending his desires and projects so far for the flesh as if it were
Immortal, and should always abide to enjoy, and use these things; as the
Philosopher said of his Countrymen, upbraiding at once their surfettings and
excess in Feasting, and their sumptuousness in building: that they eat as if
they meant to die to morrow, and yet built as if they were never to die. Thus
in Men's immoderate pursuits of earth, they seem both to forget that they are
any thing else beside flesh, and in this sense too, to forget that they are
flesh, that is mortal and perishing; they neither rightly remember their
Immortality nor their Mortality. If we consider what it is to be flesh, the
naming of that were sufficient to the purpose. All Man is flesh, But it is
plainer thus, All flesh is grass, thus in the Psalm, he remembered that they
were but flesh, that speaks their frailty enough, but it is added to make the
vanity of their estate the clearer, a wind that passes and comes not again.
Psalm. 78.39. So Psalm. 103.15. As for man his days are as grass, as a flower of
the field so he flourishes. For the wind passes over it and it is gone, and
the place thereof shall know it no more.

This natural Life is compared (even by natural Men) to the vainest things, and
scarce find they things light enough to express it vain, and as here called
grass, so they compared the generations of Men to the leaves of trees. But the
light of Scripture does most discover this, and it is a lesson requires the
Spirit of God to teach it aright. Teach us (says Moses Psa. 90.) So to number
our days that we may apply our hearts unto Wisdom. and David Psa. 39 Make me
to know my life how frail I am.. So Iam. 4.14. And here its called grass. So
Job. 14.12. Man that is born of a Woman is of few days and full of trouble, He
comes forth like a flower, and is cut down.

Grass has its root in the Earth, and is fed by the moisture of it, and for a
while, but besides that, it is under the hazard of such weather as favors it
not, or the ^ythe that ^urs is down, give it all the forbearance that may be,
let it be free from both those, yet how quickly will it wither of it self: Set
aside those many accidents, the smallest of which is able to destroy our
natural life, the diseases of our own bodies, and outward violences, and
casualties that cut down many in their greeness, in the flower of their youth,
the utmost term is not long; In the course of nature it will wither. Our life
is indeed a lighted torch, either blown out by some stroke, or some wind, or
if spared, yet within a while burns away, and will dye out of it self.

And all the Glory of man] That is elegantly added. There is indeed a great
deal of seeming difference betwixt the outward condition of li^e amongst Men,
shall the Rich, and Honorable, and beautiful, and healthful go in together
under the same name with the baser, and unhappier part, the poor wretched sort
of the world, that s^em to be born for nothing but sufferings, and miseri^s? At
least has the wise no advantage beyond the fools, is all grass? make you no
distinction? no, all is grass, or if you will have some other name, be it so,
once this is true that all flesh is grass, and if that glory that shines so
much in your eyes must have a difference, then this is all it can have, it is
but the flower of that same grass, somewhat above the common grass in gayness,
a little comelier, and better apparrel'd than it, but partaker of its frail and
fading nature, has no privilege nor immunity that way, yea of the two the
less durable, and usually shorter lived, at the best it decays with it, the
grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away.

How easily and quickly has the highest splendour of a Man's prosperity been
blasted, either by Men's power, or the immediate hand of God? The spirit of the
Lord blows upon it (as Esaias there says) and by that, not only withers the
grass; but the flower fades, though never so fair. When thou correctest Man for
iniquity thou make his beauty to consume like a moth. Psalm. 39.11. How many
have the casualties of fire, or war, or shipwreck in one day, or night, or a
small part of either turned out of great riches into extreme poverty? And the
Instances are not few of those, that have on a sudden fallen from the top of
honor into the fowlest disgraces, not by degrees comeing down the stair they
went up, but tumbled down headlong. And the most vigorous beauty, and strength
of body, how does a few days sickness, or if it escape that, a few years time
blast that flower. yea, those higher advantages that have somewhat both of
truer, and more lasting beauty in them, the Endowments of wit, and Learning,
and Eloquence, yea and of moral Goodness, and virtue, yet they cannot rise
above this word, they are still in all their glory but the flower of grass,
their Root is in the ^earth: Natural ornaments are of some use in this present
life, but they reach no further. When Men have wasted their strength and
endured the toil of study night and day, 'its but a small parcel of knowledge
they can attain to, and are forced to ly down in the dust in the midst of their
pursuit of it; that head that lodges most sciences shall within a while be
diffurnish'd of them all, and the tongue that speaks most languages silenced.

The great projects of Kings, and Princes, and they also themselves, come under
this same notion, all the vast designs that are framing in their heads, fall
to the ground in a moment, they return to their dust and in that day all their
thoughts perish. Archimedes was killed in the midst of his demonstration.

If they themselves did consider this in the heat of their affairs, it would
much allay the swelling and loftiness of their minds, and if these that live
upon their favor, would consider it, they would not value it at so high a
rate, and buy it so dear, as often they do, Men of low degree are vanity,
says the Psalmist, but he adds Men of high degree are a lie, from base mean
persons we expect nothing, but the estate of great persons promises fair, and
often keeps not, therefore a lie, although they can least endure that word.

They are in respect of mean persons as the flower to the grass, somewhat a
fairer luster they have; but no more endurance, nor exemption from decaying,
thus then it is an universal, and undeniable truth. It begins here with a
(...) and is as sure a Conclusion as the surest of these in their best
Demonstrations which they call (...). And as particular Men so whole States,
and Kingdoms are thus, they have their budding, and flourishing, and
withering, and it is in both as with flowers, when they are fullest spread,
then they are near their declining, and withering, and thus it is with all
whole Generations of Men upon Earth, as Solomon says, One goes and another
comes; but not a word of abiding at all. We in our thoughts shut up death into
a very narrow compass, namely, ^n the moment of our expiring, but the truth is,
as the Moralist observes, it goes through all our life, for we are still
losing, and spending it as we enjoy it, yea, our very enjoying it, is the
spending it* yesterdayes life is dead to day, and so shall this day's life be
to morrow. We spend our years, says Moses, as a tale, or as a thought, so
swift and evanishing is it. Each word helps a tale toward its end, and then in
that the vanity, when 'its done it evanishes as a sound in the air. What Is
become of all the pompous solemnities of Kings and Princes, at their births,
and Marriages and Coronations, and Triumphs? they are now as a dream Act. 25.23.

Hence learn the folly, and pride of Man that can glory and please himself in
the frail and wretched being he has here, that dotes on this poor natural
life, and cannot be persuaded to think on one higher, and more abiding.
Although the course of times and his daily Experience tells him this truth,
that all flesh is grass, yea, the Prophet prefixes to these words a command of
Crying, they must be shouted aloud in our ears ere we will hear them, and by
that time the sound of the cry is done, we have forgot it again. Would we
consider this in the midst of those vanities that toss our light minds too and
fro, it would give us wiser thoughts, and balast our hearts make them more
solid, and steadfast in those spiritual endeavors, which concern a durable
condition, a being that abides for ever, in comparison of which the longest
term of natural life is less than a moment, and the happiest estate of it, but
a heap of miseries; Were all of us more constantly prosperous than any of us
is, yet that one thing were enough to cry down the price we put upon this life,
that it continues not. As he answered to one that had a mind to flatter him in
the midst of a pompuous triumph, by saying, what is wanting here? continuance
said he: 'Twas wisely said at any time, but most of all to have so sober a
thought in such a solemnity, in which weak heads cannot escape either to be
wholly drunk, or somewhat giddy at least: Sure we forget this, when we grow
vain upon any humane glory, or advantage, the color of it pleases us, and we
forget that it is but a flower, and foolishly overesteem it, this is that
madness upon flowers, that is somewhere in request, where they will give as
much for one flower as would buy a good dwelling house. Is it not a most
foolish bargain to bestow continual pains, and diligence upon purchasing of
great possessions, or honors? if we believe this that the best of them is no
other, but a short lived flower, and neglect the purchase of those glorious
mansio^s of Eternity, a garland of such flowers as wither not, an unfading
crown, that everlasting life, and those Everlasting pleasures that are at the
right hand of God.

Now that life which shall never end must begin here, it is the new spiritual
life, whereof the word of God is the immortal seed, and in opposition to
corruptible seed, and the corruptible life of flesh it is here said to endure
for ever. And for this end is the frailty of natural life mentioned, that our
affections may be drawn off from it to this spiritual life that is not subject
unto death.

Verse. 25.
But the word of the Lord endures for ever, And this is the word which by the
Gospel is preached unto you.
THE word of God is so like himself, and carries so the Image and impression of
his power, and wisdom, that where they are spoke of together it is sometimes
doubtful, whether the words are to be referred to himself, or to his word, so
Heb. 14.12. And so here: But there is no hazard, seeing there is truth in both,
and pertinency too, for they that referr them to God, affirm that they are
intended for the extolling of his word, being the subject in hand, and that we
may know it to be like him. But I rather think here, that these words are meant
of the word, it is called living as here, Heb. 4. And abiding for ever is
expressly repeated of it here in the Prophet's words. And (with respect to
those Learned Men, that apply them to God) I remember not that this abiding for
ever is used to express Gods Eternity in himself. Howsoever this incorruptible
seed is the living and everlasting word of the living and Everlasting God, and
is therefore such, because he whose it is, is such.

Now this is not to be taken in a abstract sense of the word only in its own
nature, but as the principle of Regeneration, the seed of this new life;
because the word is enlivening and living; therefore they with whom it is
effectual, and into whose hearts it is received are begotten again, and made
alive by it, and because the word is incorruptible, and endures for ever,
therefore that Life begot by it, is such too, cannot perish nor be cut down, as
the natural Life; No, this Spiritual Life of grace is the certain beginning
of that eternal Life of glory, and shall end in it, and therefore has no end.

As the word of God in it self cannot be abolished, but surpasses the
endurance of the Heaven and Earth as our Savior teaches, and all the attempts
of men against the Divine truth, of that word to undo it, are as vain, as if
they should consult to pluck the Sun out of the Firmament, so likewise in the
heart of a Christian, it is Immortal, and incorruptible. Where it is once
received by faith, it cannot be obliterated again, all the powers of darkness
cannot destroy it, although they be never so diligent in their attempts that
way; and this is the comfort of the Saints, that the life which God by his word
has breathed into their Souls, though it have many, and strong enemies, such
as they themselves could never hold out against, yet for his own glory, and his
promise sake, he will maintain that life and bring it to its perfection; God
will perfect that which concerns me, says the Psalmest. It Is grossly
contrary to the truth of the Scriptures to imagine, that they that are thus
renewed can be unborn again: This new birth is but once of one kind, though
they are subject to frailties and weaknesses here in this spiritual life, yet
not to death any more, not to such way of finning as would extinguish this
life. This is that which the Apostle John says, he that is born of God sins
not, and the reason he adds, is the same that is here given, the permanence
and incorrup^ibleness of this word, the seed of God abides in him.

This is the word which by the Gospel is preached unto you.] It Is not
sufficient to have these thoughts of the word of God in a general way, and not
to know what that word is, but we must be persuaded, that that word which is
preached to us, is this very word of so excellent virtue, and of which these
high things are spoken, that it is incorruptible, and abides for ever, and
therefore surpasses all the world, and all the excellencies and glory of it.
Although delivered by weak Men the Apostles, and by far weaker than they in the
constant ministry of it, yet it loses none of its own virtue, for that depends
upon the first owner, and author of it, the ^verliving God, who by it begets
his chosen unto life eternal.

This therefore is that which we should learn thus to hear, and thus to
receive, and esteem, and love this holy, this living word, to despise all the
glistring vanities of this perishing life, all outward pomp, yea all inward
worth, all wisdom, and natural endowments of mind, in comparison of the
heavenly light of the Gospel preached unto us. Rather to hazard all than lose
that, and banish all other things from that Place that is due to it, to lodge
it alone in our hearts, as our only treasure here, and the certain pledge of
that treasure of glory laid up for us in heaven: To which blessed state God of
his Infinite mercy bring us. Amen.

Chap. Second.
1 Pet. Chap. 2. Verse 1.2.
Wherefore laying aside all Malice, and all guile, and Hypocrisies, and Envies,
and all evil speakings,

Verse. 2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may
grow thereby.


THe same power, and goodness of God that manifests it self in giving being to
his creatures, appears likewise in their sustaining, and preservation; to give
being is the first, and to support it, is the continued effect of that power,
and goodness: Thus it is both in the first Creation, and in the second, In the
first the creatures to which he gave Life, he provided with convenient
nourishment to uphold that life, Gen^ 1. So here in the close of the former
Chapter we find the Doctrine of the New birth, and life of a Christian, and in
the beginning of this, the proper food of that life, and it is the same word by
which we there find it to be begotten, that is here the nourishment of it, and
therefore Christians are here exhorted by the Apostle so to esteem, and so to
use it, and that is the main scope of the words,

Obs. in general. The word, the principle and the support of our spiritual
being, is both the incorruptible seed, and the incorruptible food of that new
life of grace, which must therefore be an incorruptible life; And this may
convince us, that the ordinary thoughts even of us, that hear this word, are
far below the true excellency and worth of it, the stream of custom and our
profession brings us hither, and we sit out our hour under the sound of this
Word, but how few consider and prize it, as the great Ordinance of God for the
salvation of Souls? The beginner and the sustainer of the Divine life of Grace
within us? and certainly until we have these thoughts of it, and seek to feel
it thus our selves, although we hear it most frequently, and slip no occasion,
yea, hear it with attention, and some present delight, yet still we miss the
right use of it, and turn it from its true end, while we take it not as that
ingrafted word which is able to save our souls.

Thus ought they that Preach to speak it, to endeavor their utmost to
accommodate it to this end, that sinners may be converted, begotten again, and
believers nourished, and strengthened in their spiritual life, to regard no
lower end, but aim steddily at that mark. Their hearts and tongues ought to be
set on fire with holy zeal for God, and love to souls, kindled by the Holy
Ghost that came down on the Apostles in the shape of fiery tongues.

And they that hear, should remember this as the end of their hearing that they
may receive spiritual life and strength by the word, for though it seems a poor
despicable business, that a frail sinful Man like your selves speak a few words
in your hearing; yet look upon it as the way wherein God communicates happiness
to them that believe, and works that believing unto happiness, alters the whole
frame of the soul, and makes a new creation, as it begets it again to the
Inheritance of glory: Consider it thus, which is its true notion, and then what
can be so precious? Let the world disesteem it as they will, know ye, that it
is the power of God unto salvation. The Preaching of the cross is to them that
perish foollishness: but unto them that are saved, it is the power of God,
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.18. And if you would have the experience of this,
if you would have life, and growth by it, you must look above the poor
worthless Messenger, and call in his almighty help who is the Lord of life. As
the Philosophers affirm, that if the Heavens should stand still there would be
no generation, nor flourishing of any thing here below, it is the moving and
influence of the spirit that makes the Church fruitful. Would you do this
before you come here, present the blindness of your minds and the deadness of
your hearts to God, and say, Lord here is an opportunity for thee to show the
power of thy word. I would find life and strength in it, but neither can I that
hear, nor he that speaks, make it thus unto me, that is thy prerogative, say
thou the word, and it shall be done. God said let there be light and it was
light.

In this Exhortation to the due use of the word, the Apostle continues the
resemblance of that new birth he mentioned Chap. 1.

As new born babes] Be not satisfied with your selves till you find some
evidence of this new, this supernatural life. There be delights and comforts in
this life, in its lowest condition that would persuade us to look after it, if
we knew them: The most cannot be made sensible of those, consider therefore the
end of it. Better never to have been, than not to have been partaker of this
new being. Except a man be born again, says our Savior, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God. Surely they that are not born again, shall one day wish
they had never been born. What a poor wretched thing is the life that we have
here, a very heap of follies and miseries, now if we would share in a happier
being after it, that life that ends not, it must begin here; grace and glory,
is one and the same Life; only with this difference, that the one is the
beginning, and the other the perfection of it; or if we do call them two
several lives, yet the one is the undoubted pledge of the other. 'Twas a
strange word for a Heathen to say, that, that day of death we fear so,
aeterninatalis est, is the birth day of Eternity: Thus it is indeed to those
that are here born again, this new birth of grace, is the sure earnest and
counterpawn of that birth day of glory. Why do we not then labor to make this
certain by the former? Is it not a fearful thing, to spend our days in vanity?
and then ly down in darkness and sorrow for ever, to disregard the life of our
soul while we may and should be provident for it, and then when its going out
cry, quo nunc abibis, whither art thou going O my soul?

But this new life puts us out of the danger and fear of that Eternal death, we
are passed from death to life, says St. John, speaking of those that are born
again, and being passed, there is no repassing, no going back from this life to
death again.

This new birth is the same that St. John calls the first Resurrection, and
pronounces them blessed that partake of it, Blessed are they that have part in
the first Resurrection, the second death shall have no power over them.

The weak beginnings of grace in comparison of further strength attainable even
in this life, are sometimes expressed as the infancy of it, and so believers
ought not to continue Infants, and if they do, it is reprovable in them, as we
see Ephesians. 4.14. 1 Cor. 2.2. and 1 Cor. 14.20. Heb. 5.12. though the Apostle
writes to new Converts,, and so may possibly imply, the tenderness of their
beginnings of grace, yet I conceive that Infancy is here taken in such a sense
as agrees to a Christian in the whole course, and best estate of his Spiritual
life here below; and so likewise the milk here recommended is answerable to
this sense of Infancy, and not to the former; as it is in some of those cited
places, where it means the easiest and first Principles of Religion, and so is
opposed to the higher mysteries of it, as to strong meat; but here it signfies
the whole word of God, and all its wholesome and saving truths, as the proper
nourishment of the Children of God. And so the Apostles words are a standing
Exhortation for all Christians of all degrees.

And the whole estate and course of their Spiritual life here, is called there
Infancy, not only as opposed to Corruption and wickedness of the old man but
likewise as signifying the weakness, and imperfection of it, at its best in
this life, compared with the perfection of the life to come; for the weakest
beginnings of grace, are nothing so far below the highest degree of it possible
in this life, as that highest degree falls short of the state of glory; so
that, if one measure of grace is called Infancy in respect of another, much
more is all grace Infancy in respect of Glory. And sure as for Time, the time
of our present life is far less to eternity than the time of our natural
Infancy is to the rest of our life, so that we may be still called but new or
lately born, Our best pace and strongest walking in obedience here, is but as
the stepping of Children when they begin to go by hold, in comparison of the
perfect obedience in glory, when we shall follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes,
all our knowledge here, is but the Ignorance of Infants, and all our
expressions of God, and of his Praises but as the first stammerings of Children
in comparison of the knowledge we shall have of him hereafter, when we shall
know as we are known, and of these praises we shall then offer him, when that
new song shall be taught us. A Child has in it a reasonable soul, and yet by
the indisposedness of the body, and abundance of moisture, it is so bound up,
that its difference from the beasts and partaking of a rational life is not so
apparent as afterward; and thus the spiritual life that is from above infused
into a Christian, though it does act and work in some degree, yet is so clogged
with natural corruption still remaining in them that the excellency of it is
that way much clouded and obscured, but in the life to come, it shall have
nothing at all incumbring, and indisposing it, and this is the Apostle St.
Paul's Doctrine. 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 11, 12.

And this is the wonder of Divine grace, that brings so small beginnings to
that height of perfection that we are not able to conceive of; that a little
sparkle of true grace, that is not only indiscernable to others, but often to a
Christian himself, Yet should be the beginning of that condition, wherein they
shall shine brighter then the Sun in the Firmament. The difference is great in
our natural life, in some persons especially, that they that in Infancy were so
feeble, and wrapped up as others in swaddling clothes, yet afterward come to
excel in wisdom and in the knowledge of sciences, or to be Commanders of great
Armies, or to be Kings. But the distance is far greater and more admirable
betwixt the weakness of these New born babes, the small beginnings of grace,
and our after perfection, that fullness of knowledge that we look for, and that
crown of Immortality, that all they are born to, that are born of God.

But as in some Childrens faces, or actions, have appeared some characters, and
presages of their after greatness, as a singular beauty in Moses's face as they
write of him, and Cyrus made King among the Shepherds Children with whom he was
brought up, etc. so also certainly in these children of God there be some
Characters, and evidences, that they are born for Heaven by their new birth.
That Holiness, and Meekness, that Patience, and Faith that shine in the actions
and sufferings of the Saints, are Characters of their Fathers Image, and show
their high Original, and foretell their glory to come, such a glory as does not
only surpass the Worlds thoughts, but the thoughts of the Children of God
themselves. 1 Ioh. 3.2.

Now that the Children of God may grow by the word of God, the Apostle requires
these two things of them. 1. The Innocence of Children. 2. The appetite of
Children. For this, As I conceive, is relative, not only, to the desiring the
milk of the word; but to the former Verse, the putting off malice* as the
Aposte Paul, 1 Cor. 14.20. as concerning malice, be ye children.

Wherefore laying aside.] This imports, that we are n^turally prepossessed with
these evils, therefore exhorted to put them off: our hearts are by nature no
other but cages of those unclean birds, malice, envy, hypocrisy, etc. The
Apostles sometimes name some of these evils and sometimes other of them: But
they are inseparable all one garment, and all comprehended under that one word,
Ephesians. 4. the old Man, which the Apostle there exhorts to put off: And here it is
pressed as a necessary evidence of their New birth, and furtherance of their
Spiritual growth, that these base habits be thrown away, ragged filthy habits,
unbeseeming the Children of God; they are the proper marks of an unrenewed
mind, the very Characters of the Children of Satan, for they are his Image. He
has his names from enmity, and envy and slandering, and he is that grand
hypocrite, and deceiver that can transform himself into an Angel of Light.

So on the contrary the Spirit of God, that dwells in his Children is the
spirit of meekness, and Love, and Truth. That dove-like spirit that descended
on our Savior, is from him communicated to Believers. It Is the grossest
impudency to pretend to be a Christian, and yet to entertain hatred, and
envyings upon whatsoever occasion, for there is nothing more recommended to
them by our Savior's own doctrine, and more impressed upon their hearts by his
spirit than love. (...) may be taken generally, but I conceive it is that which
we particularly call malice.

Malice, and envy are but two branches growing out of the same bitter root,
self-love and evil speakings are the fruit they bear. Malice is properly the
procuring or wishing another evil; Envy the repining at their good, and these
vent themselves by evil speaking. This infernal fire within smoaks, and
flashes out by the tongue which S. James says is set on fire of hell, and
fires all about it miscensuring the actions of those they hate or envy,
aggravating their failings, and detracting from their virtues, taking all
things by the left Ear, for (as Epictetus says) Every thing has two handles,
The art of taking things by the better side, which charity always does, would
save much of those janglings, and heart burnings that so abound in the world.
But folly and perverseness possess the hearts of the most, and therefore their
discourses are usually the vent of those: For out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth must speak. The unsavory breaths of Men, argues their inward
corruption: Where shall a Man come almost in societies; but his ears shall be
beaten with the unpleasant noise (sure it is so to a Christian mind) of one
detracting, and disparaging another: And yet this is extreme baseness, and the
practice only of false counterfeit goodness, to make up his own esteem out of
the ruins of the good name of others; real virtue cannot endure, nor needs not
that dishonest shift: It can subsist of it self, and therefore ingenuously
commends and acknowledges what good is in others, and loves to hear it
acknowledged, and neither readily speaks nor hears evil of any, but rather,
where duty and conscience require not discovery, casts a vail upon Men's
failings to hide them, this is the true temper of the Children of God.

These evils of Malice, and envy, and evil-speakings, and such like, are not to
be dissembled by us in our selves, and conveyed under better appearances: But
to be cast away, not to be covered, but put off, and therefore that which is
the upper garment and cloak of all other evils the Apostle here commands to
cast that off too namely, hypocrisy.

What availes it to wear this mask, a Man may indeed in the fight of Men act
his part handsomely under it, and pass so for a time; but know we not? There is
an eye that sees through it, and a hand, that if we will not put of this mask,
will pull it off to our shame either here in the sight of men, or if we should
escape all our life, and go fair off the stage under it; yet there is a day
appointed wherein all hypocrites shall be unvailed, and appear what they are
indeed before Men and Angels; it is a poor thing to be approved, and applauded
by Men while God condemns, to whose sentence all men must stand or fall. Oh
seek to be approved, and justified by him, and then who shall condemn? It Is no
matter who do. How easily may we bear the mistakes and dislikes of all the
world, if he declare himself well-pleased with us. It is a small thing for me
to be judged of Man or man's day, he that judges me is the Lord. Says the
Apostle.

But these evils are here particularly to be put off, as contrary to the right
and profitable receiving of the word of God, for this part of the exhortation [
Laying aside, Desire] look's to that which follows, and is specially so to be
considered.

There is this double task in Religion. When a Man enters to it, he is not only
to be taught true wisdom, but he is withal, yea, first of all, to be untaught
the Errors and wickedness that are deep rooted in his mind, which he has not
only learned by the corrupt conversation of the world, but brought the seeds of
them into the world with him, and they improve and grow indeed by the favor of
that example that is round about a Man: But they are orginally in our nature as
it is now, they are connaturall to us, besides continual custom which is
another nature. There is none comes to the School of Christ suiting the
Philosopher's word ut ta^ula rasa, as blank paper to receive his doctrine, but
on the contrary all scribl'd, and blurred with such base habits as these,
malice, hypocrisy, envy, etc.

Therefore the first work is to raze out these, to cleanse and purify the
heart from these blotts, those foul characters, that it may receive the
impression of the image of God. And because it is the word of God, that both
begins, and follows forth this work, draws the lineaments of that divine Image
on the soul, therefore to the receiving this word aright, and this proper
effect by it, the conforming of the soul to Jesus Christ, which is the true
growth of the spiritual life, this is prerequir'd that the hearts of them that
hear it, be purged of these such and like impurities, malice, hypocrisy etc.

These are so opposite to the profitable receiving of the word of God, that
while they possess and rule the soul, it cannot at all embrace those divine
truths; While it is filled with such guests, there is no room to entertain the
word.

They cannot dwell together by reason of their contrary nature, the word will
not mix with th^se; the saving mixture of the word of God in the soul, is that
the Apostle speaks of, and gives the want of it, as the cause of unprofitable
hearing the word. Heb. 4.2. the mixing of it with says. For by that the word
is concocted into the nourishment of the life of grace united to the soul, and
mixed with it by being mixed with faith, as the Apostle's expression imports:
That Is the proper mixture it requires, but with these qualities here mentioned
it will not mix: There is a natural antipathy betwixt them, as strong as in
those things in nature, that cannot be brought by any means, to agree and
mingle together.

Can there be any thing more contrary than the good word of God, as the Apostle
calls it, and those evil speakings? Than the word that is of such excellent
sweetness, and the bitter words of a malignant tongue? Than the word of life,
and words full of deadly poison? For so slanders and diffamings of our brethren
are. And is not all malice, and envy most opposite to the word, that is the
message of peace and Love, how can the gall of malice and this milk of the word
agree? Hyp^crisie and guile stand in direct opposition to the name of this
word, that is called the word of truth and here the very words show this
contrariety sincere milk and a double unsincere mind.

These two are necessary conditions of good nourishment. 1. That the ^ood be
good, and wholesome. 2. That the inward constitution of them that use it be so
too: And if this fail the other profit's not. This sincere milk is the only
proper nourishment of spiritual Life, and there is no defect nor undue quality
in it, but the greatest part of hearers are inwardly unwholesom, diseased with
the evils here mentioned and others of the like nature, and therefore, either
have no kind of appetite to the word at all; but rather feed upon such trash as
suite with their distemper, as some kind of diseases incline those that have
them, to eat Coals, or Lime, etc. Or if they be any ways desirous to hear the
Word, and seem to feed on it, yet the noxious humors that abound in them make
it altogether unprofitable, and they are not nourished by it; as this evil of
malice, and envying so ordinary among Men, and (which is most strange amongst
Christians) as an overflowing of the Gaul possesses their whole minds, and not
only they are not nourished by the word they hear, but are the worse by it,
their disease is fed by it, as an unwholsom stomach turns the best meat it
receives into that bad humor that abounds in it: Do not they thus, that
observe what the Word says, that they may be the better enabled to discover
the failings of others, and speak maliciously and uncharitablely of them, and
vent themselves, as is too common? This word met well with such a one's Fault,
and this with another: Is not this to feed these diseases of Malice, Envy, and
evill-speakings with this pure milk, and make them grow, in stead of growing by
it our selves in grace and holiness.

Thus likewise the hypocrite turns all that he hears of this word, not to the
inward renovation of his mind, and redressing what is amiss there: But only to
the composing of his outward carriage, and to enable himself to act his part
better to be cunninger in his own faculty, a more refined and expert hypocrite,
not to grow more a Christian in deed, but more in appearance only and in the
opinion of others.

Therefore it is a very needful advertisment seeing these evils are so natural
to Men, and so contrary to the nature of the word of God, that they be purged
out, to the end it may be profitably received: A very like exhortation to this
has the Apostle S. James and some of the same words but in another Methapor
Iam. 1.21. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness,
and receive with meekness the ingrafted word. He compares the word to a plant
of excellent virtue, the very tree of life, the word that is able to save your
souls, but the only soil wherein it will grow is a heart full of meekness, a
heart that is purged of those Luxuriant weeds that grow so rank in it by
nature; they pluck up and throw them out to make place for this word.

And there is such a necessity of this, that the most approved teachers of
wisdom, in a human way, have required this of their Scholars that to the end
their minds might be capable of it, they should be purified from vice, and
wickedness; for this reason the Philosopher judges young Men unfit hearers of
moral Philosophy because of the abounding, and untamedness of their passions,
granting that if those were composed, and ordered, that they might be admitted.
And it was Socrates his custom, when any asked him a question to be informed
by him, before he would answer them, he ask't them concerning their own
qualities, and course of life.

Now if Men require a calm and purified disposition of mind to make it capable
of their doctrine, how much more is it suitable, and necessary for learning the
doctrine of God, and those deep mysteries that his word opens up, it is well
expressed in that Apocryphal Book of Wisdom, that forward thoughts separate
from God, and wisdom enters not into a malicious soul, no indeed, that is a very
unfit dwelling for it, and the very Heathen could say the mind that is impure
is not capable of God, and divine things. Seneca. Therefore we see the strain
of that book of Proverbs, that speaks so much of this wisdom, it requires in
the first chap. That they that would hear it, do retire themselves from all
ungodly customs and practices. And indeed how can the soul apprehend
spiritual things, that is not in some measure refined from the love of sin,
that abuses and bemires the minds of Men, and makes them unable to arise to
heavenly thoughts? Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God, says
our Savior, not only shall they see him perfectly hereafter, but, as they can
receive him, he will impart and make known himself unto them here, so John.
14.23. This is it that makes the word obscure namely, the filthy mists within,
whereas on the contrary he will in just judgment hide himself, and the saving
truth of his word from those that entertain and delight in sin: The very sins,
wherein they delight shall obscure and darken the light of the Gospel to them,
that though it shine clear as the Sun at noonday, they shall be as those that
live in a dungeon, they shall not discern it.

And as they receive no benefit by the word that have these evils here
mentioned reigning, and in full strength in them, so they that are indeed born
again, the more they retain of these, the less shall they find the influence,
and profit of the word; for this exhortation concerns them, they may possibly
some of them have much remainder of these corruptions unmortified, therefore
exhorted to lay aside entirely those evils, all malice, all hypocrisy etc. And
so though they hear the word often, yet be in a spiritual Atrophy, eat much,
and grow nothing by it, find no increase of grace, and spiritual strength.

Would we know the main cause of our fruitless hearing of the word, here it is,
Men bring not meek and guiless spirits to it, not minds emptied and purified to
receive it, but stuffed with Malice, and Hypocrisy, and Pride, and other such
evils, and where should the Word enter, when all is so taken up? And if it did
enter how should it prosper amongst so many enemies? Or at all abide amongst
them, either they will turn it out again, or choke and kill the the power of
it. We think Religion and our own Lusts, and secret heart-Idols should agree
together, because we would have it so, but this is not possible, either
therefore labor to entertain the word of Truth in the love of it, and lodge
the mystery of Faith in a pure conscience, as the Apostle St. Paul speaks, join
those together with David, Psalm. 119 113. I hate vain thoughts; but thy Law do
I love. And as here our Apostle, Lay aside all malice, and hypocrisy, and
envy, and evil speakings, and so receive the Word, or else look for no benefit
by it here, nor for sal^ation by it hereafter but cast out all impurity, and
give your whole heart to it, so desire it, that you may grow, and then as you
desire, you shall g^ow by it.

Every real Believer has received a life from Heaven, far more excelling our
natural life, than that excels the life of the Beasts. And this life has its
own peculiar desires, and delights, that are the proper actings and the certain
characters and evidence of it; amongst others, this is one and a main one,
answerable to the like desire in natural life, namely, a desire of food, and
because it is here still imperfect, therefore the natural end of this, is not
only nourishment, but growth, as it is here expressed.

The sincere Milk of the word] The Life of grace is the proper life of a
reasonable soul, and without it, the soul is dead, as the body is without the
soul: so that without untruth, this may be rendered, reasonable milk, as some
read it, but certainly that reasonable milk is the Word of God, The milk of the
Word.

It was before called the immortal seed, and here it is the milk of those that
are born again, and thus it is very agreeable nourishment to that spiritual
life according to their saying, iisdemalimur ex quibus constamus, as the milk
that Infants draw from the breast, is most connatural food to them, being of
that same substance that nourished them in the womb. But when they are brought
forth, that food follows them as it were for their supply, in that way that is
provided in nature for it, by certain veins it ascends into the breasts, and is
there fitted for them, and they by nature directed to find it there. Thus as a
Christian begins to live by the power of the word, he is by the nature of that
spiritual life directed to that same word as its nourishment. To follow the
resemblance further in the qualities of milk, after the Monkish way, that runs
it self out of breath in an Allegory, I conceive, is neither solid nor
profitable, and to speak freely, the curious searching of the similitude in
other qualities of milk, seems to wrong the quality here given it by the
Apostle, in which it is so well resembl'd by milk, namely, the simple pureness
and sincerity of the word; besides that the pressing of comparisons of this
kind too far, proves often so constrained ere they have done with it, that by
too much drawing they bring forth blood in stead of milk.

Pure and unmixed, as milk drawn immediately from the breast; the pure word of
God without the mixture not only of error, but of all other composition of
vain unprofitable subtilties, or affected humane eloquence, such as become not
the Majesty and gravity of Gods word. If any man speak, says our Apostle, let
him speak as the Oracles of God; light conceits and Flowers of Rhetoric wrong
the word more than they can please the hearers, the weeds among the Corn make
it look gay, but it were all the better they were not amongst it. Nor can those
mixtures be pleasing to any but carnal minds, they that are indeed the Children
of God (as Infants who like their breast milk best pure) do love the word best
so, and wheresoever they find it so, they relish it well, whereas Natural Men
cannot love Spiritual things for themselves, desire not the word for its own
sweetness, but would have it sau^'d with such conceits as possibly spoil the
simplicity of it, or at the best love to hear it for the wit, and learning,
which without any wrongful mix^ure of it, they find in one delivering it more
than another, but the Natural and Genuine appetite of the Children of God, is
to the word, for it self; and only as milk, sincere milk. And where they find
it so, from whomsoever, or in what way soever delivered unto them, they feed
upon it with delight: before conversion Wit or Eloquence may draw a Man to the
Word, and possibly prove a happy bait to catch him, as St. Augustine reports of
his hearing St. Ambrose, but once born again, then it is the Milk it self they
desire for it self.

Desire the sincere milk] Not only hear it because it is your custom, but
desire it because it is your food, and it is 1. A natural desire, as the Infants
of milk, not upon any external respect or inducement, but from an inward
Principle and bent of nature, and because natural, therefore, 2. Earnest not a
cold indifferent willing, that cares not whether it obtain or no, but a
vehement desire, as the word signifies, and the resemblance clearly bears, as a
child that will not be stilled till it have the breast; offer it what you will,
Silver, Gold, or Jewels it regards them not, these answer not its desire, and
that must be answered. Thus David My soul breaks for the longing it has to
thy judgments; As a Child like to break its heart with crying for want of the
Breast: And again because natural it is 3. Constant, the Infant is not cloyed,
nor wearyed with daily feeding on the breast, but desires it every day, as if
it had never had it before; thus the Child of God, has an unchangeable
appetite for the word, it is daily new to him, he finds still fresh delight in
it, thus David as before cited, My Soul breaks for the longing it has for
thy judgments at all times, And then Psalm. 1. this Law was his Meditation day
and night. Whereas a Natural Man is easily surfeited of it, and the very
commonness and cheapness of it makes it contemptible to him. And this is our
case, that wherein we should wonder at Gods singular goodness to us, and
therefore prize his Word the more, that very thing makes us despise it: Whereas
others our Brethren have bought this milk with their own Blood, we have it upon
the easiest terms that can be wished, only for the desiring, without hazard of
bleeding for it, and scarce at the pains of sweating for it.

That ye may grow thereby] This is not only the end for which God has provided
his Children with the Word, and moves them to desire it, but which they are to
intend in their desire and use of it, and answerable to Gods purpose, they are
therefore to desire it, because it is proper for this end, and that by it they
may attain this end, to grow thereby. And herein indeed these Children differ
from Infants in the Natural life, that are directed to their food beside their
knowledge, and without intention of its end; but this rational milk, is to be
desired by the Children of God in a rational way, knowing and intending its
end, having the use of Natural reason renewed, and sanctified by supernatural
grace.

Now the end of this desire is growth. Desire the Word not that you may only
hear it, that is to fall very far short of its true end, Yea, it is to take the
beginning of the work for the end of it; the Ear is indeed the mouth of the
mind, by which it receives the Word, as Elihu compares it, ( Job. 34.2.) but
meat that goes no further than the Mouth (you know) cannot nourish. Neither
ought this desire of the Word to be only to satisfy a custom, 'twere an
exceeding folly to make so superficial a thing the end of so serious a work.
Again, to hear it only to stop the Mouth of Conscience, that it may not clamor
more for gross impiety in contempt of it, this is not to hear it out of desire,
but out of fear; to desire it only for some present pleasure, and delight that
a man may find in it, is not the due use and end of it; that there is delight
in it, may help to commend it to those that find it so, and so be a means to
advance the end, but the end it is not. To seek no more but a present delight
that evanisheth with the sound of the words, that dye in the air, is not to
desire the Word as Meat, but as Mufick, as God tells the Prophet Ezekiel of his
People. Ezekiel. 33.32. And lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely Song of one
that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an Instrument, for they hear
thy words, and they do them not. To desire the Word for the increase of
knowledge (although this is necessary and commendable, and being rightly
qualified is a part of spiritual accretion, (yet take it as going no further)
it is not the true end of the Word, nor the venting of that knowledge in speech
and frequent discourse of the Word, and the Divine truths that are in it;
which, where it is governed with Christian Prudence, is not to be despised, but
commended; yet certainly the highest knowledge, and the frequentest, and
skilfullest speaking of the Wo^d severed from the growth here mentioned misses
the true end of the Word. If any one's Head or Tongue should grow apace, and
all the rest stand at a stay, it would certainly make him a Monster; and they
are no other, that are knowing and discoursing Christians, and grow daily in
that, but not at all in holiness of heart, and life, which is the proper growth
of the Children of God. Epictetus his comparison of the sheep, they return not
what they eat, in grass; but in Wool. David in that 119. Psalm that is wholly
spent upon this subject, the excellency and use of the Word of God, expresses
Verse 11, 6. his delight in it, his earnest desire to be further taught, and to
know more of it, his readiness to speak of it, Verse 13, 27. but withal you
know he joins his desire and care to keep it, to hide it in his heart, etc.
Psalm. 119. Verse 11, 5, 24. To make it the Man of his Counsel, to be as the
whole Assembly of his privy Counselors, and to be ruled and guided by it, and
with him, to use it so, is indeed to grow by it.

If we know what this Spiritual life is, and wherein the nature of it consists
we may easily know what is the growth of it, when holiness increases, the
sanctifying graces of the Spirit grow stronger in the soul, and consequently
act more strongly in the life of a Christian, then he grows Spiritually.

And as the word is the means of begetting this Spiritual life, so likewise of
its increase.

1. If we consider the nature of the Word in general, that it is Spiritual and
Divine, treats of the highest things, and therefore has in it a fitness to
elevate Men's minds from the Earth, being often conversant with it to assimilate
them to it self, as all kind of Doctrine readily does to these that are much in
it, and apply their minds to study it. Doubtless such kind of things as are
frequent with Men, have an influence into the disposition of their souls. The
Gospel is called Light, and the Children of God are likewise called Light, as
being transformed into its nature, and thus they are still the more, by more
hearing of it, and so they grow.

If we look more particularly unto the strain and tenor of the Word, it is
most fit for increasing the graces of the Spirit in a Christian; for there be
in it particular truths relative to them, that are apt to excite them, and set
them on work, and so to make them grow, as all habits do, by acting, it does
(as the Apostles word may be translated) stir up the sparks, and blow them into
a greater flame, makes them burn clearer and hotter. That it does both by
particular Exhortation to the study and Exercise of those graces, sometimes
pressing one, and sometimes another; and by right representing to them their
objects. The Word feeds faith by setting before it the free grace of God, his
Rich Promises, and his Power, and truth to perform them all, shows it the
strength of the New Covenants, not depending upon it, but holding in Christ, in
whom all the Promises of God, are Yea, and Amen, and drawing faith still to
rest more entirely upon his Righteousness. It feeds Repentance by making the
vileness and deformity of sin daily more clear, and visible; still as more of
the Word has admission into the Soul, the more it hates sin, being the more
discovered, and the better known in its own native color. As the more light is
in a House, the more any thing in it that is uncleanly or deformed is seen, and
disliked.

Likewise it increases love to God by opening up still more and more of his
infinite Excellency and lovelyness, and as it borrowes the resemblance of the
vilest things in nature to express the foulness and hatefulness of sin, so all
the beauties and dignities that are in all the creatures are called together in
the Word, to give us some small scantling of that uncreated beauty, that alone
deserves to be loved. Thus might it be instanced in all other graces.

But above all other Considerations, this is in the Word observable, as the
increaser of grace, in that it holds forth Jesus Christ to our vieu to look
upon, not only as the perfect pattern, but as the full fountain of all grace,
from whose fullness we all receive the contemplating of him, as the perfect
Image of God, and then drawing from him as having in himself a treasure for us,
these give the soul more of that Image, which is truly Spiritual growth. This
the Apostle expresses excellently, 2 Cor. 3. ult. speaking of the Ministry of
the Gospel, revealing Christ that beholding in him, as it is Chap. 4. Verse. 6.
In his face the glory of the Lord, we are changed into the same image from
glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord. Not only that we may take the
Copy of his Graces, but have a share of them.

There be many things might be said of this spiritual growth, but I will add
only a few. 1. In the judging of this growth, some conluding too rigidly
against themselves, that they grow not by the word, because it is not sensible
to them as they desire.

But 1. this is known in all things that grow, that it is not discerned in motu
sed in termino, not in the growing, but when they are grown. 2. Besides other
things are to be considered in this, although other graces seem not to advance,
yet if thou growest more self-denying, and humble in the sense of thy slowness,
all is not lost, although the branches shut not up so fast as thou wishest, yet
if the root grow deeper, and fasten more, its an useful growth, he that is
still learning to be more in Jesus Christ, and less in himself, to have all his
dependence, and comfort in him, is doubtless a growing believer.

On the other side a far greater number conclude wrong in their own favor,
imagining that they do grow, if they gain in some of those things we mentioned
above, namely, if more knowledge, and more faculty of discoursing, if they find
often some present stirrings of joy, or sorrow in hearing of the word, if they
reform their life, grow more civil, and blameless etc. Yet all these and many
such things may be in a natural Man, who notwithstanding grows not, for that is
impossible, he is not in that estate a subject capable of this growth, for he
is dead, he has none of this new life to which this growth relates. Herod
heard gladly and obeyed many things.

Consider then what true delight we might have in this. You find a pleasure,
when you see your Children grow, when they begin to stand and walk etc. You
love well to perceive your estate, or your honor grow, but the soul to be
growing liker God and nearer heaven, if we know it, is a pleasure far beyond
them all, to find pride and Earthliness and vanity abating, and faith, and
love, and spiritual mindedness increasing, especially if we think whither this
growth be not as our natural life that is often cut off before it attain full
age as we call it, and if it attain that, falls again to move downwards and
decays, as the Sun, being at its Meridian begins to decline again: But this
life shall grow on-in whomsoever it is, and come certainly to its fullness,
after which there is no more need of this word either for growth or
nourishment, no death, no decay, no old age, but perpetual youth and a
perpetual spring ver aeternum, fullness of joy in the presence of God and
everlasting pleasures at his right hand.

Verse 3.
If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is Gracious.
OUR Natural desire of food, arises principally from its necessity, for that
end which nature seeks, the growth or at least the nourishment of our bodies,
but besides, there is a present sweetness, and pleasingness in the use of it,
that serves to sharpen our desire, and is placed in nature for that purpose;
thus the Children of God in their spiritual life are naturally carried to
desire the means of their nourishment and of their growth, being always here
in a growing estate; but withal, there is a spiritual delight and sweetness in
that word, in that which it reveals concerning God, and that adds to their
desire, stirs their appetite toward it, the former is in the foregoing
verse, the latter in this. Nature addresses the infant to the breast, but when
it has once tasted of it, that is a new superadded attractive, and makes it
desire after that the more earnestly: So here.

The word is fully recommended to us by these two, usefulness, and
pleasantness, so like milk (as it is compared here) which is a nourishing food,
and withal sweet and delightful to the taste, by it we grow, and in it we
taste the graciousness of God. David in that Psalm that he dedicates wholly to
this subject, gives both these as the reason of his appetite, his love to it he
expresses patheticaly. Psa. 119. Ver. 97. O how love I thy law? and then he
adds, that by it he was made wiser than his enemies, than his teachers* And
than the ancients; taught to refrain from every evil way, taught by the Author
of that word the Lord himself, thou have taught me to grow wiser and w^^ier,
and holier in thy ways, and then Ver. 103. He adds this other reason, How
sweet are thy words unto my taste, yea sweeter than the honey and the honey Comb.

We shall speak 1. Of the goodness or graciousness of the Lord. 2. Of this
taste. And 3. Of the Inference from both.

1. Gracious] Or of a bountiful kind disposition, the word Psa. 34. Whence
this is taken is Tob. And which signifies, good. The Sept there render it by
the word used here by our Apostle, both the words signify a benignity, and
kindness of nature, it is one of loves attributes 1 Cor. 13. It is kind, ever
compassionate, and as it can be helpful in straits, and distresses still ready
to forget, and pass by evil and to do good, and in the largest most
comprehensive sense must we take it here, and yet still speak, and think
infinitely below what his goodness is. He is naturally good, yea goodness in
his nature, he is goodness and love it self, he that loves not knows not
God, for God is love. 1 Io. 4.8. Primitively good, all goodness is derived from
him, and all that is in the Creature comes forth from no other but that Ocean,
and this graciousness is still larger then them all.

There is a common bounty of God wherein he does good to all, and so the whole
earth is full of of his goodness: But the goodness that the Gospel is full of,
the particular stream that runs in that channel, is his peculiar graciousness,
and love to his own Children; that by which they are first enlivened, and then
refreshed, and sustained in their spiritual being. This that is here spoken of,
gracious to them in freely forgiving their sins, and giving no less than
himself unto them, frees them from all evils, and fills them with all good.
Psa. 103.3.4.5. satisfies thy mouth, and so it follows with good reason, Ver.
8. that he is merciful and gracious, and his graciousness there further
expressed in his gentleness, and slowness to anger, bearing with the frailties
of his own, and pitying them, as a father pityeth his Children.

No friend so kind and friendly (as this word signifies) and none so powerful,
a present help in trouble, ready to be found, whereas others may be far off, he
is always at hand, and his presence is always comfortable.

They that know God, still find him a real useful good. Some things and
persons are useful at one time, and others at another, but God at all times. A
well furnished table may please a Man, while he has health and appetite; but
offer it to him in the hight of a fever, how unpleasant would it be then?
Though never so richly decked, it is not only then useless, but hateful to him:
But the kindness and love of God is then as seasonable, and refreshing to him,
as in health, and possibly more; he can find sweetness in that, even on his
sick bed. The bitter Choler abounding in the mouth in a fever does not
disrelish his sweetness, it transcends and goes above it. Thus all Earthly
enjoyments have but some time (as meats) when they are in season but the
graciousness of God is always sweet, the taste of that is never out of season.
See how old age spoils the relish of outward delights in the example of
Barzillai 2. Sam. 19.35. But it makes not this distastful; therefore the
Psalmist prays, that when other comforts forsake him, and wear out, ebb from
him, and leave him on the sand, this may not. That still he may feed on the
goodness of God Psa. 71.9. Cast me not off in old age, forsake me not when my
strength fails. It Is the continual influence of his graciousness makes them
still grow like Cedars in Lebanon, Psa. 92. To bring forth fruit in old age to
be still fat, and flourishing, to show that the Lord is upright, as is there
added, that he is even (as the word is) still like himself, and his goodness
ever the same.

Full chests, or large possessions, may seem sweet to a Man, till death present
it self, but then, as the Prophet speaks of throwing away their idols of silver
and gold to the Battes, and Moles, in the day of calamity, then he is forced to
throw all he possesses away with disdain of it, and his former folly in doting
on it, then the kindness of friends and Wife, and Children can do nothing, but
increase his grief, and their own: But then is the love of God the good indeed
and abiding sweetness. And it best relisheth when all other things are most
unsavory, and uncomfortable. God is gracious, but 'its God in Christ,
otherwise, we cannot find him so; therefore here this is spoken particular of
Jesus Christ (as it appears by that which follows) through whom all the
peculiar kindness, and love of God, is conveyed to the soul, and can come no
other way, and the word here mentioned is the Gospel Chap. 1. Ver. ult whereof
Christ is the subject. Though God is Mercy, and Goodness in himself; yet we
cannot find, nor apprehend him so to us; but only looking through that medium,
the Mediator.

That main point of the goodness of God in the Gospel, that is so sweet to a
humbled sinner, the forgiveness of sins, we know we cannot taste of, but in
Christ Ehp. 1.7. In whom we have Redemption. And all the favor that shines on
us, all the grace we receive, is of his fullness, all our acceptance with God,
taking into grace, and kindness again, is in him, Ver. 6. He made us accepted
in the beloved. His grace appears in both, as it is there expressed, but it is
all in Christ. Let us therefore never leave him out, in our desires of tasting
the graciousness and love of God: For otherwise, we shall but dishonor him,
and disappoint our selves.

The free grace of God was given to be tasted, in the promises, before the
coming of Christ in the flesh: But being accomplished in his coming, then was
the sweetness of grace made more sensible: Then was it more fully broacht, and
let out to the Elect world when he was pierced on the Cross, and his blood
poured out for our redemption. Through those holes of his wounds way we draw,
and taste that the Lord is gracious says S. August.

2. Taste] There is a tasting of temporary believers spoke of Heb. 6.4. Their
highest sense of spiritual things (and it will be in some far higher than we
easily think) yet is but a taste, and is called so in comparison of the truer
fuller sense, that true believers have of the grace, and goodness of God which
compared with temporary taste, is more than tasting, the former is tasting,
rather an imaginary taste then real, but this is a true feeding on the
graciousness of God, yet called but a taste in respect of the fullness to come,
though it is more than a taste, as you difference it from the hypocrites sense,
yet it is no more but a taste compared with the great marriage feast we look for.

Jesus Christ, being all in all unto the soul, faith apprehending him, is all
the spiritual senses, it is the eye that beholds his matchless beauty, and so
enkindles love in the soul, and can speak of him as having seen him, and taken
particuliar notice of him. Cant. 5.9. It Is the ear that discernes his voice.
Cant. 2.8. It Is faith that smells his name poured forth as an ointment, faith
it touches him and draws virtue from him, and faith that tastes him. Cant. 2.3.
And here If ye have tasted, etc.

There must be, 1. a firm believing the truth of the promises, wherein the
free Grace of God is expressed, and exhibited to us. 2. A particular application,
or attraction of that grace to our selves, which is as the drawing those
breasts of consolation, namely the promises contained in the old and new
Testament. 3. There is a sense of the sweetness of that grace, being applied or
drawn in to the soul, and that is properly this taste. No unrenewed Man has any
of these in truth, not the highest kind of temporary believer, he cannot have
so much as a real lively assent to the general truth of the promises, for had
he that, the rest would follow, but as he cannot have the least of these in
truth, he may have the counterfit of them all, not only of assent, but
application, yea, and a false spiritual joy arising on it, and all these so
drawn to the life, that they may resemble much the truth of them, and to give
clear characters of difference is not so easy as most imagine; but doubtless,
the true living faith of a Chiristian, has in it self, such a particular
stamp, as brings with it, its own evidence, when the soul is clear, and the
light of Gods face shines upon it: Indeed in the dark, we cannot read, nor
distinguish one mark from another but when a Christian has light, to look upon
the work of God in his own soul, although he cannot make another sensible of
that by which he knows it, yet he himself is ascertained, and can say
confidently in himself, this I know, that this faith and ^ast of God I have is
true, the seal of the spirit of God is upon it, and this is the reading of that
new name, in the white stone, that no Man knows, but he that has it. There is
in a true Believer such a constant love to God, for himself, and continual
desire after him, simply for his own excellency, and goodness, that no other
can have. On the other side, would an Hypocrite deal truly and impartialy by
himself, he would readily find out something that would discover him, more, or
less to himself: but the truth is, Men are willing to deceive themselves and
thence arises the difficulty.

One Man cannot make another sensible of the sweetness of Divine Grace, he may
speak to him of it very excellently, but all he says in that kind is an
unknown language to a natural Man, he has many good words, but he cannot tell
what they mean. The natural Man tastes not the things of God, for they are
spiritually discerned.

A Spiritual Man himself does not fully conceive this swetness that he tastes
of, it is an infinite Goodness, and he has but a taste of it, the Peace of God
is a main fruit of this his goodness, it passes all understanding, says the
Apostle, not only all natural understanding as some modifie it; but all
understanding, even the supernatural understanding of those that enjoy it, and
as the Godly Man cannot conceive it all, so that which he conceives, he cannot
express it all, and that which he does express, the carnal mind cannot conceive
of it by his expression.

But he that has indeed tasted of this goodness, O how tastless are those
things to him, that the World call's sweet, as when you have tasted somewhat
that is very sweet, it disrelisheth other things after it. Therefore can a
Christian so easily either want, or use with disregard the delights of this
earth. His heart is not upon them: for the delight that he finds in it God
carries it unspeakably away from all the the rest, makes them in comparison
seem sapless to his taste.

Solomon tasted of all the delicacies, the choicest dishes that are in such
esteem amongst Men, and not only tasted, but eat largly of them, and yet see
how he goes over them, to let us know what they are, and passes from one dish
to another, this also is vanity, and of the next this also is vanity, and so
through all, and of all in general, All is vanity and vexation of Spirit, or
feeding on the Wind, as the word may be rendered.

3. We come in the third place to the Inference. If ye have tasted, etc. Then
lay aside all Malice and guile and Hipocrisies and Envies, and all evil
speakings, Verse 1. For it looks back to the whole Exhortation; sure if you
have tasted of that kindness and sweetness of God in Christ, it will compose
your spirits, and conform them to him, it will diffuse such a sweetness through
your soul, that there will be no place for malice and guile. There will be
nothing but love, and meekness, and singleness of heart, therefore they that
have bitter malicious Spirits, evidence they have not tasted of the love of
God, as the Lord is good, so they that taste it are made like him. Ephesians. 4.32.
Be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God
for Christ sake has forgiven you.

Again if ye have tasted, then desire more, and this is the truest sign of it;
he that is in a continual hunger, and thirst after this graciousness of God,
sure he has tasted of it. My soul thirsts for God, (says David,) he had
tasted before, Verse 4. he remembers that he went to the house of God with the
voice of Joy.

This is that happy circle wherein the soul moves the more they love it, the
more they shall taste of this goodness; and the more they taste, the more they
shall still love, and desire it.

But observe, if ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious, then desire the milk
of the Word. This is the sweetness of the word, that it has in it the Lords
graciousness, gives us the knowledge of his love; this they find in it, that
have Spiritual life and senses and those senses exercised to discern good, and
evil; and this engages a Christian to further desire of the Word: These are
fantastical deluding tastes that draw Men from the written Word, and make them
expect other Revelations. This graciousness is first conveyed to us, by the
Word; there we taste it and therefore there still we are to seek it; to hang
upon those breasts that cannot be drawn dry, there the love of God, in Christ,
streams forth in the several promises; the heart that cleaves to the word of
God, and delights in it, cannot but find in it daily new tastes of his
goodness, there it reads his love, and by that stirs up his own to him, and so
grows, loves every day more than the former, and thus is tending from tastes
to fullness. It Is but little we can receive, some drops of joy that enter into
us, but there we shall enter into joy, as vessels put into a Sea of happiness.

Verse. 4, 5.
4. To whom coming unto a living Stone disallowed indeed of men but chosen of
God and precious.

5. Ye also as lively Stones are built up a Spitual, House, an holy Priesthood,
to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.


THe spring of all the dignities of a Christian, and therefore the great
motives of all his duties, is, his near relation to Jesus Christ. Thence it is,
that the Apostle makes that the great subject of his Doctrine, both to
represent to his distressed Brethren their Dignity in that, and to press by it,
the necessary duties he exhorts unto. Having spoke of their Spiritual life, and
growth in him, under the resemblance of natural life; he prosecutes it here, by
another comparison very frequent in the Scriptures, and therefore makes use in
it, of some passages of those Scriptures, that were Prophetical of Christ and
his Church. Though there be here two different similitudes, yet they have so
near Relation one to another, and meet so well in the same subject, that he
joins them together, and then illustrates them severaly in the following
Verses, a Temple, and a Priesthood, comparing the Saints to both. The former in
these words of this Verse.

We have in it. 1. The nature of the building. 2. The materials of it. 3. The
structure or way of building it.

1. The nature is, a spiritual building. Time, and place (we know) received
their being from God, and he was Eternaly before both, therefore styled by the
Prophet, the high and lofty one that inhabiteth Eternity: but having made the
World, he fills it though not as contained in it, and so the whole frame of it
is his Palace, or Temple; but after a more special manner, the higher and
statelier part of it, the highest Heaven: Therefore called, his holy place and
the habitation of his holiness, and glory: and on earth the houses of his
Public Worship, are called his houses; especially the Jewish Temple in its
time, having in it such a relative typical holiness; which others have not; but
besides all these, and beyond them all in excellency, he has a house wherein
he dwells more peculiarly: than in any of the rest: even more, than in Heaven,
taken for the place only, and that is, this spiritual building. And this is
most suitable to the nature of God, as our Savior says of the necessary
conformity of his Worship to himself, God is a spirit, and therefore will be
worshipped in spirit and in truth. So it holds of his house, he must have a
Spiritual one, because he is a spirit, So Gods Temple, is his People.

And for this purpose chiefly did he make the world, the heaven, and the earth:
That in it he might raise this spiritual building for himself to dwell in for
ever, to have a number of his reasonable creatures to enjoy him, and glorify
him in eternity; and from eternity he knew what the demensions, and frame, and
materials of it should be. The continuance of this present world, as now it is,
is but for the service of this work, like the scaffolding about it; and
therefore, when this Spiritual building shall be fully completed, all the
present frame of things in the world, and in the Church it self, shall be taken
away and appear no more.

This building, is, as the particular designing of its materials will teach us,
the whole invisible Church of God, and each good man is a stone of this
building, but as the nature of it, is spiritual, it has this privilege, [as
they speak of the soul] that 'its tota in toto and tota in qualibet part, as
the whole Church is the spouse of Christ, and each believing soul has the same
title, and dignity to be called so, thus each of these stones is called a whole
Temple, Temples of the holy Ghost, though taking the temple, or building in a
compleater sense, they are but each one a part, or a stone of it, as here it is
expressed.

The whole excellency of this building is comprised in this, that it is called
spiritual, differencing it from all other buildings, and preserving it to them,
and because he speaks immediately after, of a Priesthood, and sacrifices, it
seems to be called a spiritual building, particularly in opposition to that
material. Temple wherein the Jews gloried, which was now Null in regard of its
former use, and was wholly after destroyed: But when it stood, and the legal
use of it stood in fullest vigor, yet in this still it was inferior, that it
was not a spiritual house made up of living stones as this, but of a like
matter with other earthly buildings.

The spiritual house is the palace of the great King, of his temple. The Hebrew
word for palace, and temple, is one. Gods temple is a palace, and therefore
must be full of the richest beauty, and magnificence: But such as agrees with
the nature of it, a spiritual beauty. In that Psalm that wishes so many
prosperities, one is that their daughters may be, as corner stones, polished
after the similitude of a palace, thus is the Church, that is called the Kings
daughter. Psa. 45. but her comeliness, is invisible to the World. She is all
glorious within, through sorrows, and Persecutions, she may be smoaky, and
black to the World's eye, as the tents of Kedar: but in regard of Spiritual
beauty, she is comely as the Curtains of Solomon, and in this the Jews Temple
resemble it right, which had most of its riches, and beauty in the inside;
Holiness is the gold of this Spiritual house, and it is inwardly enriched with
that.

The glory of the Church of God is not in stately buildings of Temples, and
rich furniture, and Pompous ceremonies, these agree not with its Spiritual
nature. Its true, and genuine beauty is, to grow in spiritualness, and so to be
liker it self, and have more of the presence of God, and his Glory filling it,
as a cloud, and it has been observed, that the more the Church grew in outward
riches and state, the less she grew, but abated sensibly in Spiritual
excellencies. But the Spiritualness of this building, will better appear in
considering particularly the materials of it as here expressed.

Now 2. The whole building is Christ mystical; Christ together with the entire
body of the Elect, he as the foundation, and they as the stones, built upon
him: He the living stone, and they likewise by union with him livings stones He
having life in himself as he speaks, John. 6. And they deriving it from him, he
primitively living, and they by participation: For therefore is he called here
a living stone, not only, because of his immortality, and glorious
resurrection, being a lamb that was slain, and is alive again for ever: But
because he is the principle of spiritual, and eternal life unto us, a living
foundation that transfuses this life into the whole building, and every stone
of it, in whom (says the Apostle Ephesians. 2.) all the building is fitly framed
together: It Is the spirit that flows from him, which enliven's it, and knitts
it together, as a living body, for the same word is used chap. 4. For the
Church under the similitude of a body. Now that 'its there said, Chap. 2 Ver.
20. to be built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, is no other,
but their doctrine, concerning Christ and therefore it is added, that he, as
being the subject of their doctrine, is the chief corner stone. The foundation
then of the Church lies not in Rome, but in Heaven, and therefore is out of the
reach of all Enemies, and above the power of the gates of hell: Fear not then
when you see the storms arise, and the winds blow against this spiritual
building, for it shall stand, it is built upon an invisible, immovable Rock,
and it great Babylon, Rome it self, that under the false title, and pretense of
supporting this building, is working to overthrow it, shall be utterly
overthrown, and laid equal with the ground, and never be rebuilt again. But
this foundation stone as it is commended, by its quality, that it is a living,
and enlivening stone, having life, and giving life to those that are built on
it. It Is further described by Gods choosing it, and its own worth, both opposed
to Men's disesteem, and therefore said here: To be chosen of God. God did indeed
from Eternity contrive this building, and choose this same foundation, and
accordingly in the fullness of time, did perform his purpose, so the thing being
one, we may take it, either for his purpose, or performance, or both, yet it
seems most suitable to the strain of the words, and the place after alleged,
for laying him in Sion, and opposing the rejection of Men, that we take it, for
Gods actual employing of Jesus Christ, in the work of our Redemption, he only
fit for that work, impossible utterly that any other should bear the weight of
that service [and so of this building] but he who was Almighty. Therefore, the
spouse calls him, the select, or choice of ten thousand, yet rejected of Men.
There is that antipathy (so to speak) betwixt the mind of God, and corrupt
nature; the things that are highly esteemed with men are abomination to God;
and thus we see here, that which is highly esteemed with God, is cast, and
disallowed by Men. But sure there is no comparison, the choosing, and esteem of
God stands, and by that, (judge Men of Christ as they will) he is the
foundation of this building. And he is in true value answerable to this esteem
precious, which seems to signify a kind of inward worth, hidden from the eyes
of Men, blind unbelieving Men; but well known to God, and to those to whom he
reveals him. And this is the very cause of his rejection by the most, the
ignorance of his worth, and excellency. As a precious stone that the skilful
Lapidary esteems much worth, an ignorant beholder makes little or no account of.

These things hold likewise in the other stones of this building, chosen before
time, all that should be of this building foreordain'd in Gods purpose, all
written in that book before hand, and then, in due time, they are chosen by
actual calling according to that purpose; hewed out, and severed by Gods own
hand, out of the quarry of corrupt nature: Dead stones in themselves, as the
rest; but made living, by his bringing them to Christ, and so made truly
precious, and accounted precious by him that has made them so. All the stones
in this building are called Gods jewels, Mal. 3. Though they be vilified, and
scoffed and despised by Men. Though they pass for fools, and the refuse of the
world, yet they may easily digest all that in the comfort of this, if chosen of
God, and precious in his eyes, this is the very Lot of Christ, and therefore by
that the more welcome that it conformes them to him, suites these stones to
their foundation.

And if we look right on it what a poor despiseable thing, is the esteem of Men?
how soon is it past, it is a small thing for me, says the Apostle to be judged
of men. Now that God often chooses for this building, such stones, as men cast
away, as good for nothing, see 1. Cor. 1. And where he says Isa. 51. That he
dwells in the high, and holy place, What is his other dwelling? his habitation
in earth, is it in great palaces and Courts? No. But with him that is of a
contrite and humble spirit. Now these are the basest in Men's account, yet he
chooses them, and preferr's them to all other palaces, and temples Isa. 66.1.2.
you cannot gratify me with any dwelling for I my self have made all, and a
surer house than any you can make me, the heaven is my throne, and the earth my
footstool, but I, that am so high, am pleas^d to regard the lowly.

3. To whom comeing] First. Coming, then built up. They that come unto Christ,
come not only from the world, that lies in wickedness, but out of themselves.
Of a great many that seem to come to Christ, it may be said, that they are not
come to him, because they have not left themselves. This is believing on him,
which is the very resigning the soul to Christ, and living by him. Ye will not
come unto me that ye may have life, says Christ. Io. 5.40. He complains of it
as a wrong done to him: But the loss is ours, it is his glory to give us life,
that were dead: But it is our happiness to receive that life from him. Now
these stones come unto their foundation, which imports the moving of the soul
to Christ, being moved by his spirit, and that the will acts, and willingly,
for it cannot act otherwise: But as being acted, and drawn by the father. Ioh.
6. No man can come to me Except the father draw him And the outward means of
drawing, is by the word, it is the sound of that harp, that brings the stones of
this spiritual building together, and then being united to Christ they are
built up. That is as S. Paul expresses it. Ephesians. 2.21. They grow up unto a holy
temple in the Lord.

In times of peace, the Church may dilate more, and build as it were into
breadth: But in trouble, it arises more in hight, is built upwards, as in
cities, where men are straightened, they build usually higher than in the country.
Notwithstanding of the Churches afflictions yet still the building is going
forward, it is built (as Daniel speaks of Jerusalem) in troubleous times. And
it is this which the Apostle intends as suiting with his forgoing Exhortation,
this may be read exhortatively too, but taking it rather as asserting their
condition, it is for this end, that they may remember to be like it, and grow
up. For this end he expressly calls them living stones, an adjunct, not usual
for stones, but here inseparable. And therefore though the Apostle changes the
similitude from Infants, to stones; yet he will not let go, this quality of
living, as making chiefly for his purpose.

To teach us the necessity of growth in Believers, they are therefore much
compared to things that grow, to Trees planted in fruitful growing places, as
by the River of waters; to Cedars in Lebanon where they are tallest. To the
morning light, to Infants on the breast, and here where the word seems to refuse
it, to stones, yet (it must and well does admit this unwonted Epithete) they
are called living and growing stones.

If then you would have the comfortable persuasion of that union with Christ,
see whether you find your souls established upon Jesus Christ, finding him as
your strong foundation, not resting on your selves, nor on any other thing
either within you, or without you, but supported by him alone, drawing life
from him by virtue of that union as from a living foundation, so as to say,
with the Apostle, I live by faith in the son of God, who both loved me, and
given himself for me.

As these stones are built on Christ by faith, so they are cemented one to
another by love, and therefore, where that is not, it is but a delusion to think
themselves parts of this building. As it is knit to him, it is knit together in
it self through him, and if dead stones in a building support and strengthen
mutually one another, how much more ought living stones in an acttive lively
way to do so, the stones of this building keep their place, the lower rise not
up to be in the place of the higher, as the Apostle speaks; of the parts of the
body, so the stones of this building in humility and love, keep their station,
and grow up in it, edifying in love Ephesians. 4.16. The Apostle importing, that the
want of this, much prejudges edification.

These stones because living, therefore they grow in the life of grace, and
spiritualness; being a Spirittual building, so that if we find not this, but
our hearts are still carnal, and glued to the earth. minding earthly things,
wiser in those, than in Spirituals, this evidences strongly against us, that we
are not of, this building. How few of us have that spiritualness that becomes
the Temples of the holy Ghost or the stones of it, base lusts, and those still
lodging, and ruling within us, and so hearts as Cages of unclean Birds, and
filthy spirits.

Consider this as our happiness, and the unsolidness of other comforts, and
privileges, if some have called those stones happy, that were taken for the
building of Temples, or altars, beyond those in common houses, how true is it
here, happy indeed the stones, that God chooses to be living stones in this
Spiritual Temple, though they be hammered, and hewed to be polished for it, by
afflictions and the inward work of mortification, and repentance, it is worth
the enduring all, to be fitted for this building, happy they, beyond all the
rest of men, though they be set in never so great honors, as prime parts of
politic buildings, states, and Kingdoms in the Courts of Kings, yea, or Kings
themselves: For all other buildings and all the parts of them shall be
demolished and come to nothing from the foundation, to the cope stone, all your
houses both cottages, and palaces the elements shall melt away; and the earth
with all the works in it shall be consumed, as our Apostle has it, but this
Spiritual building, shall grow up to Heaven, and being come to perfection,
shall abide for ever in perfection of beauty, and glory, in it shall be found
no unclean thing, nor unclean person: But only they that are written in the
Lambs book of Life.

An holy priesthood] As the worship, and Ceremonies of the Jewish Church were
all shadows of Jesus Christ, and have their accomplishment in him not only
after a singular manner in his own Person; but in a derived way, in his
mystical body, his Church. The Priesthood of the Law represented him, as the
great high priest, that offered up himself for our sins, and that is altogether
incommunicable; neither is there any peculiar Office of Priesthood for offering
Sacrifice in the Christian Church, but his alone who is head of it, but this
Dignity that is here mentioned of a Spiritual Priesthood, offering Spiritual
Sacrifice, is common to all those, that are in Christ as they are living stones
built on him into a Spiritual Temple, so they are Priests of that same Temple,
made by him, Reve. 1.6. As he was after a transcendent manner, Temple, and
Priest, and Sacrifice; so in their kind, are Christians all these three through
him; and by his Spirit, that is in them, their Offerings through him are made
acceptable.

We have here, 1. The Office. 2. The service of that Office. 3. The success of
that Service.

The death of Jesus Christ, as being every way powerful for reconcilement, and
union, did not only break the partition wall of guiltiness that stood betwixt
God and Man, but the wall of ceremonies that stood betwixt the Jews, and
Gentiles, made all that believe one with God, and made of both one as the
Apostle speaks, united them one to another, the way of salvation made known,
not to one Nation only, but to all people, that whereas the knowledge of God
was confined to one little corner, 'its now diffused through the Nations, and
whereas the dignity of their Priesthood stayed in a few Persons, all they that
believe are now thus dignified to be Priests unto God the father, and this was
signified by the rending the vail of the Temple at his death, not only that
those cermonies, and sacrifices were to cease, as being all fulfilled in him:
But that the people of God, that were before by that vail held out in the outer
Court, were to be admitted into the holy place, as being all of them Priests
and fitted to offer sacrifices.

The Priesthood of the Law was holy, and its holiness was signified by many
outward things suitable to their manner, by anointings, and washings, and
vestments; but in this spiritual Priesthood of the Gospel, holiness it self is
in stead of all those, as being the substance of all, the Children of God are
all anoint^d, and purified, and clothed with holiness. But then.

2 There is here the service of this office namely to offer, There is no
Priesthood without sacrifice, for these are relative, and this was the chief
employment of the legal Priests, now because the Priesthood here spoke of, is
altogether Spiritual, therefore the sacrifices must be so too, as the Apostle
here expresses it.

We are saved the pains, and cost of bringing bullocks, and rams, and other
such sacrifices, and these are in their stead; as the Apostle speaks Heb. 7. of
the high Priesthood of Christ, that the Priestood being changed there followed
of necessity a change of the Law, so in this Priesthood of Christians, there is
a change of the kind of sacrifice, from the other. All sacrifice is not taken
away, but it is changed from the offering of those things formerly in use, to
Spiritual sacrifices.

Now these are every way preferable, they are easier, and cheaper to us, and
yet more precious, and acceptable to God. As here follows in the text, even in
the time when the other sacrifices were in request, yet those Spiritual
offerings, had ever the precedence in Gods account, and without them, he hated,
and despised all burnt offerings, and the largest sacrifices, though they were
then conform to his own appointment; how much more should we abound in
Spiritual Sacrifice, that are eased of the other? How much more holds that
answer now, that was given even in those times, Mic. 6.6. Wherewith shall I
come before the Lord, etc. you need not all that trouble and expense, it is at
hand that God requires most of all, Namely, to do justly, and to love mercy,
and to walk humbly with thy God. So Psalm. 50.23. That which is peculiarly spoke
of Christ holds in Christians by conformity with him.

But though the Spiritual sacrificing is easier in its own nature, yet to the
corrupt nature of Man it is by far the harder. He would rather choose still all
the toil, and cost of the former way, if it were in his option; this was the
sin of the Jews, in those times, that they leaned the soul upon the bodies
service too much, and would have done enough of that to be dispenst from this
Spiritual service. Hence are the Lords frequent reproofs and complaints in
this, Psalm. 50. Isai. 1 etc. Hence the willingness in Popery for outward work,
for Penances, and satisfactions of Bodies, and Purses, any thing of that kind,
if it might serve, rather than the inward work of Repentance, and
Mortification, the Spiritual Service, and sacrifices of the Soul, but the
answer of all those from God is that of the Prophet who required these things
at your hands.

Indeed the works of Charity they press, if they be done with a right hand, and
the left hand not so much as acquainted with the business, as our Savior
speaks, Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does. They must be done
with a right, and singular intention, and from a right Principle moving to
them, without any vain opinon of Meriting by them with God, or any vain desire
of gaining applause with Men; but merely, out of Love to God, and to Man for
his sake, thus they are one of these Spiritual Sacrifices. And therefore ought
by no means to be neglected by Christian Priests, that is by any that are
Christians.

Another Spiritual Sacrifice is, The Prayers of the Saints, Revel. 5.8. Psalm.
141.2. Let my Prayer be set forth before thee as Incense, and the lifting up of
my hands as an Evening Sacrifice. It Is not the composure of Prayer, or the
eloquence of expression that is the sweetness of it in Gods account, and makes
it a Sacrifice of a pleasing smell or sweet odor to him: But the breathing
forth the desire of the heart, that is it, that makes it a Spiritual Sacrifice,
otherwise it is as carnal, and dead, and worthless in Gods account, as the
carcases of Beasts. Incense can neither smell, nor ascend without fire, no more
does Prayer unless it arise from a bent of Spiritual affection, it is that both
makes it smell, and sends it Heavenwards, makes it never leave moving upwards
till it come before God, and smell sweet in His Nostrils, which few, too few of
our Prayers do.

Praise also is a Sacrifice, to make respectful and honorable mention of the
Name of God, and of his goodness, to bless him humbly and heartily, Heb. 13.15.
Psalm. 50.14.23. Offer unto God thanksgiving Whosoever offers praise glorifyeth
me. And this is that Sacrifice that shall never end, but continues in Heaven to
Eternity. Then a holy course of life is called the Sacrifice of Righteousness,
Psalm. 4.6. Phil. 4.18. Heb. 13.16. Where he shows what Sacrifices succeed to
those, that thus he has taught, so much are abolished. Christ Sacrificed for
us, and that only powerful to take away sin; but our gratulatory Sacrifices,
Praise and Alms are as Incense burnt to God, of which as the standers by find
the sweet smell so the holy life of a Christian, smell sweet to those with whom
they live, but the wicked as putrified Carcasses are of a noysom smell to God,
and Man. Psalm. 14.4. They are Corrupt they have done abominable works.

In a word, that our Sacrifice, that includes all these, and without which,
none of these, can be rightly offered, is Our selves, our whole selves, our
Bodies a living sacrifice, Romans 12.1. and they are not that, without our Souls,
it is our heart given, that gives all the rest, for that commands all. My Son
give me thy heart, and then the other will follow. Thine eyes will delight in
my ways, this makes the Eyes, and Ears, and Tongue, and Hands, and all to be
holy, as Gods peculiar, being once given, and consecrate to him, and therefore
sacrilege to turn them to any unholy use. This makes a Man delight to hear,
and speak of things that concern God, and to think on him frequently, to be
holy in his secret thoughts, and all his ways, in every thing we bring him,
every Thanksgiving and Prayer we offer, his eye is upon the heart, he looks if
it be in together with our offering, and if he miss it, cares not for all the
rest; but throws it back again.

The heart must be offered withal and the whole heart, all of it entirely given
to him: se totum obtulit Christus pro nobis. In another sense, which crosses
not this, it must not be whole but broken. Psalm. 51. But if thou find it
unbroken, yet give it him, with a desire that it may be broken; and if it be
broken, and when thou have given it him, he break it more, yea and melt it too,
yet thou shall not repent thy gift, for he breaks, and melts it, that he may
refine it, and make it up in a new and excellent frame, and may impresse his
own Image on it, make it holy, and so like to himself.

Let us then give him our selves, or nothing, and to give our selves to him, is
not his advantage but ours, as the Philosopher said to his poor Scholar, that
when others gave him great gifts told him, he had nothing but himself to give.
It Is well said he, and I will endeavor to give thee back to thy self, better
than I received thee. Thus does God with us, and a Christian makes himself his
daily Sacrifice, he renews this gift of himself every day to God, and receiving
it every day bettered again, still he has the more light to give it, as being
fitter for God, the more it is sanctified by former Sacrificing.

Now that, whereby we offer all other Spiritual Sacrifices, and our selves
withal, is Love, that is the holy fire that burns up all, sends up our Prayers,
and our hearts, and our whole selves a whole burnt offering to God, and as the
fire of the Altar, it is originally from Heaven, being kindled by Gods own love
to us, and by this the Church and each Believer ascends like a straight Pillar
of smoke, as the word is, Cant. 3.6. going even up to God perfumed with Aloes,
and all the Spices, all the graces of the Spirit, received from Christ, but
above all with his own Merits.

How far from this is the common Multitude of us though professing to be
Christians? Who considers his holy calling: As the peculiar holiness of the
Ministry should be much in their Eye and thoughts that are called to it, to
study to be answerably eminent in holiness, so all that are Christians consider
you are Priests unto God, being called a Holy Priesthood; thus you ought to be,
but if we speak what we are indeed, we must say rather we are an unholy
Priesthood, a shame to that Name and holy Profession, in stead of the
Sacrifices of a godly Life, and the incense of Prayer, and Praise in Families,
and alone, what is with many, but the filthy vapors of profane speaking, and
a profane life, as a noisome smell arising out of a dunghill.

But you that have once offered up your selves unto God, and are still doing
so, with all the services you can reach, Continue so, and be affur'd, that how
unworthy soever your selves, and all your offerings be, yet they shall not be
rejected.

The 3. thing here observable is the success of that Service, acceptable to God
by Jesus Christ. Heb. 13.16. The Children of God do delight in offering
Sacrifices to him: but if they might not know that they were well taken at
their hands, this would discourage them much; therefore this is added; how
often do the Godly find it in their sweet experience? That when they come to
Pray, he welcomes them, and gives them such evidences of his love, as they
would not exchange for all Worldly pleasures, and when this does not so
presently appear at other times, yet they ought to believe it, he accepts
themselves and their ways offered in sincerity, though never so mean, though
they sometimes have no more, but a sigh or groan it is most properly a Spiritual
Sacrifice.

Stay not away because thou, and thy gifts thou offer'st, are below others, no,
none are excluded for that, only give what thou have, and act with affection,
for that he regards most: Under the Law they that had not a Lamb, were welcome
with a pair of Pigeons, so that the Christian may say, What I am Lord. I offer
my self unto thee, to be wholly thine, and had I a thousand times more of
outward, or inward gifts, all should be thine, had I more Estate, or Wit, or
Learning, or Power, I would endeavor to serve thee with all. What I have I
offer thee, and it is most truly thine, it is but of thy own that I give thee.
None needs forbear Sacrifice for Poverty, for that he desires is the heart, and
there is none so poor but has a heart to give him.

But meanness is not all, there is a guiltiness on our selves, and on all we
offer, our Prayers and Services are all polluted: But this hinders not neither;
for our acceptance, is not for our selves; but for one, who has no guiltiness
at all. Acceptable by Jesus Christ] In him our Persons are clothed with
righteousness, and in his clothing, we are as Isaac said of Jacob in his
Brother's garments, as the smell of a Field that the Lord has blessed. And all
our other Sacrifices, our Prayers, and Services if we offer them by him, and
put them into his hand to offer to the Father, then doubt not they will be
accepted in him, for this by Jesus Christ, is relative both to our Offering and
acceptance, we ought not to offer any thing, but by him. Heb. 13.15. And so we
are well pleasing, for he is his wellbeloved Son, in whom his soul is
delighted, not only delighted, and pleased with himself, but in Him. with all
things and Persons that appear in him, and are presented by him.

And this alone answers all our doubts, for we our selves, for as little as we
see that way, yet may see so much in our best Services, so many wanderings in
Prayer, so much deadness, etc. as would make us still doubtful of acceptance,
and might say with Job, although he had answered me, yet would I not b^lieve
that he had hearkened to me, were it not this, that our Prayers, and all our
Sacrifices pass through Christ's hand, he is that Angel that has much sweet
odours, to mingle with the Prayers of the Saints, he purifies them with his own
Merits, and Intercession, and so makes them pleasing unto the Father. How ought
our hearts to be knit to him? by whom we are brought into favor with God, and
kept in favor with him, in whom we obtain all the good we receive, and in whom
all we offer is accepted. In him are all our supplies of grace, and our hopes
of glory.

Verse 6.
Wherefore also it is contained in the Scripture, behold I lay in Sion a chief
Corner stone, elect, precious: and he that believes on him shall not be
confounded.
THat which is the chief of the works of God, is therefore very reasonably the
chief Subject of his word, as both most excellent in it self, and of most
concernment for us to know.

And this is the saving of lost Mankind by his Son. therefore is his name as
precious Ointment or perfume diffused through the whole Scriptures, all these
holy leaves smell of it, not only those that were written after his coming, but
those before. Search the Scriptures, says he himself, for they testify of of
me. Namely, the Scriptures of the Old Testament which were only then written,
and to evidence this, both himself, and his Apostles make so frequent use of
their testimony, and we find so much of them inserted into the New, as being
both one in substance, their lines meeting in the same Jesus Christ as their
center.

The Apostle here, having expressed the happy Estate and Dignity of Christians
under a double notion. 1. Of a Spiritual House or Temple. 2. Of a Spiritual
Priesthood, he amplifies and confirms both from the Writings of the Prophets.
The former Verse 6, 7, 8. The latter Verse 9. These places that he cites,
touching this building are most pertinent, for they have clearly in them, all
that he spoke of it, both concerning the foundation, and the Edifice, as the
first in these words of Esaias 28.16. Behold I lay in Sion a chief Corner stone,
etc.

Let this commend the Scriptures much to our diligence, and affection, that
their great Theme is our Redeemer, and Redemption wrought by him, that they
contain the Doctrine of his excellencies, are the lively picture of his
matchless beauty; were we more in them, we would daily see more of him in them
and so of necessity love him more, but we must look within them, the Letter is
but the case; the Spiritual sense is that we should desire to see: We usualy
huddle them over, and see no further than their outside, and therefore, find so
little sweetness in them, we read them, but we search them not, as he requires.
Would we digg into those Golden Mines, we would find treasures of comfort that
cannot be spent, but would furnish us in the hardest times.

The prophecy here cited, if we look upon it in its own place, we shall find it
cast in, in the middle of a very sad denounciation of judgment against the
Jews. And this is usual with the Prophets, particularly with this Evangelicall
Prophet Esaias, to uphold the spirits of the godly, in the worst times, with this
one great consolation, the promise of the Messiah; as weighing down all, both
temporal distresses, and deliverances. Hence are those sudden ascents (so
frequent in the Prophets) from their present subject to this great hope of
Israel. And if this expectation of a Savior was so pertinent a comfort in all
estates, so many ages before the accomplishment of it, how wrongfully do we
undervalue it being accomplished, that cannot live upon it, and answer all with
it, sweeten all our griefs in this advantage, that there is a foundation stone
laid in Sion, on which they that are builded shall be sure not to be ashamed.

In the words there are 4 things. 1. This foundation stone. 2. The laying of
it. 3. The building on it. 4. The greatness and Excellency of the work.

1. For the foundation called here a Chief corner stone, Though the Prophet's
words are not precisely rendered, yet the substance, and sense is one: There,
both the foundation and corner stone is expressed, the corner stone in the
foundation being the main support of the building, and throughout the corner
stones uniting and knitting the building together; and therefore this same word
of a corner, is frequently taken in Scripture for Princes, or Heads of people:
Iud. 20.2. 1 Samuel 14.38. because good governors, and government are that,
which upholds, and unites the societies of people in states or kingdoms, as
one building. And Jesus Christ is indeed the alone head, and King of his
Church, that gives it laws, and rules it in wisdom, and righteousness, the
alone rock on which his Church is built, not Peter, if we will bel^eve S. Peter
himself, as here he teaches us, much less his pretended Successors; he is the
foundation, and corner stone that knitts together the walls of Jews and
Gentiles, having made of both one, as S. Paul speaks, and unites the whole
number of believers into one everlasting temple, and bears the weight of the
whole fabric.

Elected] or chosen out for the purpose, and altogether fit for it, Isaiah has
it, a stone of trial, or a tried stone: As things amongst Men are best chosen,
after trial, so Jesus Christ certainly known by the father, as most fit for
that work, to which he chose him before he tried him, as after upon trial in
his Life, and death, and resurrection he proved fully answerable to his fathers
purpose, in all that was appointed him.

All the strength of Angels combined had not sufficed for that business, but
the wise architect of this building, knew both what it would cost, and what a
foundation was needful to bear so great, and so lasting a structure as he
intended. Sin having defaced, and demolished, the first building of Man in the
integrity of his creation, it was Gods design out of the very ruins of fallen
Man to raise a more lasting edifice, than the former one, that should not be
subject to decay, and therefore fitted a foundation, that might be everlasting:
The sure founding is the main, therefore that it might stand for the true
honor of his Majesty (which Nebuchadnezzar vainly boasted of his Babel) he
chose his own son, made flesh; he was God that he might be a strong foundation,
he was Man that he might be suitable to the nature of the stones whereof the
building was to consist, that they might join and cement together.

Precious] Inestimably precious, by all the conditions that can give worth to
any, by rareness, and by inward excellency, and useful virtues. Rare he is out
of doubt, there is not such a person in the world again. Therefore called by
the same Prophet, wonderful, full of wonders, the power of God, and the frailty
of Man dwelling together in his person the ancient of days, becoming an
Infant: He that stretched forth the Heavens, bound up in swaddling clothes in
that his Infancy; and in his full age, stretched forth on the cross;
altogether spotless, and Innocent, and yet suffering, not only the unjust
cruelties of Men; but the just wrath of God his Father; the Lord of life, and
yet dying. His excellency appears in the same things, In that he is the Lord of
life, God blessed for ever, equal with the father; the sparkling brightness of
this precious stone is no less, than this, that he is the brightness of the
fathers glory; so bright, that Men could not have beheld him appearing in
himself, therefore he veiled it with our flesh, and yet through that, it
shined, and sparkled so, that the Apostle S. John saves of himself, and those
others that had eyes opened, and looked right upon him, he dwelt amongst us,
and he had a ^ent like ours, and yet through that, we saw his glory, as the
glory of the only begotten son of God, full of grace and truth. The Deity
filling his humane nature with all manner of grace, in its highest perfection.
And not only thus Excellent in himself; but of precious virtue, which he lets
forth, and imparts to others, of such virtue, that a touch of him is the only
cure of Spiritual diseases: Men tell of strange virtues of some stones, but it
is certain, that this precious stone, has not only virtue to heal the Sick,
but even to raise the dead. Dead bodies he raised in the days of his abode on
earth, and dead Souls he still does raise by the power of his word. The Prophet
Malachy calls him, the sun of righteousness, which has in it the rareness, and
excellency we speak; of he is singular, as there is but one Sun in the world,
so but one Savior, and his luster such a stone, as outshines the Sun in its
fullest brightness; and then for his useful virtue, he adds, that he has
healing under his wings, this his worth is unspeakable, and remains infinitely
beyond all these resemblances.

2 There is here the laying of this foundation, and its said to be laid in
Sion, that is, it is laid in the Church of God, and first laid in Sion
literaly, being then the seat of the Church and true Religion, he was laid
there, in his manifestation in the flesh, and suffering, and dying, and rising
again, and afterward being preached through the world, became the foundation
of his Church in all places where his name was received, and so was a stone
growing great till it filled the whole earth, as Daniel has it.

He says, I lay, by which the Lord expresses this his own proper work, as the
Psalmist speaks of the same subject. Psa. 118. This is the Lords doing, and it
is marvelous in our eyes. So Isa. 9.7. Speaking of this promised Messiah, the
zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this.

And this is not only said I lay because he had the first thought of this great
work, the model of it was in his mind from eternity, and that the
accomplishment of it was by his Almighty power in the morning of his Sons
birth, and his Life, and death, and Resurrection, but to signify withal the
freeness of his grace, in giving his Son, to be a foundation of happiness to
Man, without the least motion from Man* or motive in Man, to draw him to it; and
this seems to be signified by the unexpected inserting of these prophetical
promises of the Messiah, in the midst of complaints of people's wickedness, and
theatning them with punishment, intimating that there is no connection betwixt
this work and any thing on Man's part, fit to procure it; although you do thus
provoke me to destroy you, yet of my self I have other thoughts, there is
another purpose in my head. And Isi. 7. it is observable to this purpose, that,
that clearest promise of the virgin's son, is given* not only unrequir'd, but
being refused by that profane King.

This again, that the Lord himself is the layer of this corner stone, teaches
us, the firmness of it, which is likewise expres'd in the Prophets words very
emphatically by redoubling the same word, Musad, Musad; fundamentum,
fundamentum.

So Psalm. 2.6. I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion, who then shall
dethrone him? I have given him the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the ends of
the earth for his possession, and who will hinder him to take possession on his
right? if any offer to do so, what shall they be, but a number of earthen
vessels, fighting against an Iron Scepter, and so certainly breaking themselves
in pieces. Thus here, I lay this foundation stone, and if I lay it, who shall
remove it? and what I build upon it, who shall be able to cast down? For it is
the glory of this great Master Builder, that the whole Fabric, that is of his
building, be unruinable, and for that end has he laid an unmovable foundation,
and for that end are we taught and remembered of its firmness, that we may have
this confidence concerning the Church of God, that is built upon it. To the Eye
of Nature the Church seems to have no foundation, as Job speaks of the earth,
that it is hung upon nothing, and yet as the Earth remains firm being
established in its place by the word and power of God, the Church is most
firmly founded upon the word made flesh, Jesus Christ, as its chief Corner
stone, and as all the winds that blow cannot remove the earth out of its place,
neither can all the attempts of Men, no nor of the gates of hell prevail
against the Church, it may be beat with very boisterous storms; but it cannot
fall, because founded upon this Rock. Thus it is with the whole house, and thus
with every stone in it, as here it follows he that believes shall not be
confounded

3. There is next the building on this foundation This is plainly to be built
on Christ, to believe in him: But in this, the most deceive themselves, they
hear of such privileges, and happiness in Christ, and presently imagine, it is
all theirs, without any more ado, as that Mad man of Athens, that wrote up all
the ships came into the haven for his own: We consider not, what this is to
believe in him, and what is the necessity of his believing, that we may be
partakers of the salvation that he has wrought. It Is not they that have heard
of him, or that have some common knowledge of him, or are able to discourse of
him, and speak of His Person, and nature aright: But they that believe in him.
Much of our knowledge, is, as the poor Philosopher, (or as a Geometer that can
measure Land exactly in all its dimensions, but possesses not a foot.) who
defines riches exactly, and discourses of their nature, but possesses none;
and truly it is but a lifeless unsavory knowledge men have of Christ, by all
books and study, till he Reveal himself, and persuade the heart to believe in
him. Then indeed it says of all the reports it heard, when it sees him, and is
made one with him, I heard much, yet the half was not told me. There is in
lively faith, when it is infused into the soul, a clearer knowledge of Christ,
and his excellency than before, and withal a recumbence, of the soul upon him
as the foundation of its life, and comfort; a resolving to rest on him, and not
to depart from him, upon any terms. Though I be beset on all hands, be accused
by the law, and mine own conscience, and by Satan, and have nothing to answer
for my self, yet here I will stay, for I am sure, in him there is salvation,
and no where else. All other refuges, are but lies, as its in the words before
these in the Prophet, poor base shifts, that will do no good, and God has laid
this Precious stone in Sion, for this very purpose, that weary souls may rest
upon it, and why should not I make use of it according to his intention, he
has not forbid any how wretched soever to believe, but commands it, and
himself works it where he will, even in the vilest sinners.

Think it not enough that you know this Stone is laid, but see whether you are
built on it by faith: The multitude of imaginary believers ly round about it,
but they are never the better nor the surer for that, no more than stones that
ly loose in heaps near unto a foundation, but are not joined to it, there is no
benefit to us by Christ, without union with him. No comfort in his riches,
without interest in them, and title to them, by that union, then is the soul
right, when it can say, He is altogether lovely, and as the spouse there, He is
mine, my welbeloved. And this union is the spring of all Spiritual
consolations, and faith, by which we are thus united, is a divine work; he that
laid this foundation in Sion with his own hand, works likewise with the same
hand faith in the heart, by which it is knit to this corner stone, 'its not so
easy a thing as we imagine to believe, Ephesians. 1.19. Many that think they believe
are amongst the others quite contrary, that the Prophet there speaks, of
hardened in sin, and carnally secure, which he calls to be in covenant with
hell, and death, walking in sin, and yet promising themselves impunity.

4. There is the firmness of this building, Namely, He that believes on him
shall not be Confounded] This firmness is answerable to the nature of the
foundation. Not only the whole frame; but every stone of it, abides sure. It Is
a simple mistake, to judge the persuasion of perseverance to be
self-presumption, they that have it are far from building it on themselves, but
their foundation is that which makes them sure, because it does not only remain
firm it self, but indissolubly supports all that are once built on it. In the
Prophet, whence this is cited, it is, shall not make have, but the sense is one,
they that are disappointed, and ashamed in their hopes run to and fro, and seek
after some new recourse; This they shall not need to do, that come to Christ.
The believing soul makes have to Christ, but it never finds cause to hasten
from him, and though the comfort it expects and longs for, be for a time
deferred, yet it gives not over, knowing that in due time, it shall rejoice;
and shall not have cause to blush, and think shame of its confidence in him.
David expresses this distrust, by making haste. Psalm. 31.22. and 116.11. I was
too hasty, when I said so. Hopes frustrated, especially where they have been
raised high, and continued long, do reproach Men with folly, and so shame them.
And thus do all earthly hopes serve us, when we lean much upon them. We find
these things usually, that have promised us most content, pay us with vexation,
not only prove broken reeds, deceiving our trust, but hurtful, running their
broken spinters into our hand, that leaned on them. This sure Foundation is
laid for us, that our souls may be established on it, and be as Mount Sion that
cannot be removed. Such times may come, as will shake all other supports, but
this holds out against all, Psalm. 46.2. Though the earth be removed yet will
not we fear. Though the frame of the World were cracking about a Man's ears, he
may hear it unaffrighted, that is built on this Foundation. Why then do we
choose to build upon the sand? Believe it, wheresoever we lay our confidence,
and affection besides Christ, it shall once repent us, and ashame us, either
hapily in time, while we may change them for him, and have recourse to him, or
miserably, when it is too late: Remember that we must die, and must appear
before the Judgment Sent of God, and that the things we dote on here, have
neither Power to stay us here, nor have we power to take them along with us,
nor if we could, would they at all profit us there; and therefore when we look
back upon them all at parting, we shall wonder what fools we were, to make so
poor a Choice, and then in that great day wherein all faces shall gather
blackness, and be filled with confusion, that have neglected to make Christ
their stay when he was offered them: then it shall appear, how happy they are
that have trusted in him, they shall not be confounded, but shall lift up their
faces and be acquitted in him. In their present estate they may be founded, and
exercised, but they shall not be confounded, nor ashamed; a double negation in
the Original, by no means, they shall in all be more than Conquerours through
him that has loved them.

Behold] The last thing Obs. is in that first word importing this work to be
great, and remarkable, and caullng the eyes to behold it.

The Lord is mavelous in the least of his works, but in this he has
manifested more of his wisdom, and power, and let out more of his love to
Mankind, than in all the rest, but we are foolish, and childishly gaze about us
upon trifles, and let this great work pass unregarded, scarce afford it half an
Eye. Turn your wandering Eyes this way; Look upon this precious Stone, and
behold him, not in mere speculation, but so behold him, as to lay hold on him:
For we see he is therefore here set forth, that we may believe on him, and so
not be confounded, that we may attain this blessed union, that cannot be
dissolved, all other unions are dissoluble, A Man may be plucked from his
dwelling House and Lands, or they from him, though he have never so good title
to them, may be removed from his dearest friends, the Husband from the Wife, if
not by other accidents in their lifetime, yet sure by death, the great
dissolver of all those unions, and of that straitest of the Soul with the Body;
but it can do nothing against this union but perfects it, for I am persuaded
(says St. Paul) that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor Principallities,
nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height nor depth, nor
any other creature shall be able to s^perate us from the Love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord.

There is a twofold mistake concerning faith, 1st. They that are altogether
void of it, abusing and flattering themselves in a vain opinion that they have
it; and on the other side, they that have it, misjudging their own Condition,
and so prejudging themselves of much comfort, and sweetness that they might
find in their believing.

The former is the worse, and yet the far commoner evil, and as one says of
Wisdom, it is true of Faith, Many would seek after it, and attain it, if they
did not falsely imagine that they have attained it already. There is nothing
more contrary to the lively nature of Faith, than for the soul not to be at all
busied with the thoughts of its own Spiritual condition, and yet this very
character of unbelief passes with a great many for believing; they doubt not,
that is indeed they consider not what they are, their minds are not all in
these things, are not awaked to seek diligently after Jesus, and not to rest
till they find him, they are well enough without him, it suffices them they hear
there is such a one, but they ask not themselves, is he mine, or no? But sure
if that be all, not to doubt, the Bruites believe as well. It were better out
of all question to be laboring under doubtings; if it be a more hopeful
condition, to find a Man groaning and complaining, than speechless, and
breathless, and not stirring at all.

There be in Spiritual doubtings two things, their is a sollicitous care of the
Soul concerning its own estate, and diligent inquiry into it; and that is
laudable, being a true work of the spirit of God, but the other thing in them,
perplexity and distrust that arises from darkness and weakness in the soul; as
where there is a great deal of smoke, and no clear flame, it argues much
moisture in the matter, yet it witnesses certainly that there is fire there;
and therefore dubious questioning of a Man concerning himself, is a much better
evidence, than that senseless deadness that most take for believing. Men that
that know nothing in sciences have no doubts, he never truly believed that was
not made first sensible and convinced of unbelief. This is the Spirits first
errand in the World to convince it of sin, and the Sin is this, that they
believe not. If the Faith that thou have grew out of thy natural heart of it
self, it is but a Weed be sure, the right plant of Faith is always set by Gods
own hand, and it is watered and preserved by him, because exposed to many
hazzards, he watches it Night and Day. Isa. 27.3. I the Lord do keep it, I will
water it every moment, lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day.

Again how impudent is it in the most, to pretend believing, while they wallow
in Profaness, if Faith unite the soul unto Christ, certainly it puts it into
participation of his Spirit, for if any Man have not the spirit of Christ, he
is none of his, says St. Paul. This faith in Christ bring us into Communion
with God. Now God is light, says St. John, and therefore inferrs, if we say we
have fellowship with God, and walk in darkness, we lie and do not the truth.
The lie appears in our practice, an unsuitableness in our carriage, as he said
of him that signed his Verse wrong, fecit solaecismum manu.

But there be imaginary Believers, that are a little more refined, that live
after a blameless, yea, and a Religious manner, for there outward; and yet are
but appearances of Christians, have not the living work of Faith within, and
all these exercises are dead works in their hands. Amongst these some may have
such motions within themselves, as may deceive themselves, as well as their
outward deportment deceives other; some transient touches of desire to Christ,
upon the unfolding of his excellencies in the Preaching of the word, and upon
some conviction of their own necessity, and conceive some joy upon thoughts of
apprehending him, and yet all this proves but an evanishing fancy, an embracing
of a shadow. And because Men that are thus deluded meet not with Christ
indeed, do not really find his sweetness, therefore within a while, they return
to the pleasure of sin, and their latter end proves worse than their beginning;
their hearts could not possibly be steadfast, because there was nothing to fix
them on, in all that work wherein Christ himself was wanting.

But the truly believing Soul, that is brought unto Jesus Christ, and fastened
upon him by Gods own hand, abides stayed on him, and departs not. And in these
the very belief of the things that are spoken concerning Christ in the Gospel,
the persuasion of Divine truth, is of a higher nature than the common consent
that they call Historical, another knowledge and evidence of the mysteries of
the Kingdom than natural Men can have; this is indeed the ground of all, the
very thing that causes a Man rest upon Christ, when he has a persuasion
wrought in his heart by the Spirit of God, that Christ is an able Redeemer, a
sufficient Savior, able to save all that come to him. Then upon this, the
heart resolves upon that course, seeing I am persuaded of this, that whosoever
believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life, as here it is,
shall not be confounded, I am to deliberate no longer, this is the the thing I
must do, to lay my soul upon him, upon one that is an Almighty Redeemer. And
it does so. Now these first actings of Faith have in themselves an evidence,
that distinguishes them from all that is counterfeit, a light of their own, by
which the soul wherein they are, may discern them, and say this is the right
work of Faith, especially, when God shines upon the Soul, and clears it in the
discovery of his own work within it.

And further, they may find the influence of Faith upon the affections,
purifying them; as our Apostle says of it, Act. 15.9. Faith knits the heart to
a holy Head, a pure Lord, the spring of purity, and therefore cannot choose, but
make it pure, it is a beam from heaven that raises the mind to a Heavenly
temper. Although there remains of sin in a believing soul, yet it is a hated
wearysome guest there, it is not there, as its delight, but as its greatest
grief, and malady, that it is still lamenting and complaining of, and had
rather be rid of, than gain a World. Thus it is purified from affecting sin.

So then where these are, a Spiritual apprehension of the Promises, and a
cleaving of the Soul unto Christ, and such a delight in him, as makes sin vile,
and distastful, that the heart is set against it, and as the Needle touched
with the Loadstone, is still turned toward Christ, and looks at him in all
estates. The Soul that is thus disposed, has certainly Interest in him, and
therefore ought not to affect an humor of doubting, but to conclude that how
unworthy soever in it self, yet being in him, it shall not be ashamed, not only
it shall never have cause to think shame of him, but all its just cause of
shame in it self, shall be taken away, it shall be covered with his
Righteousness, and appear so before the Father. Who must not think, if my sins
were to be set in order, and appear against me, how would my face be filled
with shame? Though there were no more, if some thoughts that I am guilty of
were laid to my charge, I were utterly shamed and undone. Oh! Nothing in my
self but matter of shame, but yet in Christ more matter of glorying, who
endured shame, that we might not be ashamed. We cannot distrust our selves
enough, nor trust enough in him. Let it be right Faith, and there is no excess
in believing. Though I have sinned against him, and abused his goodness, yet I
will not leave him, for whether should I go, he and none but he, has the words
of Eternal life: yea, though he being so often offended, should threaten to
leave me to the shame of my own follies, yet I will stay by him, and wait for a
better answer, and I know I shall obtain it, this is assured me for my comfort,
that whosoever believes in him shall not be ashamed.

Verse 7.
Unto you therefore which believe he is precious, but unto them who be
disobedient, the stone which the Builders disallowed, the same is made the head
of the Corner.
BEsides all the opposition that meets Faith within, in our hearts, it has
this without, that it rows against the great stream of the Worlds opinion. And
therefore has need, especially where it is very tender, and weak, to be
strengthened against that. The multitude of unbelievers, and the considerable
quality of many of them in the world, is one continuing cause of that very
multitude: And the fewness of them that truly believe, does much to the
keeping of them still few; and as this prejudice prevails with them, that
believe not, so it may sometimes assault the mind of a believer, when he thinks
how many, and many of them wise men in the world, reject Christ, Whence can
this be? Particularly the believing Jews, to whom this Epistle is addressed,
might think it strange, that not only the Gentiles that were strangers to true
Religion, but their own Nation, that was the select people of God, and had the
light of his Oracles kept in amongst them only; that yet so many of them, yea,
and the chief of them, should be despisers, and haters of Jesus Christ. And
that these that were best versed in the Law, and so seemed best able to judge
of the Messiah foretold, should have persecuted Christ all his life, and at
last put him to a shameful death.

That they may know, this makes nothing against him, nor ought to invalide
their faith at all, but rather indeed testifies with Christ, and so serves to
confirm them in believing, the Apostle make use of those Prophetical
Scriptures, that foretell the unbelief, and contempt the most would entertain
Christ withal, as old Simeon speaks of him, when he was come, conform to these
former predictions: That he should be a sign of contradiction, as he was the
promised sign of salvation to believers, so he should be a very mark of
enmities, and contradictions to the unbelieving world; the places the Apostle
here uses, suite with his present discourse, and the words cited from Esaias in
the former Verse continuing the resemblance of a corner stone, they are partly
from Psa. 118. partly out of 8th. of Esaias.

Unto you, etc.] Wonder not that others refuse him; but believe the more for
that, because, you see the word to be true even in their not believing of it,
it is fulfilled and verified by their very rejecting it as false.

And whatsoever are the worlds thoughts, concerning Christ, that imports not:
For they know him not, but you that do indeed believe, I dare appeal to your
selves, your own faith, that you have of him, whether he is not precious to
you, if you do not really find him fully answerable to all that is spoken of
him in the word, and that accordingly, you have believed concerning him.

We are here 1. To Consider the opposition of the persons. And then 2. Of the
things spoken of them. 1. They are opposed under the name of believers, and
disobedient, or unbelievers; for the word is so near that it may be taken for
unbelief, as is by some so rendered. And the things are large as near, as the
words that signify them; disobedience, and unbelief. 1. Unbelief is it self the
grand disobedience, for this is the work of God, that which the Gospel mainely
commands, Ioh. 6.29. that ye believe: Therefore the Apostle calls it the
obedience of faith. Romans 1.5. And there is nothing indeed more worthy the name
of obedience, than the subjection of the mind to receive, and believe those
supernatural truths, that the Gospel teaches concerning Jesus Christ. To obey,
so as to have, as the Apostle speaks, the impression of that divine pattern
stamped upon the heart, to have the heart delivered up, as the word there is,
and laid under it, to receive it, Romans 6.17. The word here used for
disobedience, signifies properly unpersuasion, and there is nothing can more
properly express the nature of unbelief than that, and it is the very nature of
our corrupt hearts: We are Children of disobedience or unpersuasibleness,
altogether incredulous toward God, who is truth it self, and as pliable wax in
Satan's hand, he works in them what he will, as there the Apostle expresses,
most easy of belief to him, that is the very father of lies, as our Savior
calls him, a Liar and a murderer from the beginning, murdering by lies, as he
did in the beginning.

2. Unbelief is radically all other disobedience: For all flows from unbelief.
This we least of all suspect; but it is the bitter Root of all that ungodliness
that abounds amongst us. A right, and lively persuasion of the heart concerning
Jesus Christ alters the whole frame of it, brings low its high lofty
Imaginations, and brings not only the outward actions, but the very thoughts
unto the obedience of Christ.

Concerning these disobedient unbelievers, these two testimonies taken together
have in them. 1. Their rejection of Christ. 2. Their folly. 3. Their misery in
so doing.

1. They did not receive him, as the father appointed, and designed him, as the
foundation, and chief corner stone, but slighted him, and threw him by, as
unfit for the building, and this did not only the ignorant multitude; But the
builders, they that pro^ess to have the skill, and the office, or power of
building. The Doctors of the Law, the Scribes, and Pharisees, and chief
Priests, and think to carry the matter by the weight of their authority, as
overbalancing the belief of those that followed Christ. Have any of the Rulers
believed in him? But this People who know not the Law are cursed. John. 7.48.49.

2. We need not wonder then, that not only the powers of the world are usualy
enemies to Christ, and that the contrivers of policies, those builders, leave
out Christ in their building, but that the pretended builders of the Church of
God, though they use the name of Christ, and serve their turn with that, yet
reject himself, and oppose the power of his spiritual kingdom. There may be
Wit, and Learning, and much knowledge of the Scriptures amongst those that are
haters of the Lord Christ, and the power of godliness, and corrupters of the
worship of God. It Is the Spirit of humility, and obedience, and ^aving faith,
that teaches Men to esteem of Christ, and build upon him.

But the vanity of those builders opinion appears in this, that they are over
power'd by the great Architect of the Church, his purpose stands,
notwithstanding their rejecton of Christ, he is still made the head corner
stone. They cast him away by their miscensures and reproaches put upon him, and
by giving him up to be crucified, and then cast into the grave, and a stone to
be rolled upon this Stone, which they had so rejected, that it might appear no
more, and so thought themselves sure: But even from thence, did he arise, and
became the head of the corner. The disciples themselves spoke (you know) very
doubtfully of their former hopes, We believed, this had been he, that would
have delivered Israel, but he corrected their mistake, first by his word,
showing them the true method of that great work, Ought not Christ to suffer
first these things? And so enter into glory, and then really, by making himself
known to them, risen from the dead. When he was from these rejected, and lay
lowest, then was he nearest his exaltation, as Joseph in the prison, was
nearest his preferment. And thus is it with the Church of Christ; when it is
brought to the lowest desperatest condition, then is deliverance at hand; it
prospers, and gains in the event, by all the practices of Men against it. And
as this corner stone was fitted to be so, by the very rejection; even so is it
with the whole bulid^ng, it rises the higher the more Men seek to demolish it.

3. Their unhappiness that believe not is expressed, in the other word, He is
to them a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, because they will not be
saved by him, they shall stumble, and fall, and be broken to pieces on him, as
it is in Esaias, and in the Evangelists: But how is this? is he that came to
save, become a destroyer of Men, he whose name is salvation, proves he
destruction to any? Not he in himself, his primary and proper use is the
former, to be a foundation for souls to build, and rest upon; but they that in
stead of building upon him, will stumble, and fall on him, what wonder, being
so firm a stone, though they be broken by their fall; thus we see the mischief
of unbelief, that as other sins disable the Law, it disables the very Gospel to
save us, and turns life it self into death to us. And this is the misery, not
of a few, but of many in Israel, many that hear of Christ, by the preaching of
the Gospel, shall lament, that ever they heard that sound, and shall wish to
have lived and dyed without it, finding so great an accession to their misery,
by the neglect of so great salvation. They are said to stumble at the word;
because the things that are therein testified concerning Christ, they labor
not to understand and prize aright; but either altogether slight them, and
account them foolishness, or misconceive them, and prevert them.

The Jews stumbled at the meaness of Christ's birth, and life, and the ignominy
of his death, not judging of him according to the Scriptures, and we in another
way think we have some kind of belief, that he is the Savior of the world, yet
not making the Scripture the rule of our thoughts concerning him, many of us
undo our selves, and stumble, and break our necks upon this Rock, mistaking
Christ, and the way of believing; looking on him as a Savior at large, and
judging that enough; not endeavoring to make him ours, and to embrace him upon
the terms of that New Covenant, whereof he is Mediator.

Whereunto also they were appointed.] This the Apostle adds for the further
satisfaction of Believers in this point; how it is that so many reject Christ
and stumble at him? Telling them plainly, that the secret purpose of God is
accomplished in this, having determined to glorify his justice on impenitent
sinners, as he shows his rich mercy in them that believe. Here it were easier
to lead you into a deep, than to lead you forth again. I will rather stand on
the shore, and silently admire it, than enter into it. This is certain that the
thoughts of God are all no less just in themselves, than deep, and unsoundable
by us. His justice appears clear, in that Man's destruction is always the fruit
of his own sin: But to give causes of Gods decrees without himself, is neither
agreeable with the primitive being of the nature of God, nor with the doctrine
of the Scriptures; this is sure that God is not bound to give us further
account of these things, and we are bound not to ask it, Let these two words
(as S. Austin says) answer all What art thou O man? And O the depth!

Our only sure way to know, that our names are not in that black line, and to
be persuaded, that he has chosen us to be saved by his Son, is this, to find
that we have chosen him, and are built on him by faith, which is the fruit of
his love, that first chooses us. And that we may read in our esteem of him.

He is precious] or your honor. The difference is small you account him your
glory, and your gain, he is not only precious to you, but preciousness it self.
He is the thing that you make acount of, your Jewel, that if you keep, though
you be robbed of all besides, you know your selves rich enough.

To you that Believe] Faith is absolutely necessary to make this due Estimat of
Christ.

1. The most excellent things, while their worth is undiscerned, and unkown,
affect us not; Now faith is the proper seeing faculty of the soul, in relation
to Christ, that inward light must be infused from above, to make Christ visible
to us; without it, though he is beautiful, yet we are blind, and therefore
cannot love him for that beauty, but by faith we are enabled to see him that is
fairer than the Children of Men, yea, to see in him, the glory of the only
begotten Son of God; and then it is not possible, but to account him precious,
to bestow the entire affection of our hearts upon him. And if any say to the
Soul what is thy beloved, more than another, it willingly lays hold on the
question, and is glad of an opportunity to extol him.

2. Faith as it is that which discernes Christ, so it alone appropriates him,
makes him our own. And these are the two reasons of esteeming, and affecting
any thing; its own worth, and our interest in it, and faith begets this esteem
of Christ by both. 1. It discovers to us his excellencies, that we could not
see before. 2. It makes him ours, gives us possession of whole Christ, all that
he has, and is. As it is faith that commends Christ so much, and describes his
comeliness in that song, and withal, that word is the voice of faith, that
expresses propriety, My Wellbeloved is mine, and I am his, and these together
make him most precious to the soul, having once possession of him, then it
looks upon all his sufferings as endured particularly for it, and the benefit
of them all as belonging to it self; sure it will say, can it choose but account
him precious that suffered shame, that he might not be ashamed; and suffered
death that he might not die; that took that bitter cup of the father's wrath,
and drunk it out, that he might be free from it.

Think not that you believe, if your hearts be not taken up with Christ, if his
love do not possess your soul, so that nothing is precious to you in respect
of him, if you cannot despise, and trample upon all advantages, that either you
have or would have, for Christ, and count them with the great Apostle loss and
dung in comparison of him. And if you do esteem him, labor for increase of
Faith, that you may esteem him more; for as Faith grows, so will he still be
more precious to you. And if you would have it grow, turn that Spiritual Eye
frequently to him that is the proper object of it; for even they that are
Believers may possibly abate of their love, and esteem of Christ, by suffering
Faith to ly dead within them and not using it in beholding and applying of
Christ: And the World, or some particular vanities, may insensibly creep in,
and get into the heart, and cost them much pains ere they can be thrust out
again, but when they are daily reviewing those excellencies that are in Christ,
which first persuaded their hearts to love him, and discovering still more, and
more of them, his Love will certainly grow, and will chase away those follies
that the World dotes upon, as unworthy to be taken notice of.

Verse 9.
But ye are a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar
People, that ye should show forth the Praises of him who has called you out of
darkness into his mavelous light.
IT is matter of very much both consolation, and instruction to Christians, to
know their own Estate, what they are, as they are Christians. This Epistle is
much and often upon this point for both those ends, both, that the reflecting
on their dignities in Christ, may uphold them with comfort under suffering for
him, and may lead them in doing, and walking, as becomes such a condition. Here
it has been represented to us by a building, a Spiritual Temple, and by a
Priesthood conform to it.

The former is confirmed, and illustrated by testimonies of Scripture in the
preceding Verses, In this the latter, in these words: tho it is not expressly
cited, yet it is clear, that the Apostle here has reference to Exodus 19.5, 6.
where this dignity of Priesthood, together with the other titles here
expressed, is ascribed to all the chosen People of God. It Is there a promise
made to the Nation of the Jews, but under the condition of obedience, and
therefore is most fitly here applied by the Apostle, to the believing Jews, to
whom particularly he writes.

It Is true, that the external Priesthood of the Law, is abolished by the coming
of this great high Priest; Jesus Christ being the body of all those shadows:
But this promised Dignity of Spiritual Priesthood, is so far from being nulled
by Christ, that it is altogether dependant on him, and therefore fails in those
that reject Christ, although they be of that Nation, to which this Promise was
made: But it holds good in all, of all Nations that believe, and particularly,
says the Apostle it is verified in you. You that are believing Jews, by
receiving Christ, you receive withal this dignity.

As the Legal Priesthood was removed by Christ's fulfilling all that it
prefigur'd, so he was rejected by them that were at his coming in possession of
that Office: as the standing of that their Priesthood was inconsistent, with
the revealing of Jesus Christ; so they that were then in it, being ungodly Men,
their carnal minds had a kind of antipathy against him, though they pretended
themselves builders of the Church, and by their calling ought to have been so,
yet they threw away the foundation stone that God had chosen, and designed; and
in rejecting it, manifest that they themselves are rejected of God; but on the
contrary, You that have laid your souls on Christ by believing, have this your
choosing him as a certain evidence, that God has chosen you to be his peculiar
People, yea, to be so dignified, as to be a Kingly Priesthood through Christ.

We have here 1. To Consider the estate of Christians, in the words that here
describe it. 2. The opposition of it to the state of Unbelievers. 3. The end of
it.

A chosen Generation,] Psalm. 24. The Psalmist there speaks first of Gods
universal Sovereignty, then of his peculiar choice. The earth is the Lords. But
there is a select company appointed for this holy Mountain described and then
closed thus. This is the generation of them that seek him. Thus Deuteronomy. 10.14,
15. So Exodus 19.5. Whence this is taken; for all the Earth is mine, and that
Nation which is a figure of the Elect of all Nations, Gods peculiar, beyond all
others in the World. As Men that have great variety of Possessions, yet have
usually their special delight in some one, beyond all the rest, and choose to
recide most in it, and bestow most expense on it, to make it pleasant. Thus
does the Lord of the whole earth choose out to himself from the rest of the
World, a number that are a chosen generation.

Choosing here, is the work of effectual calling, or severing of Believers from
the rest, for it signifies a difference in their present estate, as the other
words joined with it. But this election, is altogether conform to that of Gods
Eternal Decree, and is no other, but the execution, or performance of it, Gods
framing of this his building, just according to the Idea of it, which was in
his mind, and purpose, before all time. The drawing forth, and investing of
such into this Christian, this Kingly Priesthood, whose names were expressly
written up for it, in the Book of life.

Generation] This imports them to be of one race, or stock, as the Israelites
who were by outward calling the chosen of God, were all the seed of Abraham
according to the flesh: So they that believe in the Lord Jesus; are Children of
the Promise, and all of them by their new birth, one People or Generation, they
are of one Nation, belonging to the same blessed Land of Promise, all Citizens
of the new Jerusalem, yea all Children of the same family whereof Jesus Christ,
the root of Iesse, is the stock, who is the great King, and the great high
Priest, and thus they are a Royal Priesthood, there is no devolving of his
Royalty, or Priesthood on any other, as it is in himself, for his proper
dignity, is Supreme, and incommunicable, and there is no succession in his
Order, he lives for ever, and is Priest for ever. Psalm. 110.4. and King for
ever too, Psalm. 45.6. but they that are descended from him, do derive from him
by that new original this double dignity, in that way that they are capable of
it, to be likewise Kings, and Priests; as he is both. They are of the
Seed-Royal, and of the holy seed of the Priesthood, in as much as they partake
of a new life from Christ; First there is his own dignity expressed, then his
dignifying us, who is himself the first begotten among the dead, and the Prince
of the Kings of the earth. Revel. 1.5. and then, as follows, Verse 6, has
made us Kings and Priests unto God the Father.

A Royal Priesthood] That the Dignity of Believers, is expressed by these two
together, by Priesthood and Royalty, teaches us, the Worth and Excellency of
that Holy Function taken properly, and so by analogy, the dignity of the
Ministry of the Gospel, which God has placed in his Church in stead of the
Priesthood of the Law: for therefore does this Title of Spiritual Priesthood
fitly signify a great Privilege, and Honor, that Christians are promoted to,
and is joined with that of Kings, because the proper Office of Priesthood was
so Honorable. Before it was established in one Family, the chief, the first
born of each Family had right to this, as a special Honor; and amongst the
Heathens in some places, their Princes, and greatest Men, yea, their Kings were
their Priests, and universally the performing of their Holy things, was an
employment of great Honor, and esteem amongst them. Though humane ambition
has strained this consideration too high, to the favoring, and founding of a
Monarchical Prelacy in the Christian World, yet that abuse of it ought not to
prejudge us of this due and just consequence from it, that the holy Functions
of Gods House have very much Honor and Dignity in them. And the Apostle we see
2 Cor. 3. preferr's the Ministry of the Gospel, to the Priesthood of the Law,
so then they mistake much that think it a disparagement to Men that have some
advantage of Birth, or Wit more than ordinary, to bestow them thus, and judge
the meanest Persons, and things good enough for this high calling, sure this
conceit cannot have place, but in an unholy, Irreligious mind, that has either
none, or very mean thoughts of God. If they that are called to this Holy
Service, would themselves consider this aright, it would not puff them up, but
humble them; comparing their own worthlesness with this great work, and wonder
at Gods dispensation, that should have honored them so Ephesians. 3.8. So the more a
Man rightly extols this his Calling, the more he humbles himself under the
weight of it, and would make them very careful to walk more like it in eminency
of holiness, for in that consists the true dignity of it.

There is no doubt that this Kingly Priesthood is the common Dignity of all
Believers, this honor have all the Saints, they are Kings, have victory, and
Dominion given them over the powers of darkness, and the lusts of their own
hearts, that held them captive, and domineered over them before. Base slavish
lusts, not born to command, yet are the hard taskmasters of unrenewed minds,
and there is no true subduing them, but by the power, and spirit of Christ;
they may be quiet for a while in a Natural Man, but they are but then asleep,
as soon as they awake again, they return to hurry, and drive him with their
wonted violence. Now this is the benefit of receiving the Kingdom of Christ
into a Man's heart, that it makes him a King himself, all the Subjects of Christ
are Kings, not only in regard of that pure Crown of Glory they hope for; and
shall certainly attain: but in the present, they have a Kingdom, that is the
pledge of that other, overcoming the World, and Satan, and themselves, by the
power of Faith. Men's bona regnum possidet, it is true, but there is no mind
truly good, but that wherein Christ dwells. There is not any kind of Spirit in
the World Noble, like that Spirit that is in a Christian, the very Spirit of
Jesus Christ that great King, the spirit of glory, as our Apostle calls it
infr. c. 4. This is a sure way to enoble the basest, and poorest amongst us,
this Royalty takes away all attendors, nothing of all that is past to be laid
to our charge, or to dishonor us.

They are not shut out from God, as before: But being in Christ are brought
near unto him, and have free access to the Throne of his grace, Heb. 10. They
resemble in their Spiritual estate the legal Priesthood very clearly. 1. In
their Consecration. 2. In their service, and 3. In their Laws of living.

1. They were washed; therefore this expressed Revel. 1.5. He has washed us in
his Blood, and then follows, made us Kings and Priests. There were no coming
near unto God in his holy Services as his Priests, unless we were cleans'd from
the guiltiness and pollution of our sins. This that pure and purging Blood
does, and it alone, no other Laver can do it, no water, but that fountain
opened for sin, and for uncleanness. No blood, none of all that blood of Legal
Sacrifices, Heb. 9. but only the Blood of that spotless Lamb, that takes away
the sins of the World. So with this, we have that other Ceremoany of the
Priests Consecration, which was by Sacrifice, as well as by washing, for he at
once offered up himself, as our Sacrifice, and let out his blood for our
washing, and with good reason, is that prefixed there Revel. 1.5. He has loved
us, and then it follows, washed us in his blood, that precious stream of his
heart blood, for our washing, told clearly, that it was a heart full of
unspeakable Love that was the source of it. 3. There is anointing, Namely, The
graces of the Spirit, conferred upon Believers, flowing unto them from Christ:
For it is of his fullness, that we all receive, grace, for grace, and the Apostle
St. Paul says 2 Cor. 1.21. that we are established, and anointed in Christ, it
was poured on him, as our head, and runs down from him unto us. He Christ and
we Christians, as partakers of his anointing. The consecrating Oil of the
Priests, was made of the richest Ointments, and Spices, to show the
preciousness of the graces of Gods Spirit, that are bestowed on those Spiritual
Priests, and as that holy Oil was not for common use, nor for any other Persons
to be anointed withal, save the Priests only; so is the Spirit of grace, a
peculiar gift of Believers; others might have costly ointments amongst the
Jews, but none of that same sort with the Consecration-Oyl. Natural Men may
have very great gifts of Judgment and Learning, and eloquence, and Moral
Virtues; but they have none of this precious Oil, Namely, the spirit of Christ
communicated to them. No, all their endowments, are but common and profane,
that Holy Oil signified particularly, Eminency of light, and knowledge in the
Priests; therefore in Christians there must be light, they that are grossly
ignorant of Spiritual things, are (sure) not of this order, this anointing is
said to teach us all things, 1. John. 2.27. That holy Oil was of a most
fragrant sweet smell, by reason of its precious composition, but much more
sweet is the smell of that Spirit, wherewith believers are anointed, those
several odoriferous graces, that are the ingredients of their anointing oil,
that heavenly mindedness, and meekness, and patience, and humility, and the
rest, that diffuse a pleasing sent into the places, and societies where they
comes; their words, actions, and their deportment smelling sweet of them. 4.
Their garments wherein they were inaugurate, and were after to wear in their
services, were outshin'd by that purity, and holiness, wherewith all the Saints
are adorned: But more by that imputed righteousness of Christ, those pure
Robes, that are put upon them, wherein they appear before the Lord, and are
acceptable in his sight, these Priests are indeed clothed with righteousness,
according to that of the Psalmist Psa. 132.9.

5. They were to have the offerings put into their hands; from thence, filling
of the hand, signifies consecrating to the Priestood, and this does Jesus
Christ, that is the Consecrator of these Priests, he puts into their hands by
his spirit these offerings, they are to present unto God. He furnishes them
with prayers, and praises, and all other oblations, that are to be offered by
them, he gives them themselves, that they are to offer a living sacrifice,
rescuing them from the usurped possession of Satan and sin.

2 ly^ Let us Consider, their services which were diverse; to name the chief:
They had charge of the Sanctuary, and the vessels of it, and the lights, and
were to keep the Lamps burnings.

The heart of every Christian, is made a Temple to the holy Ghost, and he
himself, as a priest consecrated unto God, is to keep it diligently, and the
furniture of divine grace in it, to have the light of Spiritual knowledge with
in him, and to nourish it by drawing continually new supplies from Jesus
Christ. 2 ly. They were to bless the People, and truly it is this Spiritual
Priesthood, the Elect, that procure blesings upon the rest of the world, and
particularly on the places where they live; they are daily to offer the incense
of prayer, and other Spiritual sacrifices unto God, as the Apostle expresses
it, supr. Verse. 5. Not to neglect those holy exercises together, and apart.
And as the Priests offered not only for themselves; but for the People: thus
Christians, are to extend their prayers, and to entreat the blessings of God,
for others, especially for the public estate of the Church. As the Lords
Priests they are to offer up those Praises to God, that are his due from the
other creatures which praise him indeed, yet cannot do it after that manner, as
these Priests do. Therefore are they to offer as it were their Sacrifices for
them, as the Priests did for the People, and because the most of Men neglect to
do this, and cannot do it indeed, because they are unholy, and not of this
Priesthood; therefore should they be so much the more careful of it, and
diligent in it. How few of these that the Heavens calls to by their light and
revolution that they enjoy, do offer that Sacrifice which becomes, for this
acknowledging the glory of God which they declare. This therefore is, as it
were, put into the hands of these Priests, namely, the Godly, to do.

3 ly. Let us Consider their course of life. We shall find rules given to the
Legal Priests, stricter than to others; of avoiding legal pollutions, etc. And
from these this Spiritual Priesthood must learn an exact holy conversation,
keeping themselves from the pollutions of the world, as here it follows, a holy
Nation, and that of necessity, if a Priestood, than holy.

Purchased indeed to be a peculiar treasure to God, as Exodus 19.5. at a very
high rate. He spared not his only Son, nor spared the Son himself; so that
these Priests ought to be the Lords peculiar poriton: All believers are his
Clergy, and as they are his portion so he is theirs: The priests had no
assigned Inheritance amongst their Brethren, and the reason is added, for the
Lord is their portion; and truly so they needed not envy any of the rest, they
had the choycest of all, the Lord of all. Whatsoever a Christian possesses in
the world, yet being of this Spiritual Priesthood, he is as if he possessed it
not, lays little account on it: That which his mind is set on, is, how he may
enjoy God, and find clear assurance that he has him for his portion.

It Is not so mean a thing, to be a Christian, as we think, it is a Holy, an
Honorable, a Happy estate; few of us can esteem it, or do labor to find it
so. No, we know not these things, our hearts are not on them, to make this
dignity and happiness sure unto our souls. Where is that true greatness of
mind, and holiness to be found, that becomes those, that are Kings, and Priests
unto God? That contempt of earthly things, and minding or Heaven that should be
in such? But sure, as many as find themselves indeed partakers of these
dignities, will study to live conform to them, and will not fail to love that
Lord Jesus, that has purchased all this for them, and exalted them to it,
humbled himself to exalt them.

We best discern, and are most sensible of the evils and good of things, by
comparison. In outward condition how many be there, that are vexing themselves
with causless murmurings, and discontents, that if they would look upon the
many in the world that are in a far meaner condition than they, it would cure
that evil, and make them not only content, but cheerful and thankful: But the
difference here expressed is far greater, and more considerable, than any can
be in outward things. Though the estate of a Christian is very excellent, and
precious, and rightly valued has enough in it self to commend it, yet it does,
and ought to raise our esteem of it the higher, when we compare it, both with
the misery of our former condition, and the continuing misery of those that
abide still, and are left to perish in that woeful estate. We have here both
these parallels. The happiness and dignity to which they are chosen, and
called, is opposed to the rejection, and misery of them that continue
unbelievers, and rejecters of Christ.

Not only Natural Men; but even they that have a spiritual life in them, yet
when they forget themselves, are subject to look upon the things that are
before them with a natural eye, and to think hardly, or at least doubtfully
concerning Gods dispensation, Beholding the flourishing, and prosperities of
the ungodly together with their own sufferings, and distresses, thus Psa. 73.
etc. But when they turn the other side of the Medal, and view them with a right
eye, and by a true light, they are no longer abused with those appearances,
When they consider unbelievers, as strangers, yea enemies to God, and slaves to
Satan, held fast in the chains of their own impenitency, and unbelief, and by
those bound over to eternal death, and then see themselves called to the
liberties, and dignities of the Sons of God, partakers of the honor of the
only begotten Sons, on whom they have believed, made by him Kings, and Priests
unto God the father: then sure they have other thoughts, it makes them no more
envy, but pity the ungodly, and account all their pomp, and all their
possessions, what it is indeed, no other, but a glistering misery, and
themselves happy in all estates to say with David. The lines have fallen to me
in a pleasant place, I have a goodly heritage. Makes them digest all their
sufferings, and disgraces with patience, yea with joy; and think more of
praising, than complaining, of showing forth his honor, who has so honored
them, especially considering the freeness of his grace, that it was that alone
ma^e the difference, calling them altogether undeservedly from that same
darkness, and misery in which unbelievers are deservedly left.

Now the third thing here to be spoken to, is the end of their calling, to show
his praise, etc. And the more to prize the reasonableness of that their happy
estate, to which God has exalted them, it is expressed in other terms, which
therefore we will first consider, and then the end.

To magnify the grace of God the more, we have here 1. Both the terms of this
motion, or change from whence, and to what it is. 2. The principle of it, the
calling of God.

From darkness. There is nothing more usual not only in divine, but in humane
writings, than to borrow outward sensible things, to express things
intellectual; and amongst such expressions, there is none more frequent, than
that of Light and darkness, transferred, to signify the good, and evil estate
of Man, as sometimes for his outward prosperity, or adversity, but especially
for things proper to his mind, the mind is called Light because the Seat of
Truth, and Truth is most fitly called Light being the chief beauty, and
ornament of the rational world, as Light is of the visible. And as the Light,
because of that its beauty is a thing very refreshing, and comfortable to them
that behold it, as Solomon says it is a pleasant thing to see the sun. So is
Truth, a most delightful thing to the soul that rightly apprehends it.

This may hely us, to conceive of the Spiritual sense, in which it is here
taken. The estate of Lost Mankind, is indeed nothing, but darkness, being
destitute of all Spiritual truth, and comfort, and tending to utter and
everlasting darkness.

And it is so, because by sin the soul is separate from God, who is the first
and highest light, that primitive truth, as he is light in himself, As the
Apostle 8. John tells us, God is light, and in him there is no darkness at all;
expressing the excellency, and purity of his nature, so he is light relatively
to the soul of Man. Psa. 27. the Lord is my light says, David.

And the soul being made capable of divine light, cannot be happy without it,
give it what other light you will, still it is in darkness, so long as it is
without God, being the peculiar light, and life of the soul. And as truth is
united with the soul in apprehending it, and light with the visive faculty, so,
that the soul may have God as its light, it must of necessity be in union with
God. Now sin has broke that union, and so cut off the soul from its light, and
implung'd it into spiritual darkness.

Hence all that confusion, and disorder in the soul, which is ever the
companion of darkness Tohu vahohu, as at first, when darkness was on the face
of the deep: Being ignorant of God, and of our selves, it follows that we love
not God; because we know him not, yea (though we think it a hard word) we are
haters of God, for not only does our darkness import Ignorance of him, but an
enmity to him, because he is light and we are darkness. And being ignorant of
our selves, not seeing our own vileness, because we are in the dark, we are
pleased with our selves, and having left God, do love our selves in stead of
God. Hence are all the wickednesses of our hearts, and lives, which are no
other but in place of obeying, and pleasing God, a continual Sacrificing to
those Gillulim, those base dunghill Gods, our own lusts. For this the Apostle
gives, as the root of all those evils 2 Timothy 3.2. covetous, boasters etc.
Because in the first place, lovers of themselves, therefore proud. etc. And
lovers of pleasures more than of God; and this self-love cannot subsist without
gross ignorance, minds so darkened, that we cannot withal see what we are: For
if we did, it were not possible, but we would be far of another mind, very far
out of loving, and liking with our selves. Thus our souls being filled with
darkness, are likewise full of uncleaness; as that goes along too with
darkness, they are not only dark as dungeons, but withal filthy as they use to
be, so Ephesians. 4.18. understandings darkened, alienated from the life of God. And
therefore Ver. 19. give themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all
uncleaness with greediness. They have no light of solid comfort. Our great
comfort here is not in any thing present; but in hope now being without Christ
and without God, we are without hope Ephesians. 2.12.

And as the estate from whence we are called by grace, is worthily called
Darkness, so that to which it calls us deserves as well the name of Light. As
Christ likewise, that came to work our deliverance, is frequently so called in
Scripture Io. 1. etc. Not only in regard of his own nature, being God equal
with the father, and therefore light, as he is God of God, and therefore Light
of light: But relating to Men John. 1.4. that life was the light of Men. as he
is styled the word, and the wisdom of the father, not only in regard of his own
knowledge; but as revealing him unto us John. 1.18. 1 Cor. 1.24. Compared with
Ver. 30. And styled by Malachy the sun of righteousness. Now the sun, is not
only a Luminous body, but a Luminary giving light unto the world, Genesis 1.

He is our light, opposed to all kind of darkness: to the dark shaddow's of the
ceremonial Law, which possibly is here meant, as a part of that darkness, from
which the Apostle Writes that these Jews were delivered also by the knowledge
of Christ: When he came, the day broke, and the shadows flew away: To the
darkness likewise of the Gentiles superstitions, and Idolatries; therefore
these two are joined by old Simeon, a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the
glory of his People Israel.

And to all that believe of both, he is Light opposed to the Ignorance, and
slavery, and misery of their natural estate, teaching them by his Spirit, the
things of God, and reuniting them with God, who is the light of the Soul. I am
says he, the light of the World, he that follows me shall not walk in
darkness.

And it is that mysterious Union of the Soul with God in Christ (which a
Natural Man so little understands) that is the cause of all that Spiritual
Light of Grace, that a Believer does enjoy.

No right knowledge of God to Man, once fallen from it, but in his Son, no
comfort in beholding God, but through him. Nothing but just anger and wrath to
be seen in Gods looks, but through him, in whom he is well pleased. The Gospel
shows us the Light of the knowledge of God. 2 Cor. 4.6. but it is in the face of
Jesus Christ; therefore the Kingdom of light, opposed to that of Darkness, Col.
1. is called the Kingdom of his dear Son, or the Son of his Love.

There is a Spirit of Light, and Knowledge flows from Jesus Christ into the
Souls of Believers, that acquaints them with the Mysteries of the Kingdom of
God, which cannot otherwise be known. And this Spirit of Knowledge is withal a
Spirit of Holiness, for Purity, and Holiness is likewise signified by this
Light; he removed that huge dark body of sin, that was betwixt us, and the
Father, and eclipsed him from us; the light of his countenance sanctifies by
truth; it is a light that has heat with it, and has influence upon the
affections, warmes them toward God, and divine things, this darkness here is
indeed the shadow of death; and so they that are without Christ, till he visit
them, are said to sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death. So this Light is
Life, Ioh. 1.4. Does enlighten, and enliven, beg^ts new actions, and motions in
the Soul, the right notion that he has of things as they are, work upon him,
and stir him accordingly, discovers a man to himself, and lets him see his own
Natural filthiness, and makes him loath himself, and fly from himself, run out
of himself. And the excellency he sees in God, and his Son Jesus Christ by this
new Light, enflames his heart with their Love, takes him up with estimation of
the Lord Jesus, and makes the World, and all things in it, that he esteemed
before, base, and mean in his eyes.

Then from this Light arises Spiritual Joy, and Comfort, so Light signifies
frequently, as in that of the Psalmist, the latter clause expounds the former,
Light is sown for the Righteous, and joy for the upright in heart. As this
Kingdom of Gods dear Son, that is, this Kingdom of Light, has righteousness in
it; so it has Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. It Is a false prejudice
the World has taken up against Religion, that it is a sour Melancholy thing:
There is no truly Lightsome, and Comfortable life but it. All others, have what
they will, they live in darkness, and is not that truly sad, and comfor^less?
Would you think it a pleasant life, though you had fine Clothes, and good
Die^; but never see the Sun; and were still kept in a Dungeon with them? thus
are they that live in Worldly Honor and Plenty; but still without God they are
in continual darkness with all their enjoyments.

It is true, the light of Believers is not here perfect, and therefore their
joy is not perfect neither: sometimes over clouded, but the comfort is this,
that it is an everlasting light, it shall never go out in darkness, as is said
in Job of the light of the Wicked; and it shall within a while be perfected.
There is a bright morning without a Cloud, that shall arise. The Saints have
not only Light to lead them in their journey, but much purer Light at home, an
Inheritance in Light, Colos. 1. The Land where their Inheritance lies, is full
of Light, and their Inheritance it self is light: For the Vision of God for
ever is that Inheritance, that City has no need of the Sun, nor of the Moon to
shine in it, for the glory of the Lord does lighten it, and the Lamb is the
light thereof. As we said that increated Light is the happiness of the Soul,
the beginnings of it are our begun happiness, they are beams of it sent from
above, to lead us to the Fountain and fullness of it. With thee (says David) is
the Fountain of Life, and in thy Light shall we see light.

There are two things spoken of this Light, to commend it, His Mavelous
Light; that it is after a peculiar manner Gods, and then that is is Mavelous.
All light is from him, the light of sense, and that of reason; therefore he is
called the Father of Lights: but this Light of Grace is after a peculiar manner
his, being a light above the reach of Nature, infused into the Soul, in a
supernatural way. The light of the Elect World, where God specially and
graciously recides. Natural Men may know very much, in natural things, and it
may be in supernatural things, after a natural manner. They may be full of
School Divinity, and able to discourse of God, and his Son Christ, and the
Mystery of Redemption, etc. and yet want this peculiar light, by which Christ
is known to Believers, they may speak of him; but it is in the dark, they see
him not, and therefore they love him not, the light they have, is as the light
of some things that shine only in the night, a cold Glow-worm-light that has
no heat with it at all.

Whereas a Soul, that has some of His Light, Gods peculiar Light communicated
to it, sees Jesus Christ, and loves, and delights in Him, and walks with Him: A
little of this light is worth a great deal, yea, more worth than all that other
common, speculative, and discoursing knowledge, that the greatest Doctors can
attain unto, it is of a more excellent kind, and original, it is from Heaven, and
ye know that one beam of the Sun is more worth than the light of ten thousand
Torches together; it is a pure undecaying Heavenly light, whereas the other is,
gross, and earthly (be it never so great) and lasts but a while. Let us not
therefore think it Incredible, that a poor unlettered Christian may know more
of God in the best kind of knowledge, than any the wisest, and Learnedest
natural Man can do, for the one knows God only by Man's Light, the other knows
him by his own light, and that is the only right knowledge; as the Sun cannot be
seen but by its own light, so neither can God be savingly known, but by his own
revealing.

Now this Light being so peculiarly Gods, no marvel if it be Mavelous, the
common light of the world is so, though because of its commoness, we think not
so, The Lord is Mavelous is Wisdom, in Power, in all his works of Creation,
and Providence: But above all, in the workings of his Grace. This Light is
unknown to the World, and so Mavelous in the rareness of beholding it, that
there be but a few that partake of it. And to them that see, it is Mavelous;
because in it, they see so many excellent things, that they knew not before. As
if a Man were born, and brought up, till he came to years of understanding in a
Dungeon, where he had never seen light, and were brought forth on a sudden; or,
not to need that imagination, take the Man that was born blind, at his first
sight, after Christ had cured him, what wonder, think we, would seize upon him,
to behold on a sudden the beauty of this visible World, especially of that Sun,
and that Light, that makes it both Visible and Beautiful. But much more matter
of Admiration is there in this Light to the Soul, that is brought newly from
the darkness of corrupt Nature: They see as it were a new World, and in it such
wonders of the rich Grace, and Love of God; such matchless worth in Jesus
Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, that their Souls are filled with admiration,
and if this Light of Grace be so Mavelous, how much more Mavelous shall the
Light of Glory be in which it ends.

Hence learn, 1. To Esteem highly of the Gospel, in which this Light shines
unto us, the Apostle calls it therefore, the Glorious Gospel, 2 Cor. 4. sure we
have no cause to be ashamed of it, but of our selves that we are so unlike it.

2. Think not you that are grossly ignorant of God, and his Son Christ, and the
Mysteries of Salvation, that you have any Portion as yet in his Grace; for the
first Character of his renewed Image in the Soul, is Light, as it was his first
work in the World. What availes it us to live in the Noon-day-light of the
Gospel, if our hearts be still shut against it, and so within we be nothing but
darkness, as a House that is close shut up, and has no entry for light, though
it is day without, still it is night within.

3. Consider your delight in the works of Darkness, and be afraid of that
great Condemnation, this is the Condemnation of the World, that light is come
into it, and Men love darkness rather than Light, Joh. 3.19.

4. You that are indeed partakers of this happy change, Let your hearts be
habitations of light, Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness,
but rather reprove them. Study much to increase in Spiritual light, and
knowledge, and withal in holiness, and obedience; if your light be this Light
of God, truly Spiritual Light, these will accompany it: Consider the rich Love
of God, and account His Light mavelous, as in it self, so in this, that he
has bestowed it on you, and seeing you were once darkness, but now are light
in the Lord, I beseech you, nay it is the Apostle and in him the Spirit of God
does it, Walk as Children of the Light.

But to proceed to speak to the other parts of this Verse. It Is known, and
confessed to be a chief point of Wisdom in a Man, to consider what he is, from
whom he has that his being, and to what end. When a Christian has thought on
this in his Natural being, as he is a Man, he has the same to consider over
again of his Spiritual being, as he is a Christian, and so, a New Creature. And
in this notion all the three are very clearly represented to him in these
words. 1. What he is. First, by these Titles of Dignity in the first words of
this Verse. And again by an estate of Light in the last clause of it. 2. Whence
a Christian has this Excellent being, is very express here, He has called.
That God, who is the Author of all kind of being, has given you this, called
you from darkness to his mavelous Light, if you be a Chosen Generation, it is
he that has chosen you, 1 Pet. 1.2. if you be a Royal Priesthood, you know
that it is he that has anointed you. If a Holy Nation, he has sanctified you.
Job. 17.17. If a Peculiar or Purchasd People, It Is he that has bought you. 1
Cor. 6.20. All are in this calling, and they are all one thing. 3. To what end,
to show forth his Praises. Of the first of these in all the several expressions
of it we have spoken before, now are to be considered the other two.

2. Called you] They that live in the Society, and profess the faith of
Christians, are called unto Light, the light of the Gospel that shines in the
Church of God. Now this is no small Favor, and Privilege, while many People
are left in darkness, and in the shadow of death, to have this Light arise
upon us, and to be in the Region of it, the Church, the Goshen of the World,
for by this outward light we are invited to this happy State of saving inward
Light, and that is here to be understood, as the means of this. These Jews
that were called to the Profession of the Christian Faith, to whom our Apostle
writes, were even in that called unto a Light, hid from the rest of their
Nation, and from many other Nations in the World: But because the Apostle does
(out of doubt) describe here the lively Spiritual Estate of true Believers,
therefore this calling does further import the effectual work of conversion,
making the daylight of Salvation, not only without, but within them, the day
star to arise in their hearts, as he speaks, 2 Ep. 1.19. When the Sun is
arisen, yet if a Man be lying fast in a dark Prison, and in a deep sleep too;
it is not day to him, he is not called to Light, till some open the doors, and
awake him, and bring him forth to it; this God does, in the calling here meant:
That which is here called, Calling, in regard of the way of Gods working with
the Soul, in regard of the power of it, is called a rescuing, and bringing
forth of the soul, so the Apostle St. Paul speaks of it, Col. 1.13. Delivered
from the power of darkness, and translated to the Kingdom of his dear Son. That
delivering, and translating, is this calling, and it is from the Power of
Darkness, a forcible Power, that detains the Soul Captive, as there are chains
of Eternal darkness upon damned Spirits, which shall never be taken off,
wherein they are said to be reserved to the judgment of the great day, so there
are chains of Spiritual darkness upon the Soul unconverted, that can be taken
off by no other hand, but the Powerful hand of God; He calls the sinner to come
forth, and withal causes by the power of that his voice the bolts, and fetters
to fall off, and inables the Soul to come forth into the Light, it is an
operative word that effects what it bids, as that in the creation, He said let
there be Light, and it was Light. To which the Apostle has reference, 2 Cor.
4.6. God calls Man, he works with him indeed, as with a reasonable creature,
but sure he likewise works as himself, as an Almighty Creator. He works
strongly, and sweetly with an Almighty easiness. One Man may call another to
this Light, and if there be no more, he may call long enough to no purpose, as
they tell of Mahomet's miracle that misgave, he called a mountain to come to
him, but it stirred not; but His call that shakes and removes the mountains,
does in a way known to himself turn and wind the heart which way he pleases.
The voice of the Lord is powerful and full of Majesty. Psa. 29. If he speak
once to the heart it cannot choose but follow Him, and yet most willingly chooses
that. The workings of grace (as oil to which it is often compared) do
insensibly, and silently penetrate, and sink into the soul, and dilate
themselves through it, that word of his own calling, disentangles the heart
from all its nets (as it did the Disciples) to follow Christ; that call that
brought St. Matthew presently from his receipt of custom, puts off the heart
from all its customs, and receipts too, makes it reject gains, and pleasures,
and all that hinders it, to go after Christ: And it is a call that touches the
Soul so, as the touch of Elijah's Mantle, that made Elisha follow him. Go back
said he, for what have I done unto thee, yet he had done so much, as made him
forsake all to go with him. And this every Believer is most really to
acknowledge, that knows what the rebellion of his heart was and what his
miserable love of darkness was, that the gracious, yet mighty call of God, was
that, which drew him him out of it, and therefore he willingly assents to that.
Which is the third thing, that it becomes him, to show forth his praise who
has so mercifully, and so powerfully called him, from so miserable, to so
happy an estate.

For 1. This is Gods end in calling us, to communicate his goodness to us, that
so the glory of it, may return to himself. The highest agent cannot work, but
for the highest end, so that, as the Apostle speaks, when God would confirm his
Covenant by an oath, he swear by himself, because he could swear by no greater,
so in all, he must be the end of his own actions, because there is no greater,
nor better end, yea none by infinite odds so great, or good, particularly in
the calling, and exalting a number of lost Mankind to so great honor, and
happiness, both in designing that great work, and in performing it, he aims at
the opening up, and declaring of his rich grace, for the glory of it. As the
Apostle S. Paul tells us once, and again. Ephesians. 1.

2. As this is Gods end, it ought to be ours, and therefore ours, because it is
His. And for this very purpose, are we elsewhere, and here, put in mind of it,
that we may be true to his end, and intend it with Him: This is His purpose in
calling us, and therefore our great duty being so called, to declare his
praises. All things, and persons shall pay this tribute; even they that are
most unwilling: But the happiness of His chosen is, that they are active in it,
others passive only: Whereas, the rest have it wrested from them, they do
declare it cheerfully, as the glorious Angels do: As the Gospel brings them
glad tidings of peace from God, declares to them, that love, and mercy that is
in Him, they smother it not, but answer it, they declare it, and set forth the
glory of it, with their utmost power, and skill.

There be in this Two things. 1. Not only to speak upon all occasions to the
advantage of his grace, but that the frame of their actions be such as does
tend to the exalting of God: And 2. That in those actions they do intend this
end, set up this for their aim.

1. Their words and actions being conform to their high, and holy estate, to
which they are called, do commend, and praise their Lord, that has called them
to it; the virtues that are in them tell us of his virtues, as Brooks lead us
to their Springs: When a Christian can quietly repose, and trust on God, in a
matter of very great difficulty, wherein there is no other thing to stay him
but God alone, this declares, that there is strength enough in God that bears
him up, that there must be in Him that real abundance of goodness, and truth
that the word speaks of Him. Abraham believed, and gave glory to God, this is
that which a Believer can do, to declare the truth of God, he relies on it, he
that believes sets to his seal that God is true. So also their holiness is for
his praise. Men hear that there is a God who is infinitely holy, but they can
neither see him, nor his holiness, but when they perceive some lineaments of it
in the faces of His Children, which are in no others; this may convince them
that its perfection, which must be somewhere, can be no where else, but in
their heavenly Father. When these that are His peculiar plants bring forth the
fruits of holiness, which naturally they yielded not, it testifies a
supernatural work of his hand, that planted them, and the more they are
fruitful the greater is his praise. Herein (says our Savior) is your heavenly
Father glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit. Were it not the conscience of
this duty to God, and possibly the necessity of their station, and calling, it
may well be, some Christian had rather altogether look up, and keep within any
grace he has, than let it appear at all, considering some hazards he and it
runs in the discovery: and it may be could take some pleasure in the worlds
mistakes, and disesteem of him: But seeing both Piety, and Charity requires the
acting of graces in converse with Men, That which Hypocrisy does for it self,
a real Christian may, and should do for God. The other thing mentioned as
making up this rule, will give the difference, that not only, what we speak and
do should be such as agrees with this end, but that in so speaking and doing
our eye be upon this end, that all our Christian conversation, be directly
intended by us, not to cry up our own virtues, but to glorify God, and His
virtues, to declare his praises who has called us.

Let your light, says our Savior, shine and shine before Men too, that is not
forbidden, yea it is commanded, but it is thus commanded. Let your light so shine
before Men, that Men seeing your good works, your selves as little as may be,
your works more than your selves (as the Sun gives us its light, and will
scarce suffer us to look upon it self) may glorify whom? You. No, but your
father which is in heaven. Let your light shine, it is given for that purpose,
but let it shine always to the glory of the Father of Lights. Men that seek
themselves, may share in the same public kind of actions with you; but let
your secret intention (which God eyes most) sever you. This is the impress,
that a sincere humble Chiristian sets upon all his actions, to the glory of
God: He uses all he has, especially all his graces to His praise that gives
it, and is sorry he has no more for this use and is daily seeking after more,
not to bring more esteem to himself, but more honor to God. It Is a poor booty
to hunt after that, Namely, an airy vain breath of Men. The best things in
them, their solidest good, is altogether vanity. How much more that which is
lightest and vainest in them. This is the mind, that is in every Christian, in
all his ways to deny himself, and be willing to abase himself to exalt his
Master, to be of St. Paul's temper, that regarded not himself at all, honor,
or dishonor, prison or liberty, life or death, content of any thing, so Christ
might be magnified. Phil. 1. And as every godly mind, must be thus affected,
especially the Ministers of the Gospel, they that are not only called with
others, to partake of this mavelous Light, but are in a special manner to
hold it forth to others; How pure affections, and ardent desires becomes them
to his glory, who has so called them? A rush for your praise, or dispraise,
only receive Jesus Christ, and esteem highly of him, and it is enough. That Is
the thing we give to some of you. We preach not our selves (says the Apostle)
but Christ Jesus the Lord. That Is our errand, not to to catch, either at base
gain, or vain applause for our selves: But to exalt our Lord Jesus, in the
hearts of Men, and to those that are so minded, there is a reward abiding them,
of such riches, and honor, as they would be very loath to exchange for any
thing to be had amongst Men.

But in his station, this is the mind of every one, that loves the Lord Jesus
most heartily, to make a Sacrifice of himself, and all he is, and has, means,
and esteem, and life, and all to His glory, that humbled himself so low, to
exalt us to these dignities, to make us Kings and Priests unto God.

"It Is most just, seeing we have our Crowns from Him, and that he has set them
on our heads, that we take them in our hands, and throw them down before his
throne. All our graces (if we have any) are his free gift, and are given as the
rich garments of this Spiritual Priesthood, only to attire us, sutably for this
Spiritual Sacrifice of his praises. As the costly vesture of the high Priest
under the Law, was not appointed to make himself gay for himself, but to decore
him for his holy service, and to commend, as a figure of it, the perfect
holiness, wherewith our great high Priest Jesus Christ was clothed. What good
thing have we, that is not from the hand of our good God, and receiving all
from him, and after a Special manner Spiritual blessings, is it not reasonable,
that all we have (but those Spiritual gifts especialy) declare His praise, and
His only. Pas. 30.1. David does not grow big with vain thoughts, and lift up
himself, because God had lift him up: but I will extol thee, because thou have
lifted me up. The visible heavens, and all the beauty, and the lights in them
speak nothing, but His glory, that framed them, as the Psalmist teaches us,
and shall not these Spiritual Lights, his called ones, whom he has made Lights
so peculiarly for that purpose: These stars in his right hand, do it much more?
Oh! Let it be thus with us, the more he gives, be still the more humble, and
let him have the return of more glory, and let it go entire to Him, it is all
His due, and in doing thus, we shall still grow richer, for where He sees the
faithfullest Servant that purloins nothing, but improves all to his Masters
advantage, sure, him He will trust with most.

And as it is thus, both most due to God, and most profitable for our selves,
in all, to seek his praises, with our own Interest, so it is the most excellent
and generous intent, to have the same thought with God, the same purpose that
is his, and aim no lower, than at his glory: Whereas it is a base poor thing for
a Man to seek himself, far below that Royal dignity, that is here put upon
Christians, and that Priesthood joined with it. Under the Law, they that were
squint eyed were incapable of the Priesthood, truly, this squinting out to our
own interest, looking aside to that (in Gods affairs especially) so deformes
the face of the soul, that it makes it altogether unworthy the honor of this
Spiritual Priesthood. Oh! this is a large task, an infinite task the several
creatures bear their part in this, the Sun says somewhat, and Moon, and Stars,
yea, the lowest have some share in it, the very plants, and herbs of the field
speak of God, and yet the very highest and best, Yea, altogether, the whole
Consort of Heaven, and earth, cannot show forth all his praise to the full. No,
it is but a part, the smellast part of that glory, which they can reach.

We all pretend to these dignities, in that we profess our selves Christians,
but if we have a mind to be resolved of the truth in this (for many, many are
deceived in it) we may, by asking our selves seriously, and answering truly to
this. 1. Whether are my actions, and the course of my life such, as give
evidence of the grace of God, and so speak his praise? if not, sure, I am not
of this number, that God thus called, and dignified, and this (I fear) would
degrade many. 2 ly. If my life be somewhat regular, and Christian like, yet
whether do I in it all, singly, and constantly without any self, or sinister
end, desire, and seek the glory of God alone? Otherwise I may be like this
chosen generation; but I am not of them: And this out of doubt, would make the
number yet far less. Well, think on it 'its a miserable condition for Men,
either to be grossly staining and dishonouring the holy Religion they profess,
or in seeming to serve, and honor God to be serving, and seeking themselves;
it is the way to lose themselves for ever. Oh! 'its a comfortable thing to have
an upright mind, and to love God for himself, and love seeks not its own
things; they are truly happy that make this their work sincerely, though
weakly, to advance the praises of their God in all things, and finding the
great imperfection of their best diligence in this work here, are still longing
to be where they shall do it better.

Verse. 10.
Which in time past were not a People, but are now the People of God, etc.
THe love of God to his Children, is the great subject both of his Word, and of
their thoughts, and therefore is it, that his word (the rule of their thoughts,
and whole lives) speaks so much of that love to that very end, that they may
think much, and esteem highly of it, and walk answerably to it. This is the
Scope of St. Paul's Doctrine to his Ephesians, and the top of his desires for
them. Ephesians. 3.17. And this is here our Apostles aim. As he begun with it
opposing their Election in Heaven to their Dispersion on Earth, the same
consideration runs through the whole Epistle. Here he is representing to them,
the great fruit of that Love, that happy, and high Estate, to which they are
called in Christ, that the choosing of Christ, and Believers, is as one act, and
they as one entire Object of it; one glorious Temple, He the Foundation, and
head corner Stone, and they the Edifice; one honorable Fraternity, He the King
of Kings and great high Priest, and they likewise through him made Kings and
Priests unto God the Father, a Royal Priesthood etc. He the Light of the World,
and they through him Children of Light, Now that this their Dignity, which
shines so bright in its own innate worth, may yet appear the more, he sets it
off by a double opposition.

1. Of the misery, under which others are.

2 dly. That Misery under which, they themselves were before their calling. And
this being set on both sides is as a dark shadowing round about their happiness
here described, setting off the luster of it.

Their former misery expressed in the former Verse by Darkness, is here more
fully and plainly set before their view in these words; They are borrowed from
the Prophet Hosea 2.23. Where (as is usual with the Prophets) he is raised up
by the Spirit of God, from the temporal troubles, and deliverances of the
Israelites, to consider, and foretell that great restorement wrought by Jesus
Christ, purchasing a New People to himself, made up, both of Jews, and Gentiles
that believe; and therefore the Prophecy is fit, and applicable to both, so
that the debate is altogether needless, whether it concerns the Jews, or
Gentiles: For in its Spiritual sense, as relating to the Kingdom of Christ, it
foretells the making up to the Gentiles, that were not before the People of God;
and of the Jews likewise, that by their Apostacies, and the Captivities, and
Dispersions come upon them, as just punishments of those Apostacies, were
degraded from the outward Dignities they had, as the People of God, and withal
were Spiritually miserable and Captives by Nature, and so in both respects laid
equal with the Gentiles, and stood in need of this Resti^ution, as they. St.
Paul ^iseth it concerning the calling of the Gentiles, Romans 9. And ^ere St.
Peter Writing, as is most Probable, particularly to the Dispers^d Jews, applies
it to them as being in the very reference it bears to the Jews, truly fulfilled
in those alone, that were Believers; Faith making them a part of the true
Israel of God, to which the Promises do peculiarly belong, as the Apostle St.
Paul argue at large, Romans 9.

Their former Misery, and so their present Happiness we have here under a
double expression, they were not a People, destitute of mercy, not the People
of God, says the Prophet, Not a People, says our Apostle, being not Gods
People, so base and miserable as not worthy the Name of a People at all, as
it is taken, Deuteronomy. 32.21.

There is a kind of being, a life that the Soul has by a peculiar union with
God, and therefore in that sense the Soul without God is dead, as the Body is
without the Soul Ephesians. 2.1. Yea as the Body separated from the Soul is not only
a liveless lump, but putrifies, and becomes noisome and abominable, thus the
Soul separated from God; is subject to a more loathsome and vile putrefaction,
Psalm. 14.3. So that Men that are yet Unbelievers, are Not, as the Hebrews
expressed death, multitudes of them are not a People, but a heap of filthy
Carcases. Again take our Natural Misery in the notion of a Captivity, which was
the judgment threatened against the Jews to make them not a People, therefore
their Captivity is often spoke of as a Death (by the Prophets) and their
reduction as their resurrection, Ezekiel. 37. And as a Captive People is civilly
dead, as they speak, so are Souls captive to Sin and the and the Prince of
darkness, Spiritually dead, wanting happiness and well being which if it never
attain, it had better (for it self) not be at all. Nothing but disorder and
confusion in the Soul without God, the affections hurrying it tumultuously.

Thus Captive sinners are not, are dead, they both want that happy being that
flows from God to the Souls that are united to himself, and consequently must
want that Society and union one with another, which results from the former,
from the same union that Believers have with God and the same being in Him;
which makes them truly worthy to be called a People, and particularly the
People of God. His People are the only People in the World worthy to be called
a People, the rest are but refuse and dross; although in the Worlds esteem,
that judges by its own rules, and favor of it self, the People of God be as no
body, no People, a company of silly creatures, yea, we are made (says the
great Apostle) as the filth of the World, and the offscouring of all things,
yet in his account who has chosen them (who alone knows the true value of
things) His People are the only People, and all the rest of the World as
nothing in his eyes, He Dignifies and beautifies them, and loves in them that
Beauty which He has given them.

But under that term, is not only comprised, that new being of Believers in
each one of them apart; but that tie and union that is amongst them as one
People, being incorporated together and living under the same Government and
Laws, without which a People are but as the Beasts of the Field, or the Fishes
of the Sea, and the Creeping things that have no ruler over them, as the
Prophet Habak. speaks. That regular living in Society, and Union in Laws, and
Polity makes many Men to be One People, but the civil Union of Men in States
and Kingdoms, is nothing comparable to the Mysterious Union of the People of
God with him, and one with another. That Commonwealth has a firmer Union then
all others, Believers are knit together in Christ as their Head, not merely a
Civil or Political Head ruling them, but as a Natural Head enlivening them,
giving them all one Life. Men in other Societies though well ordered, yet are
but as a Multitude of trees regularly planted indeed, but each upon his own
Root: But the Faithful are all Branches of one Root, their Union is so
Mysterious, that it is resembled to the very union of Christ with his Father,
as indeed the product of it, Ioh. 17.

People of God] I will say to them thou art my People, and they shall say thou
art my God, Hos. 2.23. That Mutual Interest and possession is the very
foundation of all our Comfort, He is the first Chuser, He first says My
People, calls them so, and makes them to be so, and then they say My God,
therefore a Relation that shall hold and shall not break, because it is founded
upon His choice who changes not. The tenor of an external Covenant with a
People (as the Jews particularly found) is such, as may be broken by Man's
unfaithfulness, though God remain faithful and true: but the New Covenant of
Grace makes all sure on all hands, and cannot be broken, the Lord not only
keeping His own part, but likewise performing ours in us, and for us, and
establishing us that He departs not from us first, so we shall not depart from
Him. I will betroth thee to me (says he there) for ever, it is an indissoluble
Marriage that is not in danger to be broke either by Divorce or Death.

My People. There is a treasure of Instruction and comfort wrapped up in that
word, not only more than the profane world can imagine (for they indeed know
nothing at all of it) but more than they that are of that number are able to
conceive of, a deep unsoundible. My People. They his portion, and He theirs; He
accounts nothing of all the World beside them, and they of nothing at all
beside Him: For them He continues the World. Many and great are the privileges
of his people contained in that great Charter the Holy Scriptures, and rich is
that Land where their Inheritance lies; but all is in this reciprocal, that he
is their God. All his power and Wisdom is engaged for their good, how great and
many soever are their enemies, they may well oppose this to all, he is their
God, they are sure to be protected and prosper'd and in end to have full
victory. Happy then is that People whose God is the Lord.

Which had not obtained Mercy] The Mercies of the Lord to his Chosen are from
everlasting, yet so long as His Decree of mercy runs hid, and is not discovered
to them in the effects of it, they are said not to have received or obtained
mercy, and when it begins to act and work in their effectual calling, then they
find it to be theirs, it was in a secret way moving forward toward them
before, as the Sun after Midnight is still coming nearer to us, though we
perceive not its approach till the dawning of the Day.

Mercy] The former word teaches us how great the change is that is wrought by
the Calling of God, this teaches us how free it is; the People of God, that is
the good attained in the change, obtained Mercy, that is the Spring whence it
flows; it is implied indeed in the words of the change of no People such as
have no right to such a Dignity at all, nor in themselves no disposition for
it, to be made His people, can be by no other but free grace, such mercy as
supposes nothing nor seeks nothing but misery in us and works upon that. As it
is expressed to have been very free to this people of the Jews, in choosing them
before the rest of the World Deuteronomy. 17. So it is to the Spiritual Israel of God,
and to every one particularly belonging to that company. Why is it that he
chused me of a Family, and leaves another; But because it pleases him, he
blots out their transgressions for his own Name sake. And 2. as it is free
mercy, it is Tender mercy, the word in the Prophet signifies tenderness or
bowels of compassion, and such are the mercies of our God toward us, Ier.
31.20. The bowels of a Father, Psalm. 103.13. and if you think not that
tenderness enough, those of a Mother, yea more than a Mother Isa. 49.15. 3.
It Is Rich mercy; delights to glorify it self in the greatest misery. Pardons
as easily the greatest as the smallest of Debts. 4. A constant unalterable
Mercy, a stream still running.

Now in both these the Apostle draws the eyes of Believers to reflect on their
former misery and view it together with their present Estate. This is very
frequent in the Scirptures, Ezekiel. 16. Ephesians. 2. 1 Cor. 6.11. etc. And it is of
very great use, works the soul of a Christian to much Humility and Love, and
Thankfulness and Obedience.

It cannot choose but force him to abase himself and magnify the free Grace and
Love of God, and this may be one reason, why it pleases the Lord to suspend
the Conversion of many, for many years of their life, yea, to suffer some of
them to stain those years with grievous and gross sins; that the riches and
glory of his Grace and the freeness of his choice may be the more legible both
to themselves and others. Likewise those apprehensions of Wrath due to sin, and
sights of Hell as it were, that He brings some unto, either at or after their
Conversion, make for this same end. That glorious Description of the New
Jerusalem, Revel. 21.16. is abundantly delighful in it self, and yet the fiery
Lake spoke of their makes all that is spoke of the other sound much the Sweeter.

But universally all the Godly have this to consider, that they were Strangers
and Enemies to God, and think whence was it that I a lump of the same polluted
clay with those that perish, should be taken and purified and molded by the
Lords own hand for a Vessel of Glory? There is nothing here but free mercy
makes the difference, and where can there be Love and Praises and service found
to answer this, all is to be ascribed to the Mercy, Gifts and calling of
Christ, and His Ministers, as St. Paul 2 Cor. 4.1.

But alas! we neither enjoy the comfort of this Mercy as obtained, nor are
grieved for wanting it, and stirred up to seek after it as not yet obtained.
What do we think? Seems it a small thing in your eyes to be shut out from the
presence of God and bear the weight of His wrath for ever? that you thus slight
this Mercy, and let it pass by you unregarded; or will that an imagined
obtaining, divert you from the real pursuit of it? Will you be willingly
deceived? And be your own deceivers in a matter of so great importance? You
cannot think too highly of the riches of Divine mercy, it is above all your
thoughts, but remember and consider this, that thereis a peculiar people of His
own, to whom alone all the riches of it do belong.

And therefore how great soever it is, unless you find your selves of that
number, you cannot lay claim to the smallest share of it. And you are not
ignorant what is their character, what a kind of people they are, that have
such a knowledge of God as himself gives, they are all taught of God,
enlightened and sanctified by his spirit, a holy People, as he is a holy God,
such as have the riches of that His grace by which they are saved, in most
precious esteem, and their hearts by it enflamed with his love; and therefore
their thoughts taken up with nothing so much as studying how they may obey and
honor Him, rather choosing to displease all the world than offend him, and
accounting nothing too dear, yea nothing good enough to do him service, if it
be thus with you, then you have indeed obtained mercy.

But if you be such as can wallow in the same pudle with the profane world, and
take a share of their ungodly ways, or if your outward carriage be somewhat
more smooth, tho you regard iniquity in your hearts, have your hearts ardent in
the love and pursuit of the World, but frozen to God, if you have some bosom
Idol that you hide and entertain, cannot find in your heart to part with some
one beloved sin, whatsoever it is, for all the love that God has manifested to
Man in the Son of his love Jesus Christ, In a word if you can please and
delight your self in any way displeasing unto God, [though His People while
they are here have spots, yet these are not the spots of His people that I am
now speaking o^] I can give you no assurance that as yet you have obtained
mercy, but on the contrary, it is certain that the wrath of God is yet abiding
on you if you continue, and you are in apparent danger to perish under it; you
are yet Children of Spiritual darkness, and in the way to utter and everlasting
darkness. Know we what it is to be destitute of this mercy; it is a woeful
estate, though you had all worldly enjoyments, and were in the top of outward
prosperity, but shut out from the mercy and love of God.

There is nothing does so kindly work repentance, as the right apprehension of
the mercy and love of God, the beams of that love are more powerful to melt
the heart than all the flames of Mount Sinai, All the threatenings and terrors
of the Law. Sin is the root of our misery, and therefore it is the proper work
of this mercy, to rescue the soul from it, both from the guilt and the power of
it at once. Can you think there is any suitableness in it, that the peculiar
People of God should despise his Laws, and practice nothing but rebellions,
that those in whom He has magnified his mercy, should take pleasure in abusing
it, and that He has washed any with the blood of His Son to that end that they
may still tumble themselves again in the mire; as if we were redeemed not from
sin, but to sin: As if we should say We are delivered to do all these
abominations, as the Prophet speaks. Oh Let us not dare thus to abuse and
indignify the free grace of God, if we mean to be saved by it, as many as would
be found amongst those that obtain mercy, walk as his people whose peculiar
inheritance is, His mercy: And seeing this grace of God has appeared unto us,
Let us embrace it, and let it effectually teach us to deny ungodliness and
wordly lusts.

And if you be persuaded to be earnest suitors for this mercy and to fly in to
Jesus, who is the true mercy Seat, then be assured it is yours, Let not the
greatest guiltiness scar you and drive you from it: But rather drive you the
more to it, the greater the weight of that misery is, under which you ly, the
more is your necessity of this mercy, and the more will be the glory of it in
you: It Is a strange kind of argument and yet a sure one, concludes well and
strongly. Psa. 25. Lord pardon my iniquity for it is great. The Soul pressed
with the greatness of its sin lying heavy upon it, may by that very greatness
of it pressing it, press the forgiveness of it at the hands of free mercy,
it is for thy name sake, that makes it strong, the force of the inference lies
in that. Thou art nothing and worse than nothing, true; but all that ever
obtained this mercy were once so, they were nothing of all that which it has
made them to be, they were not a People, had no interest in God, were strangers
to mercy, yea, Heirs of wrath; yea, they had not so much as a desire after God,
until this mercy prevented them, and showed it self to them, and them to
themselves, and so moved them to desire it, and caused them to find it, caught
hold on them and plucked them out of the dungeon. And it is unquestionably still
the same, and fails not ever expending, and yet never all spent, yea, not so
much as at all diminished, flowing as the rivers from one age to another,
serving each age in the present, and yet no whit the less to those that come
after. The Lord forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin to all that come
unto him, and yet still keeping mercy for thousands that come after.

You that have obtained this mercy, and have the Seal of it within you, it will
certainly conform your hearts to its own nature, it will work you to a
merciful compassionate temper of mind to the souls of others that have not yet
obtained it, you will indeed as the Lord does, hate sin, but (as he does
likewise) you will pity the sinner: You will be so far from misconstruing and
grumbling at the long suffering of God, as if you would have the bridge cut
because you are over (as St. Augustine speaks) that on the contrary, your great
desire will be, to draw others to partake of the same mercy with you, knowing
it to be rich enough. And you will in your station use your best diligence to
bring in many to it, both in love to the souls of Men, and to the glory of God.

And withal you will be still admiring and extolling this mercy as it is
manifested unto you considering what it is, and what you were before it visited
you. They confessed at the offering of the first fruits to set off the bounty
of God. A Syrian ready to perish was my father, and their Captivity in Egypt,
far poorer; and baser is our natural cond^tion, and more precious is that land
of which this free mercy does possess us.

Do but call back your thoughts, you that have indeed escaped it, and look but
into that pit of misery whence the hand of the Lord has drawn you out, and you
cannot miss to love him highly, and still kiss that gracious hand, even while
it is scourging you with any affliction whatsoever, because it has once done
this for you namely, plucked you out of everlasting destruction. As the thoughts
of this change will teach us to praise Psa. 40.23. He has brought me up out of
an horrible pit then follows, He has put a new song in my mouth even praise
unto our God, not only redeemed me from destruction, but withal crowned me
with glory and honor Psa. 103.4. He not only does forgive all our debts, and
lets us out of prison* but enriches us with an estate that cannot be spent and
dignifies us with a crown that cannot wither, made up of nothing of ours. These
two will stretch and Tune the heart very high, to consider from what a low
estate grace brings a Man, and how high it does exalt him, in what a beggarly
vile condition the Lord finds us, and yet does not only free us thence, but
puts such dignities on us. raises the poor out of the dust and lifts the needy
from the dunghill, that he may set him with Princes even with the Princes of
his people. Or as Joshua the Priest Zach. 3.3, 4. So those of this Priesthood
are dealt withal.

Now that we may be the deeper in the sense and admiration of this mercy, it is
indeed our duty to seek earnestly after the evidence, and strong assurance of
it, for things work on us according to our Notice and apprehensions of them,
and therefore the more right assurance of mercy, the more love and
thankfulness, and obedience springs from it: therefore it is that the Apostle
here represents this great and happy change of estate to Christians, as a thing
that they may know concerning themselves, and ought to seek the knowledge of,
that so they may be duly affected with it, a happy thing to have in the soul
an extract of that great Archive and act of grace toward it, that has stood
in heaven from eternity, it is sure both a very comfortable and profitable
thing to find and read clearly the seal of mercy upon the soul which is
holiness that by which he is marked by God, as a part of his peculiar
possession, that he has chosen out of the world: And When we perceive any
thing of this, let us look back, as here the Apostle would have us to do, how
God has called us from darkness, to his marvelous Light.

Verse. 11.
Dearly Beloved, I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from Fleshly
Lusts which war against the Soul.
THe right Spiritual knowledge that a Christian has of God and of himself,
differenceth it self from whatsoever is likest to it, by the power and
influence it has upon the heart and life. And in this it has the lively
impression of that doctrine of the holy Scriptures that teaches it. Wherein we
still find throughout, that the high mysteries of Religion are accompanied with
practical truths, not only as agreeing with them, but as drawn out of them, and
that not violently draw but naturally flowing from them, as pure streams from a
pure spring. Thus in this Epistle, we find the Apostle intermixing his divine
doctrine with most useful and practical exhortations. Chap. 1. Verse, 13.22.
And in the beginning of this Chap. Again, and now in these words.

And upon this model ought both the Ministers of the Gospel to form their
preaching, and the hearers their ear. Ministers are not to instruct only, or
exhort only, but to do both, to exhort Men to holiness and the duties of a
Christian life, Without instructing men in the doctrine of faith and bringing
them to Jesus Christ is to build a house without a foundation, And on the other
side, to instruct the mind in the knowledge of divine things, and neglect the
pressing of that practice and power of godliness that is the undivided
companion of true faith, is to forget the building that ought to be raised upon
that foundation once laid, which is likewise a point of very great folly. Or if
Men laying that tight foundation do proceed to the Superstructure of vain and
empty Speculations it is but to build Hay and stuble in stead of those solid
truths that direct the soul in the way to happiness which are of more solidness
and worth than Gold and Silver, and precious stones. 1 Timothy 3.9. Christ and the
doctrine that reveals him is called the mystery of the faith and Ver. 16. The
mystery of godliness, as Christ is the object of faith, so he is the spring and
fountain of godliness. The Apostle having, we see, in his foregoing discourse
unfolded the excellency of Christ, and of Christians in Him, proceeds here to
exhort them to that pure and Spiritual temper of mind and course of life that
becomes Christians.

These hearers are to blame and do prejudge themselves that are attentive only
to such words and discourse as stir the affections for the present, and find
no relish in the doctrine of faith, and the unfolding of those mysteries that
bear the whole weight of Religion, and are the ground both of all Christian
obedience, and all exhortations and persuasives to it. These temporary sudden
stirrings of the affections, without a right informed mind, and some measure of
due knowledge of God in Christ, do no good. It Is the wind of a word of
exhortation that stirs them for the time against their Lusts, but the first
wind of tentation that comes, caries them away, and thus the mind is but Tossed
too and fro like a wave of the Sea with all kind of winds, not being rooted and
grounded in the faith of Christ. As it is Col. 2.7. and so in the love of
Christ Ephesians. 3.17. Which are the conquering graces that subdue his Lusts and the
world unto a Christian 1 Ioh. 5.4. 2 Cor. 5.14.15. Love makes a Man dead to
himself, and the world and to live to Christ that died for him.

On the other part, they are no less, yea more to blame that are glad to have
their minds instructed in the mysteries of the Christian faith, and out of a
mere natural desire to know, are curious to hear such things as inform them,
but when it comes to the urging of holiness and mortifying their Lusts, these
are hard sayings, they had rather there were some way to receive Christ, and
retain their Lusts too, and bring them to agreement: To hear of the mercies of
God and the dignities of his people in Christ is very pleasing, but to have
this follow upon it abstain from flesh^y Lusts, this is an importune,
troublesome discourse: But it must be so for all that, these that will share in
that mercy, and happiness, must abstain from fleshly lusts. etc.

Dearly Beloved, I beseech you] There is a faculty of reproving required in the
Ministry, and sometimes a necessity of very sharp Rebukes, cutting ones. They
that have much of the Spirit of meekness, may have a rod by them too, to use
upon necessity: But sure the way of Meekness is that they use most willingly,
as the Apostle there implies. And out of all question with ingenuous minds, the
mild way of sweet entreaties is very forcible; as oil that penetrates and sinks
in insensibly or (to use that known resemblance) they prevail as the Sun beams,
that without any noise, make the Traveller cast his Cloak, which all the
blustering of the Wind could not do: But made him rather gather it closer, and
bind it faster about him. We see the Apostles are frequent in this strain of
Entreaties. I beseech you, Romans 12.1. Now this word of entreaty is strengthened
much by the other Dearly Beloved, scarce can the harshest Reproofs much less
gentle Reproofs be thrown back, that have upon them the stamp of Love. That
which is known to come from Love cannot readily but be so received too, and
it is thus expressed, for that very purpose, that the request may be the more
welcome, Beloved, it is the advice of a Friend, one that truly loves you, and
aims at nothing in it but your good, it is because I love you that I entreat
you, and entreat you as you love your selves to abstain from fleshly lusts that
war against your Souls. And what is our purpose when we exhort you to believe
and repent, but that you may be happy in the forgiveness of your sins? Why do
we desire you to embrace Christ? but that through him ye may have everlasting
life.

Howsoever you take these things, it is Our Duty uncessantly to put you in mind
of them, and to do it with much love and tenderness of affection to your Souls,
not only pressing you by frequent warnings, and exhortings, but also by
frequent Prayers and tears for your Salvation.

Abstain] 'Twas a very wise abridgment that Epictetus made of Philosophy into
those two words, bear and forbear. These are truly the two main Duties that our
Apostle recommends to his Christian Brethren, as in this Epistle. It Is one and
the same strength of Spirit that raises a Man above both the troubles and
pleasures of the World, and makes him despise and trample upon both.

We have first briefly to explain what these fleshly lusts mean, then to
consider the exhortation of abstaining from them.

Unchaste desires are particularly called by this name indeed, but to take it
for these only in this place, is doubtless too narrow. That which seems to be
the true sense of it here, takes in all undue desires and use of Earthly
things, and all the corrupt affections of our carnal minds.

Now in that sense, these fleshly lusts comprehend a great part of the body of
sin, all those three the Worlds acccursed Trinity, 1 Ioh. 2. are under this
name here of fleshly lusts. A crew of base imperious Masters they are, to which
the Natural Man is a slave, serving diverse lusts. Some more addicted to the
Service of one kind of lust, some of another: But all in this unhappy, that
they are Strangers, yea Enemies to God, and as the brute Creatures, Servants
to their flesh, either beasts of the field as covetous with their eye still
upon the earth; or voluptuous, swiming in pleasures as the Fishes of the Sea,
or Fowls of the air in vain ambition. All the strifes that are raised about
these things, all malice, and envyings all bitterness and evil speaking, which
are works of the flesh and tend to the satisfying of its wicked desires, we are
here requested to abstain from.

To abstain from these lusts is to hate and fly from the very thoughts and
first motions of them, and if surprised by those, yet to kill them there, that
they bring not forth: And to suspect our selves even in those things that are
not sinful, and to keep afar off from all inducements to those polluted ways
of sin.

In a word, the serving of our flesh either in things forbidden us, as unjust
gain or unlawful pleasures etc. And withal from immoderate desire of, and
delighting in any earthly thing, although such as is lawful, yea necessary in
some degree to desire and use them, to have any feverish pressing thirst after
gain, even just gain or after earthly delights though lawful is to be guilty of
those fleshly lusts and a thing very unbeseeming the dignity of a Christian,
they that are clothed in Scarlet to embrace a Dunghill is a strange sight;
therefore the Apostle having so cleared that immediately before, has the
better reason to require this of them that they abstain from fleshly lusts.

Let their own slaves serve them, you are redeemed and delivered from them, a
free People, yea Kings, and suits it with Royal dignity to obey vile lusts? You
are Priests consecrated to God, and will you tumble your selves and your
precious Garments in the Mire? It was a high speech of a Heathen, that he was
greater and born to greater things, than to be a servant to his body; how much
more ought he that is born again say so? Being born Heir to a crown that fades
not.

Again, as the honor of a Christians estate is far above this baseness of
serving his lusts, so the happiness, and pleasantness of his Estate, sets him
above the need of the pleasures of sin. He said before, if ye have tasted that
the Lord is gracious, desire the sincere Milk of the Word, desire that word
wherein you may taste more of his graciousness, and as that fitly urges the
appetites desire of the word, so it is strong to persuade this abstinence from
fleshly lusts, yea the disdain and loathing of them, if you have the least
experience of the sweetness of his love, have but tasted of the Crystal River
of his pleasures, the muddy pudle pleasures of sin will be hateful and
loathsome to you; yea the best earthly delights that are, will be disrelish'd
and unsavory to your taste. The imbittering the breasts of the World to the
Godly by afflictions, does something indeed to their weaning from them, but the
breasts of consolation that are given them in their stead, weans much more
effectually.

The true reason why we remain Servants to these Lusts, some to one, some to
another, is, because we are still Strangers to the Love of God, and those pure
pleasures that are in him; Though the Pleasures of this Earth be poor and low,
and most unworthy our pursuit, yet so long as Men know of no better, they will
stick by those they have, such as they are. The Philosopher gives this as the
reason why Men are so much set upon sensual Delights, because they know not the
higher pleasures that are proper to the soul, and they must have it some way,
It Is too often in vain to speak to Men in this, to follow them with the
Apostles entreaty I beseech you abstain from fleshly lusts, unless they that
are spoke to, be such as he speaks of in the former words, such as have
obtained mercy and have tasted of the graciousness and love of Christ, whose
loves are better then Wine. Oh that we would seek the knowledge of this love,
for seeking it we should find it, and finding it, no force would need to pull
the delights of sin out of our hands, we would throw them away of our own
accord.

Thus a Carnal mind prejudices it self against Religion, when it hears that it
requires an abstinence from fleshly lusts, bereaves Men of their mirth and
delight in sin: But they know not that it is to make way for more refined and
precious delights, there is nothing of this kind taken from us, but by a very
advantageous exchange, it is made up, in the World ye shall have affliction, but
in me ye shall have Peace. Is not want of the Worlds peace abundantly paid with
peace in him? Thus fleshly lusts are cast out of the hearts of Believers as
Rubbish and trash to make room for Spiritual comforts, we are barred fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness to the end we may have fellowship with
God and his Son Jesus Christ, this is to make Men eat Angels food indeed, as
was said of the Manna. The serving of the flesh, sets Man below himself down
amongst the Beasts, and the consolations of the Spirit and Communion with God
raises him above himself and associates him with the Angels. But let us speak
to the Apostles own disuasives from these lusts. 1. From the Condition of
Christians. 2. From the Condition of those lusts.

As Strangers] These Dispersed Jews were Strangers scattered in diverse
Countries as Chap. 1. V.1, but here that is not intended, they are called
Strangers in that Spiritual sense that agrees in common to all the Saints,
possibly in calling them thus, he alludes to their outward dispersion, but
means their Spiritual alienation from the World, and Interest in the New
Jerusalem.

And this he uses as a very pertinent enforcement of his Exhortation.
Whatsoever others do, the serving of the flesh, and love of the World is most
incongruous and unseemly in your Person. Consider what you are: If you were
Citizens of this World, then you might drive the same trade with them, follow
the same lusts, but seeing you are chosen and called out of this World, and
invested into a new Society, made free of another City, and are therefore here
but Travelers passing through to your Country? it is very reasonable that
there be this difference betwixt you and the World, that while they live as at
home, Let your carriage be such as fits Strangers, not glutting your selves
with these kind of pleasures, surfeiting upon their delcious fruits, as some
unwary Travelers do abroad; but as wise Strangers living warily, and soberly,
and still minding most of all your journey homewards, suspecting dangers and
snares in your way, and so walking with holy fear, as the Hebrew word for a
Stranger imports.

There is indeed a miserable party even within a Christian, the remainder of
corruption, that is no Stranger here, and therefore keeps friendship and
correspondence with the World, and will readily betray him if he watch not the
more: so that he is not only to fly the Pollutions of the World that are round
about him, and to choose his steps that he be not ensnared from without, but he
is to be upon a continual guard against the Lusts and Corruption that is yet
within himself, to curb and control his own lusts, and give them resolute and
flat refusals when they solicit him, and to stop up their Essays and
opportunities of intercourse with the World, and such things as nourish them,
and so to do what he can to starve them out of the holds they keep within him,
and to strengthen that new nature which is in him; to live and act according to
it, tho so he shall be sure to live as a Stranger here, and a despised mocked
and hated Stranger.

And it is not the worse that it be so, if Men in Foreign Countries be subject
to forget their own at any time, it is sure then, when they are kindlyest used
abroad, and are most at their ease; and thus a Christian may be in some danger
when he is best accommodate, and has most of the smiles and caresses of the
World, that though he can never wholly forget his Home that is above, yet his
thoughts of it will be less frequent, and his desires of it less earnest, and
it may be he may insensibly slide into Customs, and habitudes, as men will do
that are well seated in some other Country: But by the troubles, and
unfriendliness of the World he gains this, that when they abound most upon him,
he then feels himself a Sranger, and remembers to behave himself so, and thinks
often with much delight, and strong desires on his own Country, and the rich
and sure Inheritance that lies there, and the ease and rest he shall have when
he comes thither.

And this will persuade him strongly to fly all polluted ways and lusts, as
fast as the World follows them; it will make him abhor the pleasures of sin,
and use the allowable enjoyments of this earth warily and moderately, never
engaging his heart to them as Worldlings do, but always keeping that free,
free from that earnest desire in the pursuit of worldly things, and that deep
delight in the obtaining of them, which the Men of the earth bestow upon them.
There is a diligence in his Calling and prudent regard of his affairs, not only
permitted to a Christian, but required of him; But yet in comparison of his
great and High Calling (as the Apostle calls it) he follows all his other
businesses with a kind of coldness and indifferency, as not accounting very
much which way they go, his heart is elsewhere. The Traveller provides himself
as he can of entertainment, and lodging where he comes, if it be commodious
it is well; but if not, it is no great matter, if he find but necessaries, he can
abate delicacies very well, for where he finds them in his way he neither can,
nor if he could, would choose to stay there, though his Inn were dressed with
the richest hangings and furniture, yet it is not his home, he must and would
leave it. That Is the character of ungodly Men they mind earthly things. Phil.
3. they are drowned in them over head and ears as we say.

If Christians would consider how little, and for how little a while they are
concerned in any thing that is here, they would go through any estate, and any
changes of estate, either to the better or the worse with very composed equal
minds, always moderate in their necessary cares, and never taking any care at
all for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it.

Let them that have no better home than this world to lay claim to, live here
as at home, and serve their lusts, they that have all their portion in this
life, no more good to look for than what they can catch here; Let them take
their time of the poor profits and pleasures that are here: But you that have
your whole estate, all your riches and pleasures laid up in Heaven, and
reserved there for you, let your hearts be there, and your conversation there,
this is not the place of your rest, nor your delights, unless you would be
willing to change and to have your good things here, as some foolish
Travelers, that spend the estate they should live on at home in a little whiles
braving it abroad amongst strangers, will you with profane Esau sell your
birthright for a mess of pottage? Sell eternity for a moment, and such
pleasures, as a moment of them, is more worth than an eternity of the other.

It were quarrel enough against fleshly lusts, which war against the Soul. That
they are so far below the Soul, that they cannot content, no not at all reach
the Soul, they are not a suitable, much less a satisfying good to it. Although
sin has unspeakably abused the Soul of Man, yet its excellent nature and
original does still cause a vast disproportion betwixt it, and all those gross
base things of the earth that concern the flesh and go no further. But this is
not all, these fleshly lusts are no benefit to the Soul, but they are its
pernicious enemies: They war against it, and their war against it, is all made
up of Stratagem and slight, for they cannot hurt the Soul, but by it self, they
promise it some contentment, and so gain its consent to serve them, and undo it
self, they embrace the Soul that they may strangle it. The Soul is too much
diverted from its own proper business, by the inevitable and uncessant
necessities of the body. And therefore it is exceeding injustice, and cruelty to
make it likewise serve the extravagant and sinful desires of the flesh, so
much time for sleep, and so much for eating, and drinking and dressing, and
undressing, and to many the greatest part of the time that remains from these
spent in laboring and providing for those. Look on the employments of most
Men, all the labor of the Husbandmen in the Country and Tradesmen in the
City, the multitude of shops and callings, what are they all? But the interest
and service of the body, and in all these the immortal Soul is drawn down to
drudge for the mortal body, the house of clay wherein it dwells. And in the
sense of this, those Souls that truly know, and consider themselves in this
condition do often groan under the burden, and desire the day of their
deliverance. But the service of the flesh in the inordinare lusts of it, is a
point of far baser slavery, and indignity to the Soul, and does not only divert
it from spiritual things for the time: But habitualy indisposes it to every
Spiritual work and makes it earthly and sensual, and so unfits it for heavenly
things: Where these lusts or any one of them have dominion the Soul cannot at
all perform any good, neither pray, nor hear, nor read the word aright, And in
as far as any of them prevail upon the Soul of a Child of God, they do disjoynt
and disable it for holy things.

Although they be not of the grossest kind of Lusts, but such things as are
scarce taken notice of in a Man, either by others or by his own conscience,
some irregular desires, or entanglments of the heart, Yet these little Foxes
will destroy the vines, they will prey upon the graces of a Christian, and keep
them very low: Therefore it concerns us much to study our hearts, and be exact
in calling to account the several affections that are in them; otherwise even
such as are called of God, and have obtained mercy (for such the Apostle speaks
to) may have such lusts within them, as will much abate the flourishing of
their graces and the Spiritual beauty of the Soul.

The Godly know it well in their sad experience, that their own hearts do often
deceive them, harboring and hiding such things as prejudge them much of that
liveliness of grace and comforts of the Holy Ghost that otherwise they would be
very likely to attain unto.

This warring against the Soul, meaning the mischief and hurtfullness of them,
has this under it, that these lusts as breaches of Gods Law do subject the
Soul to his wrath. So that by this the Apostle might well urge his point.
Besides that these lusts are unworthy of you, the truth is, if you Christians
serve your lusts, you kill your Souls. So Romans 8.13.

Consider when Men are on their deathbeds, and near their entering eternity,
what then they think of all their Moyling in the earth, and serving of their
own hearts and lusts in any kind, when they see that of all these ways nothing
remains to them but the guiltiness of their sin, and accusations of
conscience, and the wrath of God.

Oh! that you would be persuaded to esteem your precious Souls, and not wound
them as you do, but war for them, against all those lusts that war against the
Soul* The Soul of a Christian is doubly precious, being besides its natural
excellency ennobled by grace, and so twice descended of heaven, and therefore
deserves better usage than to be turned into a Scullion, to serve the flesh.
The service of Jesus Christ is that which only fits it, only honorable for the
Soul to serve so high a Lord, and only due to serve Him that bought it at so
high a rate.

Verse. 12.
Having your Conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak
against you as Evil doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold,
glorify God in the day of visitation.
THese two things that a Natural Man makes least account of, are of all things
in highest regard with a Christian, his own Soul, and Gods glory. So that there
be no stronger persuasives to him in any thing than the interest of these two,
and by these the Apostle urges his present Exhortation to holiness and
blamelesness of life, for the substance of his advice or request in this, and
the former Verse, is the same, a truly honest conversation, is only that which
is Spiritual, not defiled with the carnal lusts and polutions of the world.

The abstaining from those lusts does indeed Comprehend, not only the rule of
outward carriage, but the inward temper of the mind, whereas this honest
conversation does more expressly concern our external deportment amongst Men,
as it is added, honest among the Gentiles. And so tending to the glory of God:
So that these two are inseparably to be regarded the inward disposition of our
hearts, and the outward conversation and course of our lives.

I shall speak to the former first as the spring of the latter, Keep thine
heart with all diligence. For all depends upon that for from thence are the
issues of Life. Prove. 4.23. And if so, then the regulating of the tongue, and
eyes, and feet and all will follow. As there it follows, Ver. 24. That the
impure streams, may cease from running, the corrupt spring must be dried up.
Men may convey them closely to run under ground as it were, as they do vaults
and ditches, Sentinas and cloacas; but till the heart be renewed and purged
from base lusts, it will still be sending forth some way or other the streams
of iniquity, as a fountain Swells out, or casts forth her waters
uncessantly, so she casts out her wickedness, says the Prophet, of that very
People, and City that was called holy by reason of the ordinances of God, and
profession of the true Religion that was amongst them. And therefore it is the
same prophet's advice from the Lord. Wash thine heart O Jerusalem how long
shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee. Ier. 4.14.

This is the true Method, according to our Saviors Doctrine Make the tree
good, and than the fruits will be good, not till then: for Who can gather
grapes of thorns, or figs of Thistles. Some good outward actions avail
nothing, the Soul being unrenewed. As you may stick some figs or hang some
clusters of grapes upon a thorn bush, but they cannot grow upon it.

In this Men deceive themselves, even such as have some thoughts of amendment,
when they fall into sin, and are reproved for it, they say and possibly think
so too, I will take heed to my self, I will be guilty of this no more, and
because they go no deeper, they are many of them ensnared in the same kind
again: But however, if they do never commit that same sin, they do but change
it for some other; as a current of waters, if you stop their passage one way,
they rest not till they find another. The conversation can never be uniformly,
and entirely good till the fram of the heart, the affections and desires that
lodge in it be changed. It is naturally an evil treasure of impure lusts and
must in some kind vent, and spend what it has within. It Is to begin with the
wrong end of your work to rectify the outside first, to smooth the
conversation, and not first of all purge the heart. Evil affections are the
source of evil speeches and actions. Whence are strifes and fightings (says
St. James) are they not from your lusts which war in your members: Unquiet
unruly lusts within are the cause of the unquietnesses and contentions abroad
in the world. One Man will have his corrupt will, and another his, and thus
they chock and justle one another, and by the cross encounters of their
purposes as flints meeting, they strike out these Sparks that set all on fire.

So then according to the order of the Apostles Exhortation, the only true
principle of all good and Christian conversation in the world, is the mortifing
of all earthly, and sinful lusts in the heart while they have possession of
the heart, they do clog, it and straiten it toward God and his ways, it
cannot walk constantly in them, but when the heart is freed from them it is
enlarged and so (as David speaks) fits a Man not only to walk but to run the
way of Gods commandments: And without this freeing of the heart a Man will be
at the best very uneven, and incongruous in his ways, one step like a Christian
and another like a worldling, which is an unpleasant and an unprofitable way,
not according to that word Psa. 18. Thou have set my feet as hindes feet, set
them even, as the word is, not only swift but straight and even, and that is
the thing here required the whole course and revolution of a Christian's life
to be like himself, and that it may be so, the whole body of sin, and all the
member^ of it, all the deceitful lusts, must be crucified.

In the words there are 3. Things 1. One point of a Christians ordinary
entertainment in the world is to be evil spokne of. 2. Their good use of that
evil, to do the better for it. 3. The good end and certain effect of their so
doing, The glory of God.

1. Whereas they speak against you as evil doers] This is in the general the
disease of Man's corrupt nature, and argues much the baseness and depravedness
of it, this propension to evil speaking one of another either blotting the best
actions with misconstructions, or taking doubtful things by the left ear, not
choosing the most favorable, but on the contrary the very harshest sense that
can be put upon them. Some Men take more pleasure in the narrow Eying of the
true and real faults of Men, and then speak of them with a kind of delight. All
these kind of evil speakings are such fruits as spring from that bitter root of
pride and self-love; which is naturaly deep fastened in every Man's heart: But
besides this general bent to evil speaking, there is a particular malice in the
world against those that are born of God which must have vent in calumnies and
reproaches. If this evil speaking be the hissing that is natural to the
Serpents seed, sure by reason of their natural antipathy it must be breathed
forth most against the seed of the Woman, those that are one with Jesus Christ:
If the tongues of the ungodly be sharp swords even to one another, they will
whet them sharper than ordinary when they are to use them against the
righteous, to wound their name. The evil tongue must be always burning, that
is set on fire of hell as St. James speaks; but against the Godly it will be
sure to be heated seven times hotter than it is for others. Reasons of this are
1. Being naturaly haters of God and yet unable to reach him, what wonder if
their malice act it self against His Image in His Children, and labor to blot
and stain that all they can with the foulest calumnies.

2. Because they are neither able nor willing themselves to attain unto the
Spotless holy life of Christians they bemire them, and would make them like
themselves by false aspersions, they cannot rise to the Estate of the Godly,
and therefore they endeavor to draw them down to theirs by detraction.

3. The Reproaches they cast upon the Professors of Pure Religion, they mean
mainly against Religion it self, and intend them to reflect upon it.

These evil speakings of the World against pious Men professing Religion, are
partly gross falsehoods invented without the least ground or appearance of
truth, for the World being ever credulous of evil, especially upon so deep a
prejudice as it has against the Godly, the falsest and absurdest calumnies
will always find so much belief as to make them odious or very suspected at
least, to such as know them not; this is the Worlds Maxim, Lie confidently and
it will always do something. As a Stone taken out of the Mire and thrown
against a white Wall, tho it stick not there but rebound presently back again,
yet it leaves a spot behind it.

And with those kind of evil speakings, were the Primitive Christians
surcharged, even with gross and horrible falsehoods, as all know that know any
thing of the History of those times, even such things were reported of them, as
the worst of wicked Men would scarce be guilty of, The Devil for as witty as he
is, makes use again and again of his old inventions, and makes them serve in
several ages, for so were the Waldenses accused of inhumane banquetings and
beastly promiscuous uncleanness, and diverse things not once to be named amongst
Christians, much less to be practiced by them; so that it is no new thing to
meet with the Impurest vilest slanders as the Worlds reward of Holiness, and
the practice of pure Religion.

Then again Consider, How much more will the wicked insult upon the least real
blemishes that they can espy amongst the Professors of Godliness. And in this
there is a threefold injury very ordinary. 1. Strictly to pry into, and
maliciously to object against Christians the smallest imperfections and
frailties of their Lives, as if they pretended and promised absolute
perfection. They do indeed exercise themselves (such as are Christians indeed)
with St. Paul, to keep a good Conscience in all things toward God and Men,
they have a regard unto all Gods Commandments, as David speaks, they have a
sincere love to God which makes them study the exactest obedience they can
reach, and this is an imperfect kind of perfection, it is Evangelical, but not
Angelical. 2. To impute the scandalous falls of some particular Persons to the
whole number: It Is a very short incompetent rule, to make judgment of any one
Man himself by one action, much more to measure all the rest of the same
Profession by it; and they yet proceed further in this way of misjudging. 3.
That they impute the personal failings of Men to their Religion, and
disadvantage it by the faults of those that profess it, which as the Ancients
plead well, is the greatest injustice, and such as they would not be guilty of
against their own Philosophers. They could well distinguish betwixt their
Doctrine and the manners of some of their followers, and thus ought they to
have dealt with Christians too. Consider their Religion in it self, and the
Doctrine that it teaches, and if it were vicious the blame were just, but if it
taught nothing but Holiness and righteousness, then the blame of any unholiness
or unrighteousness found amongst Christians was to rest upon the Persons
themselves, that were guilty of it, and not to be stretched to the whole number
of Professors, much less to the Relion that they profess: And yet this is still
the custom of the World upon the least failing they can espy in the Godly, or
such as seem to be so, much more with open mouth upon any gross sin in any of
them.

But seeing this is the very Character of a profane mind, and the badge of the
Enemies of Religion, beware of sharing at all with them in it, give not easy
entertainment to the reports of profane, or of mere civil Men, against the
professors of Religion, they are undoubtedly partial, and their testimony
justly suspected, Lend them not a ready ear to receive their evil speakings,
much less your tongue to divulge them, and set them further going: Yea, take
heed that you take not pleasure in any the least kind of scoffs, against the
sincerity and power of Religion. And all of you that desire your selves to walk
as Christians, be very wary, that ye wrong not one another, and help not the
wicked against you, by your mutual misconstructions and miscensures one of
another, far be it from you to take pleasure in hearing others evil spoken of,
whether unjustly, or though it be some way deservedly, yet let it be always
grievous to you, and no way pleasing to hear such things, much less to speak of
them It is the Devils delight to be pleased with evil speakings, The Syrian
calls him an Akal Kartza eater of slanders or Calumnies. They are a dish that
please his palate, and Men are naturally of his Diet. In the 35. Psalm. V.6.
There is a word that is rendered mockers at Feasts, or feasting-mockers, that
feasted Men's ears at their meetings with speaking of the faults of others
scoffingly, and therefore shared with them of their cakes, or feasts as the
word is; but to a renewed Christian mind, that has a new taste, and all new
senses, there is nothing more unsavory, than to hear the defaming of others,
especially of such as profess Religion, did the Law of Love possess our hearts
it would regulate our Ear and Tongue, and make them most tender of the name of
our Brethren, it would teach us the faculty of covering their infirmities, and
judging favorably, taking always the best side and most charitable sense of
their actions, and to blunt the fire-edge of our censures upon our selves, our
own hard hearts and rebellious wills within, that they might remain no more
sharp against others, then is needful for their good.

And this would cut short those that are without, from a great deal of
Provisions of evil speaking against Christians that they many times are
furnished withal by themselves, through their uncharitable carriage one toward
another. However this being the hard measure that they always find in the
World, it is their wisdom to consider it aright, and to study that good which
according to the Apostles advice, may be extracted out of it, and that is the
second thing to be spoken to.

2. Your Conversation] As the Sovereign power of drawing good out of evil
resides in God, and argues his primitive goodness, so he teaches his own
Children some faculty this way, that they may resemble Him in it, he teaches
them to draw sweetness out of their bitterest afflictions, and increase of
inward peace from their outward troubles. And as these buffetings of the tongue
are no small part of their sufferings, so they reap no small benefit by them
many ways, particularly in this one, that they order their Coversation the
better, and walk the more exactly for it.

And this no doubt in Divine Providence is intended and ordered for their good,
and all their other trials. The sharp censures and evil speakings that a
Christian is encompassed withal in the World is no other but a hedge of thorns
set on every side, that he go not out of his way, but keep straight on in it
betwixt them, not declining to the right hand nor to the left; whereas if they
found nothing, but the favor and good opinion of the world, they might as in a
way unhedged be subject to expatiate, and wander out into the Meadows of
Carnal Pleasures that are about them, that would call and allure them, and
often amuse them from their journey.

And thus it might fall out that Christians would deserve censure and evil
speakings the more, if they did not usually suffer them undeserved. This then
turns into a great advantage to them, making them more answerable to those two
things that our Savior joins, to Watch and Pray, to be the more vigilent over
themselves, and the more earnest with God for his watching over them, and
conducting of them, Make my ways straight, says David, because of mine
enemies. the word is My Observers, or those that scand my ways every foot of
them that examine them as a Verse, or as a Song of Music, if there be but a
wrong measure in them, they will not let it slip, but will be sure to mark it.

And if they that are the Godly's enemies wait for their halting, shall not
they themselves scand them that they may not halt, and examine them to order
them, as the wicked do to censure them, and withal depend wholly upon the
Spirit of God as their guide to lead them into all truth, and to teach them how
to order their Coversation aright that it may be all of one piece holy, and
blameless and still like it self.

Honest] Fair, or Beautiful, the same word does fitly signify goodness and
beauty. For that, that is the truest and lastingest beauty grows fresher in
Old age as the Psalmist speaks of the Righteous Psalm. 92. as trees planted in
the house of God. Could the Beauty of Virtue be seen, said he, it would draw
all to love it. A Christian holy Conversation has such a beauty, as when they
that are Strangers to it begin to discern it any thing right, they cannot choose
but love it, and where it begets not love, yet it silences Calumny, or at least
convinces its falsehood.

The goodness, or beauty of a Christian's Conversation consisting in that
Symmetry and Conformity to the word of God, as its rule* he ought diligently to
study that rule, and to square his ways by it, not to walk at random, but to
apply that rule to every step at home, and abroad, and to be as careful of the
beauty of his ways, to keep that unspotted, as those Women are of their faces
and attire, that are most Studious of comeliness.

But so far are we that call our selves Christians from this exact regard of
our Conversation, the most part not only have many four spots, but they
themselves, and all their ways nothing but defilement* all one spot, as our
Apostle calls them, blots are they and spots* 2 Pet. 2.13. and even they that
are Christians indeed, yet not so watchful, and accurate in all their ways as
becomes; (...) staining their holy Profession either with Pride, or
Coveteousness, or contentions, or some other such like uncomeliness.

Let us therefore resolve all, more to study this good and comely conversation
the Apostle ^ere exhorts to, that it may be such as becomes the Gospel of
Christ, as St. Paul desires his Philippians.

And if you live amongst profane Persons, that will be to you as the
unbelieving Gentiles were to these believing Jews, that lived amongst them,
traducers of you, and given to speak evil of you, and of Religion in you,
trouble not your selves with many apologies, and clearings, when you are evil
spoke of, but let the ^^act of your life answer for you: your honest and
blameless conversation: that will be the shortest and realest way of confuting
all obloquies, as when one in the Schools was proving by a sophistical Argument
that there could be no (...); the Philosopher answered it fully, and shortly by
rising up and walking. If thou would pay them home, this is a kind of
revenge not only allowed thee, but recommended to thee, be avenged on evil
speakings, by well doing, shame them from it. It was a King that said, it was
Kingly to do well and be ill spoke of. Well may Christians acknowledge it to be
true, when they consider, that it was the lot of their King Jesus Christ, And
well may they be content, seeing he has made them likewise Kings, as we heard
V. 9.) to be conform to him in this too, this Kingly way of suffering to be
unjustly evil spoken of, and still to go on in doing the more good, always
aiming in so doing (as our Lord did) at the glory of our Heavenly Father. that
is the 3 d. thing.

That they may glorify God*] He says not they shall praise or commend you,
but shall glorify God. What way soever this time, this day of Visitation be
taken, the effect it self is this, they shall glorify God, it is this the
Apostle stills holds before their eye, and that upon which a Christian does
willingly set his eye, and keep it fixed on it, in all his ways; he does not
teach them to be sensible of their own esteem as it concerns themselves, but
only as the glory of their God is interess'd in it, were it not this, a
generous minded Christian could set a very light rate upon all the thoughts and
speeches of Men concerning him, whether good or bad, and could easily drown all
their mistakes in the Conscience of the favor and approbation of his God, it is
a small thing for me to be judged of Man, or the day of Man, he that judges me
is the Lord. Man has a day of judging, but it and his judgment with it soon
passes away, but God has his day, and stand his sentence abides for ever, as
the Apostle there adds, as if he should say, I appeal to God.

But considering that the Religion he professes, and the God whom he worships
in that Religion are wronged by those reproaches, and that the calumnies cast
upon Christians reflect upon their Lord, this is the thing that makes him
sensible, he feels on that side only, the reproaches of them that reproach thee
are fallen upon me, says the Psalmist. And this makes a Christian desirous
even to Men, to vindicate his Religion, and his God, without regard to himself,
because he may say the reproaches of them that reproach only me have fallen
upon thee.

This is his intent in the holiness and integrity of his life, that God may be
glorified, this is the Axis about which all, this good conversation moves, and
turns c^n^inually.

And he that forgets this, let his conversation be never so plausible and
spotless, knows not what it is to be a Christian. As they say of the Eagles who
try their young ones whether they be of the right kind or no, by holding them
before the Sun, and if they can look steadfastly upon it, they own them, if not
they throw them away; this is the true evidence of an upright and real
Christian, to have a steadfast eye on the glory of God the father of Lights. In
all, Let God be glorified, says the Christian and that suffices, that is the
sum of his desires far from glorying in himself, or seeking to raise himself,
for he knows that of himself, he is nothing, but by the free grace of God he is
what he is, whence any glorying to thee, rottenesse and dust? (says, St.
Bern.) whence is it to thee if thou art holy? Is it not the holy spirit that
has sanctified thee. If thou could work miracles, though they were done by
thy hand, yet it were not by thy power, but by the power of God.

To the end that my glory may sing praise unto thee says David Psa. 30.
Whether his tongue, or his soul or both. What he calls his glory he shows us;
and what use he has for it, namely to give the Lord glory, to sing his
praises, and that then it was truly David's glory when 'twas so employed in
giving glory to him whose peculiar due glory is. What have we to do in the
world as his creatures? Once and again his creatures, his new creatures created
unto good works, but to exerise our selves in those, and by those to advance
his glory; That all may return to him, from whom all is, as the rivers run back
to the Sea from whence they came; Of him and through him and therefore, for him
are all things, says the Apostle: They that serve base Gods seek how to advance
and agrandize them. The covetous Man studies to make his Mammon as great as he
can all his thoughts and pains run upon that service, and so the voluptuous and
ambitious for theirs. And shall not they that profess themselves the servants
of the only great and the only true God have their hearts much more, at least,
as much possessed with desires of honoring and exalting him, should not this
be their predominant design and thought: What way shall I most advance the
glory of my God, how shall I that am engaged more than they all, set in with
the Heavens and the earth, and the other creatures to declare his excellency
his greatness, and his goodness.

In the day of Visitation] The beholding of your good works may work this in
them that they may be gained to acknowledge and embrace that Religion and that
God, which for the present they reject; but that it may be thus, they must be
visited with that same light and grace from above which has sanctified you.
This I conceive is the sense of this word though it may be, and is taken diverse
other ways by Interpreters. Possibly in this day of visitation is implied the
clearer preaching of the Gospel amongst those Gentiles, where the dispersed
Jews dwell, and that when they should compare the light of that doctrine with
the light of their lives, and find the agreement betwixt them, that might be
helpful to their effectual calling, and so they might glorify God: But to the
end that they might do thus indeed, as with the word of God and the good works
of his People there must be a particular visiting of their Souls by the Spirit
of God: Your good conversation may be one good mean of their conversion;
therefore this may be a motive to that: But to make it an effectual mean, this
day of gracious visitation must dawn upon them. The day spring from on high
must visit them, as it is Luke. 1.78.

Verse. 13, 14.
Submit your selves unto every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it
be to the King, as Supreme.

Or unto governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of
evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well.


IT is one of the falsest, and yet one of the commonest prejudices that the
world has always entertained against true Religion, that it is an enemy to
civil power, and government. The Adversaries of the Jews charged this fault
upon their City, the then Seat of the true worship of God. Ezra. 4.15. The Jews
charged it upon the preachers of Christian Religion Act. 17.7. As they
pretended the same quarrel against Christ himself. And generally the enemies of
the Christians in the primitive times loaded them with the slander of Rebelion,
and contempt of authority. Therefore our Apostle descending to partacular rules
of Christian life, by which it may be blameless, and to silence calumny, begins
with this, not only as a thing of prime importance in it self, but as
particulary fit for those he wrote to, being both Jews, and Christians, for the
clearing of themselves and their Religion, Submit your selves etc.

There are in the words diverse particulars to be considered, all concurring to
press this main duty of obedience to Magistrates, not only as well consistent
with true Religion, but as indeed inseparable from it, not to parcel out the
words into many pieces, they may (I conceive,) be all not unfitly comprised
under these two 1. The extent of this duty. 2. The ground of it.

First The extent 1. To all Civil power, of what kind soever, for the time
received, and Autoris'd. There being no need of questioning, what was the rise
and original of civil power either in the nature of it, or in the persons of
those that are in possession of it, for if you will trace them quite through in
the succ^ssion of ages, and narrowly eye their whole circle, there be few
crowns in the world in which there will not to be found some crack or other
more or less. If you look on those great Monarchies in Daniel's Vision, you see
one of them built up upon the ruins of another, and all of them represented by
terrible devouring beasts of monstrous shape, And whether the Roman Empire be
the fourth there, as many take it, or no, yet in the things spoken of that
fourh and the rest, it is inferior to none of them, enlarging it self by
conquests in all parts of the world; and under it, were the Provinces to which
this Epistle is addressed; yet the Apostle enjoyn's his brethren subjection and
obedience to its Authority.

Nor is it a Question so to be moved as to suspend, or at all abate our
obedience to that which possesses in present where we live; What form of
government is most just and commodious?

God has indeed been more express in the officers and government of his own
house, his Church: But Civil Societies he has left at liberty, in the choosing
and modelling of Civil government, though always indeed overruling their
choice, and changes in that, by the secret hand of his wise and powerful
providence; yet he has set them no particular rule touching the frame of it,
only the common rule of equity and justice were to be regarded, both in the
contriving and managing of Government; And yet though it be some way defective
in both, they that be subject to it are in all things lawful to submit to its
Authority, whether suprem or subordinate as we have it here expressly, whether
to the King as Supreme, Namely To the Emperor, or to the Governors sent by
him, which though a Judicious Interpreter refert's to God, and will not admit
of any other sense, yet it seems most suitable both to the words, and to the
nature of the Government of those Provinces to take that word To him, as
relating to the King, for the them that are sent, Answers to the other, The
King as Supreme, and so is a very clear designment of the inferior Governors
of those times, and places. And whatsoever was their end that sent them, and
their carriage that were sent, that which the Apostle adds, expresses the end
for which they should be sent to govern, and at which they should aim in
governing, as the true end of all government. And though they were not fully
true to that end in their deportment, but possibly did many things unjustly,
yet as God has ordained authority for this end, there is always so much
justice in the most depraved government, as is a public good, and therefore
puts upon inferiors an obligation to obedience, and this leads us to consider
the Second thing The ground of this duty.

2 The main ground of submitting to humane authority, is the interest that
divine authority has in it, having both apponited Civil government as a common
good amongst Men, and particularly commanded his people obedience to it, as a
particular good to them, and a thing very suitable with their profession it is,
for the Lords sake. This word carries the whole weight of the duty, and is a
counter balance to the former, which seems to be therefore on purpose so
expressi'd, that this may answer it. Although Civil Authority in regard of
particular forms of Government, and the choice of particular persons to
govern, is but a humane ordinance or man's creature, as the word is; yet both
the good of government, and the duty of subjection to it, is Gods ordinance,
and therefore for his sake submit your selves.

1. God has in general instituted Civil government for the good of humane
society, and still there is good in it, tyranny is better than Anarchy. 2. It Is
by his providence that Men are advanced to places of authority. Psa. 75.6, 7.
Dan. 4.25. John. 19, 11. 3 ly. It Is his command that obedience be yielded to
them Romans 13.1. Tit. 3.1. etc. And the consideration of this ties a Christian
to all Loyalty and due obedience, which being still for the Lords sake cannot
hold in any thing that is against the Lords own command, for Then Kings and
Rulers, leave their station, Now the Subjection here is, be subject to them, as
it were in your rank, still in subordination to God, but if they go out of that
even line follow them not. They that obey the unlawful commands of Kings do it
in regard to their God no question, but that their God, is their belly or their
ambition, or their avarice.

But not only ought the exercise of authority, and submission to it be in
things just, and lawful in themselves, but the very purpose of the heart, both
in command and obedience should be in the Lord and for his sake, this is the
only straight, and only safe rule both for Rulers, and for people to walk by.
Would Kings and the other powers of the world consider the supremacy and
greatness of that King of whom they hold all their Crowns and dignities, they
would be no less careful of their submission and homage to him, than they are
desirous of their Peoples submission unto them.

I will not speak at all of their civil obligations to their people, and the
Covenant of justice that with good reason, is betwixt them in the fundamental
constitutions of all well ordered Kingdoms, nor meddle with that point of the
dependence that Humane Authority has upon the Societies of Men over whom it
is, according to which it is here called Man's ordinance or creature. This is a
thing that the greatest and most absolute of Princes cannot deny, that all
their authority is dependent upon the great God, both as the Author of it in
the general, and the Sovereign disposer of it to particular Men, giving the
kingdoms of the earth to whom he will, and therefore he may most justly
require obedience and fealty of them, that they serve the Lord in fear, and it
they rejoice in their dignities over Men, yet do it with trembling in sense of
their duty to God, and that they throw down their Crowns at the feet of Christ
the Lords anointed.

And to this they are the more obliged, considering that Religion and the
Gospel of Christ does so much press the duty of their peoples obedience to
them, so that they wrong both it, and themselves very far in mistaking it, as
an enemy to their authority when it does not only, not prejudge it, but
confirms it, and pleads for it. Sure they do most ingratefuly requite the Lord
and his Christ, When they say (as Psalm. 2.) Let us break their bands asunder
and cast away their cords from us. Whereas the Lord binds the cords of Kings
and their Authority fast upon their People, not the cords of Tyrany indeed, to
bind the Subjects as Beasts to be Sacrifices to the Passion of their Rulers,
But the cords of just and due Obedience to their Kings and Governors. The Lord
does (as you see here) bind it upon all that profess his Name, and strengthens
it by the respect his People carry to himself, enjoining them, that for his
sake they would obey their Rulers; so that Kings need not fear true Religion,
that it will ever favor any thing that can be called Rebellion, but on the
contrary still urges Loyalty, and Obedience, so that as they ought in Duty,
they may in true Policy and Wisdom befriend true Religion, as a special friend
to their Authority, and hate that Religion of Rome which is indeed Rebellion,
and that Mother of abominations that makes the Kings of the Earth drunk with
her cup, and makes them dream of increase of Authority while they are truly on
the loosing hand. But besides that they owe their Power to the advancement of
Christ's Kingdom so employing themselves, by strengthening it, and doing
themselves good, they confirm their own Thrones, when they erect his, as it was
said of Caesar that by setting up Pompey's Statue he settled and fastened his own.

But it is an evil too natural to Men to forget the true end, and use of any
good the Lord conferr's on them. And thus Kings and Rulers consider not
readily, for what they are exalted, think it is for themselves, to honor and
please themseves, and not to honor God and benefit their People, to encourage
and reward the good (as here it is) and punish the wicked, they are set on
high, for the good of those that are below them, that they may be refreshed
with their light and influence, as the Lights of Heaven are set there in the
highest parts of the World for the use and benefit of the very lowest. God set
them in the Firmament of Heaven, but to what end is added, to give light upon
the earth, and the Mountains are raised above the rest of the earth, (not to be
places of prey and robbery, as sometimes they are turned to be) but to send
forth streams from their Springs into the Valleys, and make them fertile, the
Mountains and Hills, greater and lesser Rulers, higher and lower are to send
forth to the People the streams of Righteousness and Peace. Psalm. 72.3.

But it is the corruption and misery of Man's nature that he does not know and
can hardly be persuaded to learn, either how to command aright, or how to obey;
and no doubt many of those that can see and blame the Injustice of others in
Authority, Would be more guilty that way themselves if they had the same power.

It Is the Pride and self-love of our Nature that begets disobedience in
Inferiors, and violence and in^ustice in Superiors. That depraved humor that
^ies to every kind of Government a propension to a particular disease, that
makes Royalty easily degenerate into tyranny, and Nobles Government into
faction, and popular into confusion.

As civil Authority and subjection to it, is the institution of God; so the
peaceable correspondence of those two, just Government and due obedience is the
especial gift of Gods own hand, and a prime blessing to States and Kingdoms,
and the troubling and interruption of their Course is one of the highest
Public Judgments by which the Lord punishes oftentimes the other sins both of
Rulers and People. And whatsoever be the cause and on which side soever be the
justice of the cause, it cannot be looked upon, but as a heavy Plague and the
fruit of many and great provocations, when Kings and their People that should
be a mutual blessing and honor each to other are turned into scourges one to
another, or into a devouring fire, as it is in his Parable Iud. 9.20. Fire going
forth from Abimelech, to devour the Men of Sechem and fire from Sechem to
devour Abimelech.

Verse. 15.
For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish Men.

Verse 16. As free, and not using your Liberty for a Cloak of Maliciousness:
but as the servants of God.


THis continues the same reason of the same Christian Duty, if they will obey
the Lord, then they must obey Civil Powers, for that is his will, and they will
not deny that their Obligation to him for they are his servants Verse. 16. The
words indeed are more general than the former, but they relate chiefly in this
place to the particular in hand, so that neither in that kind nor in any other
they dishonor their profession, and abuse their Liberty, mistaking it as an
exemption from those Duties to which it does more straightly tie them, so then
here the point of civil Obedience and all other good conversation amongst Men,
is recommended to Christians, as conform to the will of God, and the
effectuallest clearing of their profession, and very agreeable to their
Christian Liberty.

The will of God] This is the strongest and most binding reason that can be
used to a Christian mind that has resigned it self to be Governed by that
rule, to have the will of God for its Law. Whatsoever is required of it upon
that Warrant, it cannot refuse; although it cross a Man's own humor, or the
interest of his private advantage, yet if his heart be subjected to the will of
God, he will not stand with him in any thing, one word from God, I will have it
so, silences all, and carries it against all opposition.

It were a great point if we could be persuaded to esteem duly of this, it were
indeed all, it would make light and easy work in those things that go so hardly
on with us, though we are daily exhorted to them. Is it the will of God that I
should live soberly? Then though my own corrupt will and my companions be
against it, yet it must be so; wills he that I forbear Cursing and Oaths,
though my custom is for it? Yet I must offer violence to my Custom, and set
against the stream of all their customs that are round about me, to obey his
will, who wills all things justly and holily; will he have my Charity not only
Liberal in giving but in forgiving, and real and hearty in both? Will he have
me Bless them that Curse me, and do good to them that hate me, and love mine
Enemies? Though the World count it a hard task, and my own corrupt heart
possibly find it so; yet it shall be done, and not as upon unpleasant
necessity, but willingly and cheerfully, and with the more delight because it is
difficult: For so it proves my Obedience the more, and my love to him whose
will it is. Though mine Enemies deserve not my love, yet he that bids me love
them does, and if he will have this the touchstone to try the uprightness of my
love to him, shall it fail there? No, his will Commands me so absolutely, and
he himself is so lovely, that there can be no body so unlovely in themselves,
or to me, but I can love them upon his Command and for his sake.

But that it may be thus, there must be a renewed frame of mind, by which a Man
may renounce the World, and the Forms of it, and himself, and his own sinful
heart, and its way, to study and follow the only good and acceptable and
perfect will of God, Romans 12.2. To move most under that line, not willingly
declining to any hand, to have our whole minds, taken up in searching it, and
our whole heart in embracing it: Be ye not unwise but understanding, what the
will of the Lord is, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.17^ Being about to exhort to
particular Duties as our Apostle here is doing.

This is the task of a Christian to understand his Lords will, and with a
practical understanding, that he may walk in all well pleasing unto God, thus
the Apostle likewise exhorts the Thessalonians pathetically, 1 Ep. Chap. 4.1
and adds Verse 3. This is the will of God even our Sactification. And then
proceeds particularly against uncleanness and deceit, etc.

Let this then be your endeavor to have your wills Crucified to whatsoever is
sinful, yea to will outward indifferent things with a kind of indifferency, the
most things that men are so stiff in, are not worth an earnest willing. In a
word, it were the only happy and truly Spiritual temper to have our will quite
rooted out, and the will of God placed in its stead, to have no other will but
his, that it might constantly yea (so to speak) identically follow it in all
things. This is the will of God therefore it is mine.

That with well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men.] The
Duties of the second Table, or well doing toward Men, are more sensible to Men
void of Religion than these things that have immediate relation to God,
therefore (and so in other Epistles) the Apostle is here particular in these
for the vindicating of Religion to them that are without. Ignorance usually is
loud, and prattling, making a mighty noise and so has need of a muzle to
silence it. They that were ready to speak evil of it are called wittlessor
foolish Men, there was perverseness in their ignorance as the Word imports. And
generally all kind of Evil speakings, uncharitable censurings do argue a
foolish worthless Mind whence they proceed, and yet they are the usual
divertisement of the greatest part, and takes up very much of Men's converse,
and discourse, which is an evidence of the baseness and perverseness of their
minds, for whereas these that have most real goodness, delight most to observe
what is good and commedadable in others, and to pass by their blemishes, it is
the true Character of vile unworthy Persons, as scurvy Flies sit upon Sores, to
skip over all the good that is in Men, and fasten upon their infirmities.

But especially does it discover ignorance and folly, to turn the failings of
Men to the disadvantage of Religion, none can be such Enemies to it, but they
that know it not, and see not the beauty that is in it. However the way to
silence them we see is by welldoing, that silences them more than whole Volumes
of Apologies. When a Christian walks unreproveably, his Enemies have no where
to fasten their teeth on him; but are forced to gnaw their own malignant
tongues, as it secures the Godly thus to stop the lying mouths of foolish Men,
so it is as painful to them to be so stopped, as muzling is to Beasts, and
punishes their Malice.

And this is a wise Christians way, instead of impatient fretting at the
mistakes or wilful miscensures of Men, to keep still on in their calm temper
of mind and upright course of life, and silent innocence, as a wind it breaks
the waves into foam that Roar about it.

As free] This the Apostle adds, lest any should so far mistake the Nature of
their Christian Liberty as to dream of an exemption from obedience either to
God or to Men for his sake, and according to his appointment.

Their freedom he grants, but would have them understand aright, what it is. I
cannot here insist at large on the Spiritual freedom of Christ^ans, nor is it
here needful, being mentioned only for the clearing of it in this point, but
free they are, and they only that are partakers of this liberty. If the Son
make you free you shall be free indeed, the restare slaves to Satan and the
World, and their own lusts, as the Israelites in Egypt, working in the clay,
under hard taskmasters.

Much discourse and much Ink has been spilt upon the debate of free will, but
truly all the liberty it has, till the Son and his Spirit free it, is that
miserable freedom the Apostle speaks of Romans 6.20. While ye were servants to
sin, ye were free from righteousness.

And as we are naturally subject to the vile drudg^ry of sin, so we are
condemned to the proper wages of sin, which the Apostle there tells us, is
death, according to the just sentence of the Law. But our Lord Christ was
anointed for this purpose to set us free, both to work and to publish liberty,
to proclaim liberty to Captives and the opening of the prison doors to them
that are bound, having paid our complete ransom, he sends his word as the
message, and his Spirit to perform it effectually to set us free, to let us
know it, and to bring us out of prison. He was bound and scourged as a slave or
Malefactor to purchase us this liberty, therefore ought it be our special care,
first to have part in it, and then to be like it, and stand fast in it in all
points.

But that we deceive not our selves as too many do, that have no portion in
this liberty, we ought to know, that it is not to inordinate walking and
licentiousness, as our liberty, that we are called: But from them, as our
thraldom, not called from Obedience, but to it. Therefore beware that you
shuffle in nothing under this specious name of Liberty that belongs not to it,
make it not a Cloak of maliciousness it is too precious a garment for so base an
use. Liberty is indeed Christ's livery that he gives to all his followers: But
the suitable living of it is not wickedness, and disobedience of any kind, but
Obedience and Holiness; you are called to be the servants of God, and that is
your dignity and your Liberty.

The Apostles of this Gospel of Liberty, gloried in this title, the servants of
Jesus Christ, David before that Psalm of praise for his victories and
exaltations being now settled on his throne, prefixes that as more honor than
all these a Psalm of David the Servant of the Lord. To Kings and Subjects and
all, it is only happiness to be his Subjects, it is the glory of the Angels to be
his ministering Spirits. The more we attain unto the faculty of serving him
cheerfully and diligently the more still we find of this Spiritual Liberty, and
have the more joy in it. As it is the most honorable, it is likewise the most
comfortable, and most gainful service, and they that once know it, will never
change it for any other in the world. Oh that we could live as his Servants
employing all our industry to do him service in the condition and place wherein
he has set us, whatsoever it is, and as faithful Servants, more careful of his
affairs than of our own, accounting it our maine business to seek the
advancement of his glory. Happy is the the servant whom the Master when he
comes shall find so doing.

Verse. 17.
Honor all men. Love the Brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the King.
THis is a precious cluster of Divine Precepts, the whole face of the Heavens
is decored with stars But of different greatness, and in some parts they are
thicker set then in the rest, thus is it likewise in the holy Scriptures, and
these are the two Books that the Psalmist sets open before us Psa. 19. The
Heavens as a choice piece of the works of God instructing us, And the word of
God more full and clear then they. Here is a constellation of very bright stars
near together. These words have [very briefly, and yet not obscured by
briefness, but withal very plainly] the Sum of our duty toward God and Men,
to Men both in general Honor all Men, and in special Relations, in their
Christian or religious relation, Love the Brotherhood, and a chief civil
relation Honor the King. And our whole duty to God comprised under the name of
his fear, is set in the middle betwixt these, as the common Spring of all duty
to Men and of all due observance of it, and the Sovereign rule by which it is
to be regulated.

I shall speak of them as they lie in the text, we need not labor about the
Connection; for in such variety of brief practical directions it has not such
place as in Doctrinal discourses. The Apostle having spoke of one particular,
wherein he would have his brethern to clear and commend their Christian
profession, now accumulates these directions as most necessary, and after goes
on to particular duties of Servants etc. But first observe in general how
plain, and easy, and how few these things are that are the rule of our life, no
dark sentences to puzle the understanding, nor large discouses and long periods
to burden the memory, they are all plain. There is nothing wreathed nor
distorted in them, as wisdom speaks of her instructions. Prove. 8.

And this gives check to a double folly amongst Men, contrary the one to the
other, but both, agreeing in mistaking and wronging the word of God. The one is
of those, that despise the word, and that Doctrine and Preaching that is
conform to it, for its plainess and simplicity. These certainly do not take
the true end for which the word is designed that it is the Law of our life, and
it is mainely requisite in Laws, that they be both brief, and clear, that it
is our guide, and light to happiness, and if that which ought to be our Light
be darkness. how great will that darkness be?

It is true (but I am not now to insist on this piont) that there be dark and
deep passages in Scripture for the exercise, yea for the humbling, yea for the
amazing, and astonishing of the sharpest-sighted readers: But this argues much
the pride and vanity of Men's minds when they busy themselves only in those, and
throw aside altogether the most necessary, which are therefore the easiest and
plainest truths in it as in nature, these commodities that are of greatest
necessity God has made commonest and easiest to be had, so in Religion, such
as these now in our hands, that are given us to live and walk by, and in the
search of things that are more obscure and less useful, Men evidence that they
had rather be Learned then holy, and have still more mind to the tree of
knowledge, then the tree of life. And in bearing of the word, they that are any
whit more knowing then ordinary, are they not still gaping after new notions?
Something to add to the stock of their speculative, and discoursing knowledge,
loathing this daily manna, these profitable exhortations, and requiring meat
for their lust. There is an Intemperance of the mind as well as of the mouth,
you would think it, and may be not spare to call it a poor cold Sermon, that
were made up of such plain precepts as these Honor all men, Love the
brotherhood, fear God honor the King. And yet this is the Language of God,
it is his way, this foolish despiseable way by which he guides, and brings to
Heaven them that believe.

Again we have others that are still complaining of the difficulty and darkness
of the word of God, and Divine truths, to say nothing of Romes doctrine, that
talk thus, to excuse their Sacrilege of stealing away the word from the people
of God, a senseless pretext, though it were true, because the word is dark of
it self, that therefore they should make it darker, looking it up under an
unknown Tongue. But we speak of the common vulgar excuse, that the gross
Ignorance and Profaness of many seeks to shroud under, that they are not
Learned, and cannot reach the Doctrine of the Scriptures. There be deep
mysteries there indeed, but what say you to these things, such rules as these,
Honor all men, etc. Are such as these ridles that you cannot know their
meaning, for do not all understand them, and all neglect them. Why set you not
on to do these? And then you should understand more. A good understanding have
all they that do his commandments, says the Psalmist, and as one said well,
the best way to understand the mysterious and high discourse in the beginning
of St. Paul's Epistles, is to begin at the practice of these rules and precepts
that are in the latter end of them, the way to at^ian to know more, were to
receive the truth in the love of it and obey that you know. The truth is, such
truths as these will leave you inexcusable, even the most ignorant of you, you
could not but know, you heard often that you ought, to love one another, and to
fear God, etc. And yet never apply your selves in earnest to the practice of
these things, as will appear to your own consciences if they deal honestly with
you in the particulars.

Honor all men.] Honor in a narrower sense is not an universal due to all,
but peculiar to some kind of persons. Of this the Apostle. Honor to whom
honor, and that in different degrees, to Parents, and Masters and other
Superiors, there is an honor, that has, as it were, Caesar's image and
Superscription on it; is particularly due to him, And as here it follows
Honor the King; but there is something that goes not unfitly under the name of
honor, generally due, from every Man without exception, and it consists (as
all honor does) partly in inward esteem of them, partly in outward behavior
toward them, And the former must be the ground, and cause of the latter.

We owe not the same measure of esteem to all, we may, yea, we ought to take
notice of the different outward quality, or inward Graces and gifts of Men, nor
is it a fault to perceive the shallowness and weakness of Men with whom we
converse, and to esteem more of those on whom God has conferred more of such
things as are truly worthy of esteem: But unto the meanest we do owe some
measure of esteem. 1. Negatively, we are not to entertain despising disdainful
thoughts of any, how worthless and mean soever, as the admiring of Men, the
very best is a foolish excess that way, so the total contemning of any, the
very poorest, is against this rule, for that contemning of vile persons, the
Psalmist speaks of, and commends, is the dislike and hatred of their sin, which
is their vileness, and not to account them for outward respects worthy of such
esteem, as their wickedness denudes them of. 2. We are to observe and respect
the smallest good that is in any, although a Christian be never so base in his
outward Condition, in Body, or Mind, of very mean Intellectuals, and natural
endowments; yet they that know the worth of Spiritual things, will esteem the
grace of God that is in him in the midst of all those disadvantages, as of a
Pearl in a rough shell. Grace carries still its own worth, though under a
deformed body, and ragged garments; yea, though they have but a small measure
of that neither, the very lowest degree of Grace, as a Pearl of the least size
or a small piece of Gold, yet Men will not throw't away: But as they say the
least shavings of Gold are worth the keeping. The Jews would not willingly
tread upon the smallest piece of paper in their way, but took it up, for
possibly (said they) the name of God may be on it, though there was a little
Superstion in that, yet truly there is nothing but good Religion in it, if we
apply it to Men, trample not on any. There may be some work of grace there,
that thou know not of. The name of God may be written upon that Soul thou
treadest on, it may be a Soul that Christ thought so much of, as to give his
precious blood for it, therefore despise it not, much more, I say, if thou
can perceive any appearance that it is such a one, ought thou to esteem
wheresoever thou find the least trait of Christ's image: If thou love him,
thou will honor it; or if there be nothing of this to be found in him thou
look on, yet observe what common gift of any kind God has bestowed on him,
judgment, or memory, or faculty in his calling, or any such thing, and these
in their degree are to be esteemed, and the person for them. And as there is no
Man so complete as to have the advantage in every thing; so there is no Man so
low, and unworthy, but he has some thing wherein he is preferable even to
these that in other respects are much more excellent; or imagine, thou can
find nothing else in some Men, yet honor thy own nature, esteem humanity in
them, especialy since humanity is exalted in Christ to be one with the deity,
account of him as a Man, and with this esteem 3dly goes that general good will
and affection due to Men. Whereas there be that do not only outwardly express,
but inwardly bear more regard to some Dog or Horse that they love then to poor
distressed Men, and in so doing do reflect dishonor upon themselves and upon
Mankind.

The outward behavior wherein we owe Honor to all, is nothing but a
conformity to this inward temper of mind, for he that inwardly despises none,
but esteems the good that is in the Lowest, at least that they are men, and
loves them as such, will accordingly use no outward sign of disdain of any,
will not have a scornful Eye, nor a reproachful tongue to move at any, not the
meanest of his servants, nor the worst of his Enemies; but on the contrary will
acknowledge the good of every Man, and give unto all that outward respect that
is convenient for them, and that they are capable of, and be ready to do them
good as he has opportunity and ability.

But in stead of walking by this rule of honoring all Men. What is there
almost to be found amongst Men, but a perverse proneness to dishonor one
another, and every Man ready to dishonor all Men, that he may honor himself,
reckoning that what he gives to others abates of himself, and taking what he
detracts from others as good booty to make up himself. Set Men's own interest
aside, and that common Civility that for their own Credit they use one with
another, and truly there will be found very little of this real respect to
others out of their obedience to God, and love to Men, tendering their esteem,
and good Name, and their welfare as our own: For so the rule is, but mutual
disesteem and Defaming filling almost all Societies.

And the bitter root of this Iniquity is, that wicked accursed self love that
dwells in us, every Man is naturally his own grand Idol, would be esteemed and
honored by any means, and to magnify that Idol self, kills the good Name and
esteem of others in sacrifice to it. Hence is the narrow observing Eye, and
broad speaking tongue upon any thing that tends to the dishonor of others, and
where other things fail, the disdainful upbraiding of their Birth or Calling,
or any thing that comes next to hand, that serves for a reproach. And hence
arises a great part of the jarrs and strifes amongst Men, the most being drunk
with an over weening opinion of themselves, and the Worthlessest most. A fool
(says Solomon) is wiser in his own conceit then ten Men that can render a
reason, and not finding others of their mind, this frets and troubles them,
they take the ready course to deceive themselves; for they look with both Eyes
on the failings and defects of others, and scarce give their good, half an Eye,
on the contrary in themselves, they study to the full their own advantages, and
their weaknesses and defects (as he says) they skip over, as Children do the
hard words in their lesson, that are troublesome to read, and making this
uneven parallel, what wonder the result be a gross mistake of themselves. Men
miscount themselves at home, they reckoning that they ought to be regarded, and
their mind should carry it, and when they come abroad, and are crossed in this,
this puts them all out of frame.

But the humble man as he is more conform to this Divine Rule, so he has more
Peace by it, for he sets so low a rate upon himself in his own thoughts, that
it is scarce possible for any to go lower in judging of him, and therefore as he
pays due respect to others to the full, and so gives no ground of quarrel that
way, so he challenges no such debt to himself, and thus avoids the usual
contests that arise in this. Only by Pride comes contention, says Solomon, a
Man that will walk abroad in a crowded Street cannot choose but be often
justled, but he that contracts himself, passes through more easily.

Study therefore this excellent Grace of Humility, not the Personated acting of
it in appearance, which may be a chief agent for Pride; but true lowliness of
mind, to be nothing in your own Eyes, and content to be so in the Eyes of
others: Then will you obey this Word, you will esteem as is meet of all Men,
and not to be troubled though all Men disesteem you. As this Humility is a
precious Grace, it is the preserver of all other graces, and without it (if
they could be with out it) they were but as a Box of precious Powder carried in
the wind without a cover, in danger to be scattered and blown away. If you
would have Honor, there is an ambition both allowed you, and worthy of you,
whosoever you are Romans 2.7. 2 Cor. 4. other honor, though it have the Hebrew
Name from weight, is all too Light, and weighs only with cares and troubles.

Love the Brotherhood] There is a love as we said due to all included under
that word of honoring all, but a peculiar love to our Christian Brethen, which
the Apostle Paul calls by a like word the Household of Faith.

Christian Brethren are united by a threefold cord two of them common to other
Men, but the third, the strongest, and theirs peculiarly, their Bodies
descended of the same Man, and their souls of the same God, but their new life
by which they are most entirely Brethren, is derived from the same God-Man
Jesus Christ; yea in him they are all one body, receiving life from him their
glorious head, who is called the first born among many Brethren and as his
unspeakable love was the source of this New being, and Fraternity, so out of
question it cannot but produce indissolluble love amongst them that are
partakers of it. The Spirit of Love and concord is that Precious Ointment that
runs down from the Head our great High Priest to the skirts of his Garment. The
life of Christ, and this Law of Love is combined and cannot be severed. Can
there be enmity betwixt those hearts that meet in him? Why do you pretend your
selves Christians, and yet remain not only Strangers to this Love, but most
contrary to it, Biters and Devourers one of another, and will not be convinced
of the great guiltiness and uncomliness of Strifes and Envyings amongst you, is
this the badge that Christ has left his Brethren, to wrangle and malign one
another? Do you not know on the contrary that they are to be known by mutual
Love? By this shall all Men know that you are my Disciples, if you love one
another. How often does that Beloved Disciple press this, he drank deep of that
wellspring of Love that was in the Breast on which he leaned, and (if they
relate right) he died exhorting this, Love one another. Oh that there were more
of this Love of Christ in our hearts, arising from the sense of his Love to us,
and that would teach this Mutual Love more effectually, which the Preaching of
it may set before us, but without that, the other cannot work it within us. Why
do we still hear these things in vain? Do we believe what the Love of Christ
did to us, and suffered for us? And will we do nothing for him, not forgive a
shadow, a fancy of Injury much less a real one, for his sake? And love him
that wronged us who ever it is, but especially being one of our Brethren in
this Spiritual sense.

Many are the Duties of this peculiar fraternal love, that mutual Converse and
admonition, and reproof, and comforting, and other Duties which are in neglect,
not only amongst formal, but even amongst real Christians. Let us entreat more
of his Spirit, who is Love, and that will mend this.

Fear God] All the Rules of equity and Charity amongst Men, flow from a higher
Principle and depend upon it, and there is no right observing of them without
due regard to that, therefore this word that expresses that Principle of
Obedience is fitly inserted amongst these. The first obligemen^ of Man being to
the Sovereign Majesty of God that made him, and all their mutual Duties one to
another derived from that. A Man may indeed from Moral Principles be of a mild
inoffensive Carriage, and do Civil right to all Men: But this answers not the
Divine Rule even in these same things after the way that it requires them. The
Spiritual and Religious observance of these Duties toward Men, springs from a
respect to God, and terminates there too, begins and ends in him, and generally
all obedience to his Commands, both such as regulate our behavior toward
himself immediately, and such as relate to Men, does arise from a holy fear of
his Name. Therefore this fear of God upon which follows necessarily the
keeping of his Commandments is given us by Solomon as the total Sum of Man's
business and Duty, and so this way to solid happiness, it is totum hominis after
he had made his discoveries of all things besides under the Sun, gone the whole
circuit, and made an exact valuation, and found all to amount to nothing but
vanity and vexation of Spirit. The account he gives of it, it was all for this
purpose, to illustrate and establish this truth the more, and to make it the
more acceptable, to be a repose after so much weariness, and such a tedious
Journey, and so as he speaks there, Verse. 10. A word of delight as well as a
word of truth, that the mind might sit down and quiet it self in this from the
turmoyl and pursuit of vanity that keeps it busy to no purpose in all other
things, but whereas there was emptiness, and vanity that is just nothing in all
other things, there was not only something to be found, but all in this one
this fear of God, and that is keeping of his Commandments, which is the proper
fruit of that fear. All the repeated declaring of Vanity in other things, both
severally, and altogether in that Book, are but so many strokes to drive and
fasten this nail as it is there Verse 11. This word of Wisdom which is the Sum
of all, and contains all the rest. So Job after a large inquest for Wisdom
searching for its Vein, as Men do for Mines of Silver and Gold, has the return
of a Non inventium est, from all the Creatures, The Sea says it is not in me,
etc. But in the close finds it in this. The fear of the Lord that is Wisdom,
and to depart from evil that is understanding.

Under this fear is comprehended all Religion, the inward, and outward of it,
all his worship, and Service, and all the observance of His Commandments which
is there Eccles. 12. and elsewhere expressly joined with it, and therefore is
included in it, when it is not expressed, so Job. 28. to depart from evil that
is understanding, repeating the former words by that. So Psalm. 111. Verse 10.
It has in it all holiness, and Obedience, they grow all out of it. It is the
beginning, and it is the top or consummation of wisdom, for the word signifies
both.

Think it not then a trivial common matter to speak or hear of this Subject;
but take it as our great lesson, and business here on earth, that the best
proficients in it have yet need to learn it better, and that it requires our
uncessant diligence and study all our days.

This fear has chiefly these things. 1. A reverent esteem of the Majesty of
God, which is a main fundamental thing in Religion, and that moulds the heart
most powerfully to the obedience of his will. 2. A firm belief of the Purity of
God, and of his power, and justice, that he loves holiness and hates all sin,
and can and will punish it. 3. A right apprehension of the bitterness of his
wrath and the sweet- of his Love, that His incensed Anger is the most terrible
and intolerable thing in the World, absolutely the fearfullest of all evils,
and on the other side His Love, of all good things the best, the most blessed
and delightful, yea only blessedness. Life is the Name of the sweetest good we
know, and yet this loving kindness is better then life, says David. 4. It
supposes likewise Sovereign love to God for his own infinite Excellency, and
goodness. 5. From all these things springs a most earnest desire to please him,
and in all things, and unwillingness to offend Him in the least, and because of
our danger through the multitude and strength of tentations, and our own
weakness a continual selfe-suspition, a holy fear least we should sin, and a
care and watchfulness that we sin not, and deep sorrow and speedy returning,
and humbling before him, when we have sinned.

There is indeed a base kind of fear that in the usual distinction they call
servile fear: But to account all fear of the Judgments and Wrath of God a
Servile fear (or not to stand upon words) to account such a fear improper to
the Children of God I conceive is a wide mistake. Indeed to fear the punishment
of sin, without regard to God and his Justice as the inflicter of them, or to
forbear to sin only because of those punishments, so as if a Man can be secured
from those he has no other respect to God that would make him fear to offend,
this is the character of a slavish and base mind.

Again, for a Man so to apprehend wrath in relation to himself as to be still
under the horror of it in that notion, and not to apprehend Redemption and
deliverance by Jesus Christ is to be under that Spirit of bondage, which the
Apostle speaks of Romans 8. And such fear though a Child of God may for a time be
under it, yet the lively actings of faith, and persuasion of Gods love, and the
feeling of reflexe love to him in the Soul does cast it out, according to that
of the Apostle 1 Ioh. 4.18. true love casts out fear. But to apprehend the
punishments the Lord threatens against sin as certain and true, and to consider
the greatness and fearfulness of them, but especially the terror of the Lords
anger, and hot displeasure above all punishments, and (though not only, no nor
chiefly for these) yet in contemplation of those, as very great and weighty, to
be afraid to offend that God who has threatened such things as the just reward
of sin, this I say is not incongruous with the estate of the Sons of God, yea
it is their duty, and their property even thus to fear,

1. This is the very end for which God has published these intimations of his
justice, and has threatened to punish Men if they transgress, to the end they
may fear and not transgress, So that not to look upon them thus, and to be
affected with them answerably to their intendment were a very grievous sin, a
slight and disregard put upon the words of the great God.

2. Of all others the Children of God have the rightest, and clearest knowledge
of God, and the deepest belief of his word, and therefore they cannot choose,
but be afraid, and more afraid then all others to fall under the stroke of his
hand. They know more of the greatness, and truth, and justice of God then
others, and therefore they fear when he threatens. My flesh trembles for fear
of thee (says David) and I am afraid of thy judgments, yea, they tremble
when they hear the Sentence against others, or sees the execution on them, it
minds them when they see public executions, and knowing the terror of the
Lord we persuade Men says S. Paul they cry out with Moses Psa. 90. Who knows
the power of thine anger even according to thy fear so is thy wrath. It Is not
an imagination nor invention that makes Men fear more then they need, his wrath
is as terrible as any that fears it most can apprehend, and beyond. So that
this does not only consist with the estate of the Saints, but is their very
character to tremble at the word of their Lord, the rest neglect what he says
till death, and judgment sieze on them: But the Godly know and believe that it
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

And though they have firm promises, and a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, yet
they have still this grace by which they serve God acceptably with reverence
and godly fear, even in this consideration, that our God, even he that is ours
by peculiar covenant, is a confirming fire. Heb. 12.28, 29.

But indeed together with this, yea more then with these, they are persuaded to
fear the Lord by the sense of his great love to them, and the power of that
love that works in them toward him, and is wrought in them by his. They shall
fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days. Hos. 3.5. In those days
his goodness shall manifest it self more then before, the beams of his love
shall break forth more abundantly in the days of the Gospel, and shall bear
more direct and hotter on the hearts of Men, and then they shall fear him more,
because they shall love him more.

This fear agrees well both with faith, and love, yea, they work it, compare
Psa. 31.23. with Psa. 34.9. and that same Psa. 34. Ver. 8. with 9. and Psa.
112. Ver. 1. with 7. The heart touched with the lodestone of divine love
trembles still with this godly fear, and yet looks fixedly by faith to that
star of Jacob, Jesus Christ, who guids it to the Haven of happiness.

The looking upon God in the face of Jesus Christ takes off that terror of his
countenance that drives Men from him, and in the smiles of his love that appear
through Christ, there is such a power as unites* their hearts to him, but
unites them so, as to fear his name, as the Psalmist's prayer is. He puts such
a fear in their hearts as will not cause them depart from, yea, causes that
they shall not depart from him.

And this is the purest and highest kind of godly fear that springs from love,
and though it excludes not the consideration of wrath, as terrible in it self,
and some fear of it, yet it may surmount it, and doubtless where much of that
love possesses the heart, it will sometimes drown the other consideration, that
it shall scarcely be sensible at all, and will constantly set it aside, and
persuade a Man purely for the goodness and loveliness of God to fear to offend
him, though there were no interest at all in it of a Man's own personal misery
or happiness.

But do we thus fear the Lord our God* What mean then our oaths, and excesses,
and uncleanness? our covetousness, and generally our unholy and unchristian
conversation? This fear would make Men tremble so as to shake them out of their
profane customs, and to shake their beloved sins out of their bosoms, the
knowledge of the holy one, causes fear of him Prove. 9.18.

But alas! We know him not, and therefore we fear him not, knew we but a little
of the great Majesty of God, how holy he is, and how powerful a punisher of
unholiness, we would not dare to provoke him thus, he that can kill both body
and soul, and cast them into hell (as our Savior tells us) and he will do so
with both, if we will not fear him, because he can do so and it is told us that
we may fear, and so not feel this heavy wrath. A little lively spiritual
knowledge would go far, and work much, that a great deal, such as ours is, does
not. Some such word as that of Joseph would do much, being engraven on the
heart, shall I do this evil and sin against God? it would make a man be at no
more liberty to sin, in secret then in public, no not to dispense with the sin
of his thoughts more then of openest words or actions. If some grave wiseman
did see our secret behavior, and our thoughts, would we not look more narrowly
to them? And not suffer such rovings and follies in our selves, sure therefore
we forget Gods eye, which we could not, if we thought right on it, but respect
more, then if all men did see within us.

Nor is this only the main point to be pressed upon the ungodly, but the
Children of God themselves have much need to be put in mind of it, and to
increase in it, how often do they abuse the indulgence of so loving a father,
and have not their thoughts so constantly full of him, are not in his fear (as
Solomon advises) all the day long, but many times slip out of his directing
hand, and wander from him, and do not so deeply fear his displeasure, and so
watch over all their ways as becomes them, and keep close by him, and wait on
his voice, and obey it constantly, and are not so humbled and afflicted in
their repentings for sin as this fear requires, but slight and superficial.
They offer much lip labor which is but dead service to the living God. These
are things, My beloved, that concerns us much, and that we ought seriously to
lay to heart, for even they that are freed from condemnation, yet if they will
walk fearlesly and carelessly at any time, he has ways enough to make them
smart for it, and if there were no more, should it not wound them deeply, to
think how they requite so great, so unspeakable love.

Honor the King,] This was the particular that the Apostle pressed, and
insisted on before, and here repeats, as a special duty of the Second Table,
and a vindication of Religion wrongfully blamed in this point, but of this
before.

This is out of question in the general, only in the measure and rule of it,
is the difference, and sure they cannot possibly be satisfied that are so drunk
with power, as to admit of none at all, no measure nor rate for it, no banks
nor channel for those rivers the hearts and wills of Kings to run in, but if
they like to run over all, they may.

This is such a wild conceit as destroys both all law of reason in humane
societies, and all religious obligement to the Laws of God. For the
qualification and measure, I shall mention no other, but that in the Text, that
it be always regulated by this, that here goes before it, the fear of God, that
we never think of any such obedience, and honor due to Kings as crosses that
fear that is due to God, Let Kings, and Subjects, and all know, that they are
absoutely bound to this, it is spoke to Kings Psa. 2. serve the Lord in fear.
and Psa. 9.6. to all men fear before him all the earth, for he is great and
greatly to be praised, He is to be feared above all Gods. What is Man in
respect of him? Shall a worm whose breath is in his nostrils stand in
competition with the everliving God? Shall an Earthen potsheard strive with his
maker? Let the potsheard^ strive with the potsheards of the earth, Let them
work one against another and try which is hardest, and so they shall often
break each other, but woe to him that striveth with his maker. There Is nothing
there, but certain perishing. As we conlude in the question with Rome of the
honor due to Saints, and Angels, honor let them have good reason, but not
Divine Honor, not Gods peculiar, so in this, give to Caesar the things that
are Caesar's but withal still give to God the things that are Gods.

But it is a miserable estate of a Kingdom when debates arises, and increases in
this, and their happiness is, when Kings, and People concur to honor God:
For those that honor him, he will honor. And whosoever despises him shall be
despised.

Verse. 18.
Servants be Subject to your Masters with all fear not only to the good and
gentle: But also to the froward.
THy word (says the Psalmist) is a light to my feet, and a L^nterne to my
paths, not only a light to please his eyes, by the excellent truths and
comforts that are in it, but withal a light to direct his feet in the precepts
and rules of life that it gives, to inform and delight his mind to order his
course. That Philosopher was deservedly commended, that drew knowledge most
this way, and therefore was said to have brought Philosophy from the clouds to
dwell amongst Men, calling it from empty Speculations to a practical stram.
Thus we are taught in Spiritual knowledge by the word of God. The Son, the
etenal word, when he came to dwell with Men, and so brought life, and wisdom,
and all blessings from the Heavens down unto them, he taught them both by his
doctrine, and perfect example how to walk, and his Apostles do conformably aim
at this in their holy writings, joining with the mysteries of faith, those
rules of life, that show men the straight way to happiness.

And as it is spoken of the largness of Solomon's wisdom, that He spoke of all
Trees, from the Cedar in Lebanon, to the Hysope that grows out of the wall: So
in this, we may see the perfection of the Holy Scriptures, that they give those
directions that are needful to all ranks and sorts of Men, they speak not only
of the duties of Kings, how they ought to behave themselves on their thrones,
and the duty of their subjects to them in that dignity, and how Ministers, and
others ought to carry in the House of God; but they come in to private houses,
and give aeconomick rules for them, teaching Parents, and Children, and
Masters, yea and Servants how to acquit themselves one to another, Thus here
Servants be subject to your Masters.

As this is a just plea for all the people of God, that they have right to the
use of this book, being so useful for all sorts, and that they ought not to be
barred it, so it is a just plea against a great part of those that bar
themselves the use of it, through sloathfulness and earthly-mindedness, seeing
it is so contemper'd, that there be many things, yea, all the main things in it
profitable for all: Fitted to the use of the lowest estate, and lowest
capacities of Men, yea, it takes (as we see) particular notice of their
condition, stoops down to take the meanest Servant by the hand, to lead them
the way to Heaven; and not only that part of it which is the general way of
Christians, but even those steps of it, that lie within the walk of their
particular calling, as here, teaching not only the duties of a Christian but of
a Christian Servant.

Obs. 1. The Scriptures are a deep that few can wade far into, and none can
wade through (as those Ezekiel. 47. But yet all may come to the brook and refresh
themselves with drinking of the streams of its living Water, and go in a little
way according to their strength and stature; now this (I say) may be spoken to
our shame, and I wish it might shame you to amendment, that so many of you,
either use not the Scriptues at all, or in using, do not use them, turn over
the leaves, and it may be run through the lines, and consider not what they
advise you, Masters learn your part, and Servants too hearken what they say to
you, for they pass not you by, they vouchsafe to speak to you too: But you
vouchsafe not to hear them, and observe their voice. How can you think that the
reading of this Book concerns you not? When you may hear it address such
particular directions unto you. Wisdom goes not only to the gates of Palaces,
but to the common gates of the Cities, and to the public highwayes, and calls
to the simplest that she may make them wise. Besides that you dishonor God,
you prejudge your selves; for does not that neglect of God and his Words justly
procure the disorder and disobedience of your Servants toward you, as a fit
punishment from his righteous hand; although they are unrighteous, and are
procuring further judgment to themselves in so doing; and not only thus, is
your neglect of the Word a cause of your trouble by the justice of God, but in
regard of the Nature of the Word, that if you would respect it, and make use of
it in your Houses, it would teach your Servants to respect and obey you as
here, you see it speaks for you, and therefore you wrong both it, and your
selves when you silence it in your Families

Obs. 2. The Apostle having spoken of subjection to public Authority, adds
this of subjection to private Domestic Authority, it is a thing much of
concernment, the right ordering of Families, for all other Societies Civil, and
Religious, are made up of these. Villages, and Cities, and Churches, and
Commonwealths, and Kingdoms are but a Collection of Families, and therefore
such as these are, for the most part, such must the whole Societies
predominantly be, one particular House is but a very small part of a Kingdom,
yet the wickedness and lewdness of that House, be it but of the meanest in it,
of Servants one or more, though it seem but a small thing, yet goes in to make
up that heap of sin that provokes the wrath of God, and draws on public
Calamity.

And this particularly when it declines into disorder proves a public evil,
when Servants grow generally corrupt and disobedient, and unfaithful; though
they be the lowest part; yet the whole Body of a Commonwealth cannot but feel
very much the evil of it, as a Man does when his Legs and feet grow diseased,
and begin to fail him.

We have here, 1. Their Duty. 2. The due extent of it. 3. The right Principle
of it.

Be subject] 1. Keep your Order and Station under your Masters, and that with
fear, and inward reverence of mind and respect to them, that is the very Life
of all Obedience. Then their Obedience has in it diligent doing, and patient
suffering. Both these are in that word, be subject, do faithfully to your
utmost that which is concredited to you, and obey all their just Commands, for
Action indeed goes no further, but suffer patiently even their unjust Rigours
and severities. And this being the harder part of the two, and yet a part that
the Servants of those times bore, many of them being more hardly and slavishly
used than any with us, especially those that were Christian Servants under
unchristian Masters; therefore the Apostle insists most on this, and this is
the extent of the Obedience here required, that it be to all kind of Masters,
not to the good only, but the evil, not only to obey, but to suffer, and suffer
patiently, and not only deserved, but even wrongful and unjust punishment.

Now because this particular concerns Servants, Let them reflect upon their own
carriage, and examine it by this Rule, and truly the greatest part of them will
be found very unconform to it, being either closely fraudulent, and deceitful;
or grossly stubborn, and disobedient, abusing the lenity and mildness of their
Masters, or murmuring at their just severity, so far are they from the patient
endurance of the least undue word of reproof, much less of sharper punishment,
either truly, or in their opinion undeserved. And truly if any that profess
Religion dispense themselves in this, thy mistake the matter very much; for it
ties them more, whether Children or Servants to be most submissive and obedient
even to the worst kind of Parents and Masters, always in the Lord, not obeying
any unjust Command, though they may and ought to suffer patiently (as it is
here) their unjust reproves or punishments.

But on the other side, this does not justify, nor at all excuse the unmerciful
Austerities, and unbridled Passion of Masters, it is still a perverseness and
crookedness in them, as the word is here, and must have its own Name, and shall
have its proper reward from the Sovereign Master and Lord of all the World.

2. There is here also the due extent of this Duty. Namely, to the Froward.
It Is a more deformed thing to have a distorted crooked mind, or a froward
spirit, than any crookedness of the Body. How can he that has Servants under
him expect their Obedience, when he cannot command his own Passion, but is a
slave to it? And unless much Conscience of Duty possess Servants (more than is
readily to be found with them) it cannot but work a Master into much
disaffection and disesteem with them, when he is of a turbulent Spirit, a
troubler of his own House, embittering his affairs, and Commands, with
rigidness and Passions, and taking things readily by that side that may offend,
and trouble him, thinking his Servant slights his call, when he may as well
think he heard him not, and upon every light occasion, real or imagined, flying
out into reproachful speeches, or proud threats, contrary to the Apostle St.
Paul's rule; which he sets over against the Duty of Servants, Ephesians. 6. Forbearing
threatening, knowing that your Master also is in Heaven, and that there is no
respect of Persons with him: think therefore, when you shall appear before the
Judgment Seat of God that your carriage shall be examined, and judged as
theirs, and think that we regard those differences much of Masters and
Servants, but they are nothing with God, they evanish.

Consider who made thee to differ, might he not have made your Stations just
contrary with a turn of his hand, and made thee the Servant, and thy Servant
the Master: But we willingly forget those things that should compose our minds
to humility, and meekness, and blow them up with such fancies as please, and
feed our natural vanity, and make us some body in our own account.

However that Christian Servant that falls into the hands of a froward Master,
will not be beaten out of his Station, and Duty of Obedience by all the hard
and wrongful usage he meets withal; but will take that as an opportunity of
exercising the more Obedience, and Patience, and will be the more cheerfully
Patient, because of his Innocence, as the Apostle here exhorts.

Men do indeed look sometimes upon this, as a just plea for impatience, that
they suffer unjustly, which yet is very ill Logic: for (as he said) would any
Man that frets because he suffers unjusty, wish to deserve it, that he might be
patient. Now to hear them, they seem to speak so, when they exclaim, that the
thing which vexes them most, is, that they have not deserved any such thing as
is inflicted on them: truly desert of punishment may make a Man more silent
upon it, but innocence right considered makes him more Patient, guiltiness
stops a Man's mouth indeed in suffering: But sure it does not quiet his mind, on
the contrary, it is that which mainly disturbs and grieves him, it is the sting
of suffering, as sin is said to be of Death; and therefore when that is not,
the pain of the sufferings cannot but be much abated by it; Yea the Apostle
here declares, that to suffer undeservedly, and withal patiently, is glorious
to a Man, and acceptable to God. It is commendable indeed to be truly patient
even in deserved sufferings, but the deserving them tarnishes the luster of
that Patience, and makes it look more constrain'd-like, which is the Apostles
meaning, preferring it much before spotless suffering, and that is indeed the
true glory of it, that it pleases God, so that it is rendered in the close of
the 20. Verse for the other word of glory in the beginning of it it is a
pleasing thing in Gods eyes, and therefore he will thank a Man for it, as the
word is, though we owe all our Patience under all kind of afflictions as a Duty
to him, and though that Grace is his own gift; yet he has obliged himself by
his Royal Word, not only to accept of it, but to praise it, and reward it in
his Children; though they lose their thanks at the World's hands, and be rather
scoffed and taunted in all their doings, and sufferings, it is no matter, they
can expect no other there, but their reward is on high, in the sure and
faithful hand of their Lord.

How often do Men work earnestly, and do and suffer much for the uncertain
wages of glory, and thanks, amongst Men, and how many of them fall short of
their reckoning, either dying before they come through to that State where they
think to find it, or find it not where they looked for it, and so do but live to
feel the pain of their dissappointment; Or if they do attain their end, such
glory and thanks as Men have to give them, what amounts it to? Is it any other
but a handful of nothing, the breath of their mouths, and themselves much like
it, a vapor dying out in the air, and the reallest thanks they give, their
solidest rewards, are but such as a Man cannot take home with him; if they go
so far with him, yet at furthest he must leave them at the door, when he is to
enter his Everlasting home. All the Riches and Palaces, and Monuments of
honor that he had, and that are erected to him after death, as if he had then
some interest in them, reach him not at all, enjoy them who will, he does not,
he has no Portion of all that is done under the Sun, his own end is to him the
end of the World.

But he that would have abiding glory, and thanks, must turn his eye another
way for them. All Men desire Glory, but they know neither what it is, nor how
it is to be sought, he is upon the only right bargain of this kind, whose Praise
(according to St. Paul's word) is not of Men but of God. If Men commend him not,
he accounts it no loss, nor no gain if they do, for he minds for a Country
where that coin goes not, and whither he cannot carry it; and therefore he
gathers it not. That which he seeks in all, is, that he may be approved, and
accepted of God, whose thanks is no less to the least of those he accepts, than
a crown of unfading Glory; not a poor Servant that fears his Name and is
Obedient, and Patient for his sake, but shall be so rewarded.

There be some kind of Graces, and good actions that Men (such as regard any
grace) take special notice of, and commend highly, such as are of a magnifick
and remarkable nature, such as Martyrdom, or doing, or suffering for Religion
in some Public way: There be again other obscure Graces, that if Men despise
not, yet they esteem not much, as Meekness, and Gentleness, and Patience under
private crosses known to few or none, and yet these are of great account with
God, and therefore should be so with us, they are of more universal use:
whereas the other, are but for high times, as we say, for rare occasions, these
are every ones work, but few are called to the acting of the other. And the
least of them shall not lose their reward, in whose Person soever, as St. Paul
tells us, speaking of this same subject, Ephesians. 6.8. Knowing that whatsoever good
thing any Man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whither he be bound
or free.

This is the bounty of that great Master we serve: For what are we, and all we
can do, that there should be a Name of a reward to it, yet he keeps all in
reckoning, not a poor lame Prayer, not a Tear, nor a sigh poured forth before
him shall go to loss. Not any cross from his own hand immediately, or coming
through Men's hands, that is taken (what way soever it come) as out of his hand
and carried patiently, yea and wellcom'd, and embraced for his sake, But he
observes our so entertaining of it, not an injury that the meanest Servant
bears Christianly, but goes all upon account with him, and he sets them so, as
that they bear much value through his esteem, and way of reckoning them, though
in themselves they are all less than nothing, as a worthless Counter, stands
for hundreds or thousands according to the Place you set it in. Happy they that
have to deal with such a Lord, and be they Servant or Master, are vowed
Servants to him, When he comes his reward shall be with him.

The 3 d. thing is the Principle of this Obedience and Patience, for Conscience
toward God.

It imports 1. The knowledge of God, and of his will in some due measure. 2. A
conscientious respect unto him and his will so known, taking it for their only
rule in doing and suffering.

1. This declares to us the freeness of the grace of God in regard of Men's
outward quality, that he does often bestow the riches of his grace upon Persons
of mean condition. It Is supposed here, that this conscience of God, the saving
knowledge and fear of his name, is to be found in Servants: Therefore the
Apostle takes them within the address of his Letter amongst those that are
elect, according to the foreknowledge of God. Chap. 1. Ver. 2. And sharers of
those dignities he mentions Ver. 9. of this Chap. A chosen generation. The
honor of a Spiritual Royalty, under the meanness of a Servant, and this grace
possibly conferred upon the Servant, and denied to the Master, as here
supposed: It may fall out that a perverse crooked-minded Master may have a
Servant uprightly minded, being endowed with a tender respective conscience
toward God, and thus the Lord does to counteract the pride of Man, and set off
the luster of his own free grace, he has all to choose on, and yet chooses
there, where Men would least imagine. Mat. 11.25. 1 Cor. 1.27.

2. Grace finds a way to act it self in every estate where it is, and regulates
the Soul to the particular duties of that estate, if it find a Man high or low,
a Master, or a Servant, it requires not a change of his station, but works a
change on his heart, and teaches him how to live in it, the same Spirit that
makes a Christian Master pious, and gentle, and prudent in commanding, makes a
Christian Servant faithful and obsequious, and diligent in obeying. A skillful
engraver makes you a Statue indifferently of Wood, or Stone, or Marble, as they
are put into his hand, and grace forms a Man to a Christian way of walking in
any estate, there is a way for him in the meanest condition to glorify God,
and to adorn the profession of Religion, no estate so low, as to be shut out
from that, and a right informed, and right affected conscience toward God
shows a Man that way, and causes him to walk in it. As the Astrologers say,
that the same Stars that made Cyrus to be chosen King amongst the Armies of Men
when he came to be a Man, made him to be chosen King amongst the Shepherds
Children when he was a Child: Thus grace will have its proper operation in
every, estate.

In this Men readily deceive themselves, they can do any thing well in
imagination, better than the real task that is in their hands. They presume
that they could do God good service in some place of command, that serve him
not as becomes in that which is by far the easier, the place of obeying,
wherein he has set them, They think if they had the ability and opportunities
that some Men have, they would do much more for Religion, and for God than they
do, and yet do nothing but spoil a far lower part than that, which is their
own, and is given them to study and act aright in; but our folly, and self
ignorance abuses us, it is not our part to choose what we should be, but to be
what we are to to his glory, that gives us to be such: Be thy condition never
so mean, yet thy conscience toward God, if it be within thee, will find it
self work in that. If it be little that is concredited to thee in regard of thy
outward condition, or any other way, be thou faithful in that little, as our
Savior speaks, and thy reward shall not be little, he shall make the ruler over
much.

3. As a corrupt mind debaseth the best and excellentest Callings, and Actions,
so the lowest are raised above themselves, and ennobl'd by a Spiritual mind. A
Magistrate or Minister though their calling and employments be high, may have
low intentions, and draw down their high calling to these low intentions; they
may seek themselves, and self ends, and neglect God. And a sincere Christian
may elevate his low Calling by this Conscience of God observing his will, and
intending his Glory in it. An Eagle may fly high, and yet have its eye down
upon some carrion on the earth, and a Man may be standing on the earth, and
that on some low part of it, and yet have his eye upon Heaven and be
contemplating it. That which one Man cannot at all see in another, is the very
thing most considerable in their actions, namely, the principle whence they
flow, and the end to which they tend. This is the form and life of actions,
that by which they are earthly, or Heavenly. Whatsoever be the matter of them,
the Spiritual mind has that Alchimy indeed of turning base Metals into Gold,
Earthly employments into Heavenly. The handy work of an Artisan or Servant that
regards God, and eyes him, even in that work, is much holier than the prayer of
an Hypocrite, and a Servants enduring the private wrongs and harshness of a
froword Master, bearing it patiently for the Conscience of God, is more
acceptable to God, than the sufferings of some such, as may endure much for a
public good cause without a good and upright heart.

This habitude and posture of the heart toward God, the Apostle S. Paul
pr^sses much in this very Subject Ephesians. 6. as being very needful to allay the
hard labor, and harsh usage of many of them, this is the way to make them
easy, to undergo them for God. no pill so bitter, but respect and love to God
will sweeten it. And this is a very great refreshment and comfort to a
Christian in the mean estate of a Servant, or other laboring Men, that they
may offer up their hardship and bodily labor as a sacrifice to God, and say,
Lord, this is the station wherein thou have set me in the world, and I desire
to serve thee in it, what I do is for thee, and what I suffer I desire to bear
patiently and cheerfully for thy sake, in submission and obedience to thy will.

For Conscience] In this there is 1. A reverent compliance with Gods disposal,
both in allotting to them that condition of Life, and particularly choosing
their Master for them, though possibly not the mildest and pleasantest, yet the
fittest for their good, there is much in the firm believing of this, and hearty
submitting to it: For we would naturally rather carve for our selves, and shape
our own estate to our mind, which is a most foolish, yea, an impious
presumption, as if we were wiser that he that has done it, and as if there
were not as much, and it may be more possibility of true contentment in a mean
than in a far higher condition, the Masters mind is often more toiled than the
Servants body. And if our condition be appointed us, at least we would have a
voice in some qualifications and circumstances of it, as in this, if a Man must
serve, he would wish willingly, that God would allot him a meek gentle Master,
and so we in other things, if we must be sick, we would be well accommodate,
and not want helps, but to have sickness, and want means, and friends for our
help, this we cannot think of without horror. But this submission to God is
never right till all be given up into his hand that concerns us, to do with it
and every Article and circumstance of it as seems good, in his eyes. 2. In this
Conscience is a Religious and observant respect to the rule God has set men to
walk by in that condition, so that their obedience depends not upon any
external inducement, and so falls when that fails: But flows from an inward
impression of the Law of God upon the heart, thus a Servant's obedience, and
patience will not be pinned to the goodness and equity of his Master, but when
that fails, will subsist upon its own inward ground, and generally in all
estates. This is the thing that makes sure, and constant walking, makes a Man
step even in the ways of God. When a Man's obedience Springs from that
unfailing, unchanging reason, the command of God, it is a natural motion, and
therefore keeps on, and rather grows, than abates; but they that are moved by
things outward, must often fail; because these things are not constant in their
moving; as a People that are much acted by the Spirit of their rulers, as the
Jews when they had good Kings. 3. In this is a tender care of the glory of God,
and the adornment of Religion, which the Apostle premised before these
particular duties, as a thing to be specially regarded in them; the honor of
our Lords name is that we should set up, as the mark, and to aim all our
actions at, either we think not on it, or our hearts slip out, and start from
their aim, like bows of deceit as the Word is. 4. There is the comfortable
persuasion of Gods approbation and acceptance, as is expressed in the following
Verse (of which somewhat before) and the hope of that reward he has promised,
as it is Col. 3.24. No less than the inheritance, so then such Servants as
these, are Sons and Heirs of God, Coheirs with Christ, thus he that is a
Servant, may be in a far more excellent estate than his Master: The Servant may
hope for, and aim at a Kingdom, while the Master is embracing a dunghill, and
he that is thus, thinks highly of Gods free grace: And the looking ever to that
inheritance, make them go cheerfully through all pains and troubles here as
light and momentany, and not worth the naming in comparison of that glory that
shall be revealed. In the mean time the best and most easy condi^ion of the
Sons of God cannot satisfy them, nor stay their sighs and groans, waiting, and
longing for that day of their full redemption.

Now this is the great rule, not only for Servants. But for all the Servants of
God in what estate soever, to set the Lord always before them, and to study
(with St. Paul) to have a conscience void of offense toward God and Man, to
eye and apply constantly to their actions, and their inward thoughts the
command of God, to walk by that rule abroad, and at home, in their houses, and
in the several ways of their calling: As an exact workman is ever, and anon
laying to his rule to his work, and squaring it, and for the Conscience they
have toward God, to do and suffer his will cheerfully, in every thing, being
content, that he choose their condition, and their trialls for them. Only
desirous to be assured, that he has chosen them for his own, and given them
right to the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, still endeavoring to walk in
that way that leads to it, overlooking this moment, and all things in it,
accounring it a very indifferent matter what is their outward estate here in
this moment, providing they may be happy in Eternity; high or low here, bond or
free, it imports little; seeing all these differences will be so quickly at an
end, and thene shall not be so much as any tract or footstep of them left with
particular Men: It Is so in their graves, you may distinguish the greater from
the less by their Tombs, but by their dust you cannot, and with the whole world
it shall be so in end. All Monuments, and Palaces, with cottages made fire, as
our Apostle tells us, the elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the earth
and all the works therein shall be burnt up.

Verse. 21.22, 23.
For even hereunto were ye called: Because Christ also suffered for us, leaving
us an example, that ye should follow his steps.

22. Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth.

23. Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened
not: But committed himself to him that judges righteously.


THe rules that God has set Men to live by are universally just, and there is
an universal obligation upon all Men to obey them, but as they are particulary
addressed to his own people in his word, they are out of question particularly
bound to yield obedience, and have many peculiar perswasives to it, that extend
not to others, which are therefore usually represented to them, and pressed
upon them in the Holy Scriptures. Thus the preface of the Law runs to Israel,
besides that, I am Jehovah and have Supreme power to give Men Laws, is added I
am thy God especially thy deliverer from slavery, and bondage, and so have a
peculiar right to thy obedience, so Deuteronomy. 7.6. Thus the Apostle here urges
this point in hand of inoffensiveness, and patience, particularly in Christian
Servants: But so as it fits every Christian in his station, for hereunto, says
he, ye are called. Whatsoever others do, though they think this too strait a
rule, yet you are tied to it by your own calling, and profession as you are
Christians; and this is evidently the highest and clearest reason that can be,
and of greatest power with a Christian, Namely, the example of Jesus Christ
himself. For Christ also suffered for us. etc.

So it is all but one entire Argument, that they ought thus to behave
themselves, because it is the very thing they are called to, as their conformity
to Jesus Christ, whose they profess to be, yea, with whom as Christians they
profess themselves to be one.

Hereunto were ye called] This in the general is a thing that ought to be ever
before our eye, to consider the nature, and end of our calling, and to
endeavor in all things to suit it, to think in every occurrence, what does the
calling of a Christian require of me in this; but the truth is, the most do not
mind this, we profess our selves to be Christians, and never think what kind of
behavior this obliges us to, and what manner of persons it becomes us to be in
all holy Conversation; but walk disorderly out of our rank inordinately, you
that are Profane, were you called by the Gospel to serve the World, and your
Lusts, to Swearing and Rioting, and Voluptuousness? Hear you not the Apostle
testifying the contrary, in express terms? That God has not called us to
uncleanness, but unto holiness. You that are of proud contentious Spirits, are
you suitable to this holy Calling? No, for we are called to Peace, says the
same Apostle, but we study not this Holy Calling, and therefore we walk so
incongruously, so unlike the Gospel, we lie and do not the truth, as St. John
speaks, our Actions belie us.

The particular that here Christians are said to be called to, is to suffering,
as their Lot; and Patience, as their Duty, even under the most unjust and
undeserved sufferings^

And both these are as large as the Sphere of this Calling, not only Servants
and others of a mean condition, that lying low, are the more subject to rigours
and Injuries, but generally, all that are called to Godliness are likewise
called to Sufferings. 2 Timothy 3.12. All that will follow Christ, must do it in
his Livery, they must take up their Cross. This is a very harsh and unpleasing
Article of the Gospel to a carnal mind, but it conceales it not, Men are not
led blindfold upon sufferings, and drawn into a hidden snare by the Gospels
invitations, they are told very often, that they pretend not a surprisal, nor
have any just plea for starting back again, as our Savior tells his Disciples,
why he was so express and plain with them in this. These things says he, have
I told you that you be not offended. I have showed you the ruggedness of your
way, that you stumble not at it, taking it to be a smooth plain one, but
withal where this is spoke of, it is usually allayed with the mention of those
comforts, that accompany these sufferings, or that glory that follows them.
The Doctrine of the Apostles which was so verified in their own Persons, Acts
14. That through much tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of God, an
unpleasant way indeed, if you look no further, but a Kingdom at the end of it,
and the Kingdom of God will transfuse pleasure into the painfullest step in it
all, so Psalm. 34.19. It seems a sad condition that falls to the share of Godly
men in the World, to be eminent in sorrows and troubles. Many are the
afflictions of the Righteous, but that which follows weighs it abundantly down
in consolation, that the Lord himself is engaged in their afflictions, both
for their deliverance out of them in due time, and in the mean time, their
support and preservation under them. The Lord delivers them out of them all.
And till he does that, he keeps all their bones, etc. Which was literally
verified in the Natural body of Christ, as St. John observes, and holds
Spiritually true in his mystical body. The Lord supports the Spirits of
Believers in their troubles with such solid consolations, as are the Pillars
and strength of their Souls, as the bones are of their Body, as the Hebrew word
for them imports, so he keeps all his bones; and the desperate condition of
wicked men is opposed to illustrate this Verse 21. But evil shall slay the
Wicked.

Thus Ioh. 16.33. In the closure they are forewarned what to expect at the
Worlds hands, as they were diverse times before in that same Sermon: but it is a
sweet Testament, take it altogether, Ye shall have tribulation in the World,
but Peace in me, and seeing he has jointly bequeathed these two to his
followers, were it not great folly to cast such a bargain? And to let go that
Peace for fear of this trouble, the trouble is but in the World, but the Peace
is in him who weighs down thousands of Worlds.

So then they do exceedingly mistake, and misreckon themselves, that would
agree Christ, and the World: that would have the Church of Christ, or at least,
themselves for their own shares, enjoy both kinds of peace together, would
willingly have Peace in Christ, but are very loath to part with the Worlds
Peace, they would be Christians, but they are very ill satisfied when they hear
of any other but ease and Prosperity in that estate, and willingly forget the
tenor of the Gospel in this; and so when times of trouble and sufferings come,
their minds are as new and uncouth to it, as if they had not been told on it
before hand. They like better of St. Peter's carnal advice to Christ to avoid
suffering. Mat. 16. than of of his Apostles Doctrine to Christians, teaching
them that as he suffered, so they likewise are called to suffering. Men readily
think as he did there, that Christ should favor himself more in his own body,
his Church, than to expose it to so much suffering; and most would be of Rome's
mind in this, at least in affection, that the badge of the Church should be
Pomp and Prosperity, and not the Cross, the true cross of Afflictions and
sufferings is too heavy and painful.

But Gods thoughts are not ours, those he calls to a Kingdom, he calls to
sufferings, as the way to it: He will have the heirs of Heaven know they are
not at home on earth, and that this is not their rest, he will not have them
with the abused World fancy a happiness here, and seek life, as St. Augustine
says beatam vitam quaerere in regione mortis. The reproaches and wrongs that
encounter them shall elevate their minds often to that Land of Peace and rest,
where righteousness dwells. The hard Taskmasters shall make them weary of
Egypt, which otherwise possibly they would comply too well with. and dispose
them for deliverance, and make it welcome, which it may be they might but
coldly desire if they were better used.

He knows what he does, that secretly serves his good ends of Men's evil, and
by the Plowers that make long furrows on the back of his Church makes it a
fruitful Field to himself. Therefore it is great folly and unadvisedness, to
take up prejudice against his way, and think it might be better as we would
model it, and to complain of the order of things; whereas we should complain of
disordered minds, but we had rather have all altered, and changed for us, the
very course of Providence, than seek the change of our own perverse hearts, but
the right temper of a Christian is, to run always cross to the corrupt stream
of the World, and humane iniquity, and to be willingly carried along with the
stream of divine Providence, and not at all to stir a hand, no nor a thought,
to row against that mighty current; and not only is he carried with it upon
necessity, because there is no steering against it, but cheerfully and
voluntarily, not because he must, but because he would.

And this is the other thing to which they are jointly called, as to suffering
so to calmness of mind, and patience in suffering; although their suffering be
most unjust, yea, this is truly a part of that Duty they are called to, to that
integrity and innofensiveness of Life, that may ma^e their sufferings at Men's
hands always unjust to the entire Duty here, is Innocence, and Patience, doing
willingly no wrong and yet cheerfully suffering it done to them; if either of
the two be wanting, their suffering does not credit their Profession, but
dishonours it, if they be patient under deserved suffering, their guiltiness
darkens their Patience; and if their suffering be undeserved, yea, and the
cause of them honorable, yet impatience under them stains both their
sufferings, and their cause, and seems in part to justify the very injustice
that is used against them: But where innocence and Patience meet together in
suffering, there sufferings are in their perfect luster. These are they that
honor Religion, and shame the enemies of it. It was the concurrence of these
two that was the very triumph of the Martyrs in times of Persecution that
tormented their Tormentors and made them more then Conquerors even in
sufferings.

Now that we are called both to suffering, and to this manner of suffering, the
Apostle puts out of question, by the Supreme example of our Lord Jesus Christ,
for the Sum of our Calling is, to follow him. Now in both these, in suffering,
and in suffering Innocently and Patiently, the whole History of the Gospel
testifies how complete a Pattern he is. And the Apostle gives us here a
Summary, yet a very clear account of it.

The Words have in them these two things. 1. The perfection of this Example. 2.
Our obligation to follow it.

I. The example he sets off to the full. 1. In regard of the greatness of his
sufferings. 2. Of his spotlesness and Patience in suffering.

The first we have in that word he suffered, and after Verse 24. We have his
crucifying, and his stripes expressly specified.

Now this is reason enough and carries it beyond all other reason, why
Christians are called to a suffering Life, seeing the Lord and Author of that
Calling suffered himself so much. The Captain or Leader of our salvation, as
the Aposte speaks, was consecrate by suffering, that was the way by which he
entered into the holy place where he is now our everlasting High Priest, making
intercession for us, if he be our Leader to Salvation, must we not follow him
in the way he leads whatsoever it is, if it be (as we see it is) by the way of
sufferings, we must either follow on in that way, or fall short of salvation,
for there is no other Leader nor other way, but that which he opened up, so
that there is not only a Congruity in it, that his followers be conform to him
in suffering, but a necessity, if they will follow him on, till they attain to
Glory, and the consideration, of both these cannot but argue a Christian into a
Resolution for this via regia this Royal way of suffering that leads to Glory,
through which their King, and Lord himself went to his Glory. It could hardly
be believed at first, that this was his way, and we can as hardly yet believe
that it must be ours. Luke 24. O fools and slow of heart to believe, ought not
Christ to have suffered these things, and so to enter into his glory.

Would you be at glory, and will you not follow your Leader in the only way to
it? Must there another way be cut out for you by your self? O absurd! shall
the servant (says he) be greater than his Master. Are you not fairly dealt
with if you have a mind to Christ? You shall have full as much of the Worlds
good will as he had, if it hate you he bids you remember, how it hated him.

But though there were a way to do otherwise* would you not rather choose (if
the love of Christ possessed your hearts) to take a share with him in his Lot,
and find delight in the very trouble of it, is not this conformity to Jesus,
the great ambition of all his true hearted followers. We carry about in the
body the dying of the Lord Jesus, says the great Apostle, besides the
unspeakable advantage to come, that goes linked with this, that if we suffer
with him, we shall reign with him; there is a glory, even in this present
resemblance that we are conformed to the Image of the Son of God in sufferings.
Why should we desire to leave him? Are you not one with him? Can you choose but
have the same common friends and enemies? Would you willingly, if it might be,
could you find in your heart to be friends with that World, that hated your
Lord and Master? Would you have nothing but kindness and ease? where he had
nothing but enmity and trouble, or would you not rather, when you think right
on it, disdain and refuse to be so unlike him? As that good Duke said, when they
would have Crowned him King of Jerusalem. No, said he, by no means, I will not
wear a Crown of Gold, where Jesus was Crowned with thorns.

2. This Spotlesness and Patience in suffering are both of them set here before
us, the one Verse 22. the other 23.

Whosoever it is that makes such a noise of the injustice of what he suffers,
and thinks to justify his Impatience by his Innocence, let me ask thee, art
thou more just and innocent then he that is here set before thee? Or art thou
able to come near Him in this Point? Who did no sin, neither was guile found in
his mouth. This is to signify perfect holiness, according to that James. 3.2.
Man a little world, a world of wickedness, and that little part of him a little
world of Iniquity. all Christ's words, and actions, and all his thoughts flowed
from a pure Spring that had not any thing defiled in it, and therefore no
tentation either from Men, or Satan could seize on him, other Men may seem
clear unstirr'd, but move and trouble them, and the mudd arises, but he was
nothing but holiness, a pure fountain, all purity to the bottom, and therefore
stir and trouble him as they would he was still alike clear. The Prince of
this world comes, and has nothing in me.

This is the main ground of our confidence in him, that he is a Holy Harmeless
undefiled high Priest, and such an one became us, says that Apostle, that are
so sinful, the more sinful we, the more need that our High Priest should be
sinlesse, and being so, we may build upon his perfection, standing in our
stead, yea, we are invested with him and his righteousness.

Again there was no guile found in his mouth, this serves us concerning all the
promises that he has made us, that they are nothing but truth, has he said?
Him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out, then you need not fear, how
unworthy and vile soever, do you but come to him, and you have his word that he
will not shut the door against you, and as he has promised access, so has he
further promised ease, and Souls rest to those that come; then be confident to
find that in him too, for there was never a false nor guilefull word found in
his mouth.

But to consider it only in the present action, this speaks him the most
innocent sufferer that ever was, not only judicially just in his cause, but
entirly just in his Person, altogether righteous, and yet condemned to death,
and an opprobrious death of Malefactors, and set betwixt two, as chief of the
three, I am (says he) the rose Sharon and the Lilly of the valley. And the
Spouse says of him My well beloved is White and ruddy, thus indeed in his
death, ruddy in his bloodshed, and white in his innocence, and withal in his
meekness and patience, the other thing wherein he is here so exemplary.

Verse, 23. Who when he was reviled, reviled not again] This spotless Lamb of
God was a Lamb both in guiltlesness, and silence, and the Prophet Esaias
expresses the resemblance in that, he was brought as a Lamb to the slaughter,
he suffered, not only an unjust Sentence of death but withal, unjust
revilings, the contradictions of sinners, none ever did so little deserve
revilings, none ever could have said so much in his own just defense, and to
the just reproach of his enemies, and yet in both, he preferred silence: None
could ever threaten so heavy things as he could against his enemies, and have
made good all he threatened, and yet no such thing was heard from him. The
heaven and earth as it were spoke their resentment of his death that made them:
But he was silent, or what he spoke makes this still good, how far he was from
revilings, and threatenings, As spices pounded, or precious ointment poured out
give their smell most, thus his name was an ointment then poured forth,
together with his blood, and filled Heaven and Earth with its sweet perfume,
was a favor of rest and peace in both, appeasing the wrath of God, and so
quieting the Consciences of Men, and even in this particular was it then most
fragrant, in that all the Torments of the cross and revilings of the multitude,
that as it were racked him for some answer, yet could draw no other from him
but this, father forgive them for they know not what they do.

But for those to whom this mercy belonged not, the Apostle tells us what he
did in stead of Revilings and Threatenings, he committed all to him that judges
righteously. And this is the true method of Christian patience, that which
quiets the mind, and keeps it from the boiling Tumultuous thoughts of revenge,
to turn the whole matter into Gods hand, to resign it over to him, to
prosecute when, and as he thinks good. Not as the most, that had rather, if
they had power, do for themselves, and be their own avengers, and because they
have not power do offer up such bitter curses, and prayers for revenge unto
God, as are most hateful to him, and are far from this calm and holy way of
committing matters to his judgment. The common way of referring things to God
is indeed impious, and dishonorable to him, being really no other, but a
calling of him to be a Servant, and executioner to our passion, We ordinarily
mistake his justice, and judge of it according to our own precipitant
distempered minds. If wicked Men be not crossed in their designs, and their
wickedness evidently crushed just when we would have it, we are ready to give
up the matter as desperate, or at least abate of those confident, and reverent
thoughts of divine justice that we owe him: Howsoever things go, this ought to
be fixed in our hearts, that he that sits in Heaven judges righteously, and
executes that his righteous judgment in the fittest season, We poor worms
whose whole life is, but an hand-breadth in it self, and is as nothing unto
God, we think a few months, or years, a great matter, but to him that inhabites
Eternity, a thousand years are but as one day, as our Apostle teaches us.

Our Savior in that time of his Humiliation and Suffering, committed himself
and his cause, for that is best expressed, in that nothing is expressed but he
committed, and the issue shall be that all his enemies shall become his
footstool, and he himself shall judge them: But that which is given us here to
learn from his carriage toward them in his Suffering, is that quietness and
moderation of mind even under unjust Sufferings make us like him. Not to reply
reproach with reproach as our custom is, to give an ill word for another, or
two for one, to be sure not to be behind. Men take a pride in this, and think
it ridiculous simplicity to suffer, and this make strifes and contention so
abound, but it is a great mistake, you think it greatness of spirit to bear
nothing, to put up no wrong: Whereas it is indeed great weakness, and baseness,
it is true greatness of Spirit to despise the most of those things that set you
usually on fire one against another, especially being done after a Christian
manner, 'twere a part of the Spirit of Christ in you, and is there any Spirit
greater than that think you? Oh! that there were less of the Spirit of the
Dragon, and more of that Spirit of the Dove amongst us.

Our obligement to the example of Christ, besides its own excellency, is in
these two things in the words 1. The intendment of his behavior for this use,
to be as an example to us. 2. Our Interest in him, and those his Sufferings,
wherein he so carried himself.

Leaving us an Example etc. He left his footsteps as a Copy (as the word is) to
follow, every step of his, a letter of this Copy, and particularly in this
point of Suffering, he writ us a pure and perfect Copy of obedience in clear
and great letters in his own blood.

His whole life is our Rule, not his Miraculous works, his footsteps walking on
the Sea, and such like, are not for our following: But his obedience and
Holiness, and Meekenss, and Humility are our Copy, which we should continualy
study. The shorter and more effectual way (they say) of teaching, is by
example, but above all, this matchless example is the happiest way of teaching,
He that follows me says he, shall not walk in darkness.

He that aims high, shoot's the higher for it, though he shoot not so high, as
he aims. This is that which ennobles the Spirit of a Christian the propounding
of this our high Pattern, the example of Jesus Christ.

The Imitation of Men in worthless things is low and servile, the Imitation of
their virtues is commendable, but if we seek no higher, it is both imperfect and
unsafe. The Apostle St. Paul will have no Imitation, but with regard to this
Supreme Pattern, be ye follewers of me, as I am of Christ, One Christian may
take the example of Christ in many things in another, but still examining all
by the Original primitive Copy, the footsteps of Christ himself, following
nothing, but as it conformes with that, and looking most on him, as both the
perfectest and most effectual example. Heb. 12.2. there is a cloud of
witnesses and examples, but look above them all to him, that is as high above
them, as the Sun is above the clouds. As the way is better, a lively one
indeed, so there is this advantage in the Covenant of grace, that we are not
left to our own skill for following of it, but taught by the Spirit: In the
delivery of the Law, God showed his glory and greatness by the manner of it,
but the Law was written only in dead Tables, but Christ, the living Law,
teaches by obeying it, how to obey it, and this is the advantage of the Gospel,
that the Law is Twice written over unto believers, first in the example of
Christ, and then inwardly in their hearts by his Spirit. There is together with
that Copy of all grace in him, a Spirit derived from him, enabling believers to
follow him in their measure, they may not only see him as the only begotten Son
of God full of grace and truth, as it is Io. 6. But as there it follows, they
receive of his fullness grace for grace. The love of Christ makes the Soul
delight to converse with him, and converse, and Love together, makes it learn
his behavior, as Men that live much together, especially if they do much
affect one another, will insensibly contract another habitudes and customs.

The other thing obliging us, is our interest in him, and his Sufferings, he
suffered for us, and this the Apostle returns to Ver. 24. Observe only from
the Tie of these two, that if we neglect his example set before us, we cannot
enjoy any right assurance of his suff^ring for us, but if we do seriously
endeavor to follow him, then we may be persuaded of life through his death,
and those steps of his wherein we walk will bring us ere long to be where he is.

Verse. 24.
Who his own self bare our sins in his own Body on the Tree, that we being dead
to sin, should live unto Righteousness; by whose stripes ye were healed.
THat which is deepest in the heart, is readily most in the mouth. That which
abounds within, runs over most by the Tongue or Pen, when Men light upon the
speaking of that Subject, that possesses the affection, they can hardly be
taken off, or drawn from it again. Thus the Apostles in their writings, when
they make mention any way of Christ suffering for us, they love to dwell on it,
as that which they take most delight to speak of: Such delicacy and sweetness
is in it to a Spiritual taste, that they like to keep it in their mouth, and
are never out of their theme when they insist on Jesus Christ, though they have
but named him by occasion of some other Doctrine, for he is the great subject
of all they have to say.

Thus here, the Apostle had spoke of Christ in the foregoing words very fitly
to this present Subject, setting him before Christian Servants and all
suffering Christians, as their complete example, both in point of much
suffering, and of perfect Innocence, and Patience in suffering. And expressed
their engagement to study and follow that example; yet he cannot leave it so,
but having said, that all those his sufferings wherein he was so exemplary,
were for us, as a chief consideration, for which we should study to be like
him, he returns to that again, and enlarges himself in it in words partly the
same, partly very near those of that Evangelist among the Prophets Esaias Chap.
53.

And it suits very well with his main scope, to press this point; as giving
both very much strength and sweetness to the Exhortation, as being most
reasonable, that we willingly conform to him in suffering that had never been
an Example of suffering, nor subject at all to sufferings nor capable of them
but for us; and most comfortable in the light sufferings of this Moment, to
consider, that he has freed us from the sufferings of Eternity, by suffering
himself in our stead, in the fullness of time.

That Jesus Christ is in doing and suffering, our Supreme and Matchless
Example, and that he came to be so, is a truth, but that he is nothing further
and came for no other end, is (you see) a high point of falsehood; for how
should Man be enabled to learn, and follow that example of obedience unless
there were more in Christ, and what would become of that great reckoning of
disobedience that Man stands guilty of. No, these are too narrow, he came to
bear our sins on his own Body on the tree, and for this purpose had a Body
fitted for him, and given him to bear this burden, to do this, as the will of
his Father, to stand for us in stead of all Offerings, and Sacrifices; and by
that will, says the Apostle, we are Sanctified through the offering of the
body of Jesus Christ once for all.

This was his business, not only to rectify sinful Mankind by his example; but
to redeem him by his Blood, he was a teacher come from God. As a Prophet he
teaches us the way of Life, and as the best and greatest of Prophets is
perfectly like his Doctrine, and his actions (that in all Teachers is the
livelyest part of Doctrine) his carriage in Life and death, is our great
Pattern and instruction: But what is said of his forerunner, is more eminently
true of Christ, he is a Prophet and more then a Prophet, a Priest satisfying
justice for us, and a King conquering sin and death for us, an Example in deed,
but more than an Example, our Sacrifice, and our Life, and all in all, it is our
Duty to walk as he walked, to make him the pattern of our steps 1 Ioh. 2.6. But
our comfort and salvation lies in this, that he is the propitiation for our
sins, Verse 2. So in the first Chapter of that Epistle Verse 7. We are to walk
in the Light, as he is in the Light: For all our walking we have need of that
which follows, that bears the great weight, the Blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses us from all sin, and so still that glory which he possesses in his
own Person, is the pledge of ours, he is there for Us. he lives to make
intercession for us, says the Apostle, and I go to prepare a place for you,
says he himself.

We have in the words these two great points, and in the same order as the
words ly. 1. The nature, and quality of the sufferings of Jesus Christ, And 2.
The end of them.

In the expression of his suffering, we are to consider. 1. The commutation of
the Persons, he himself, for us. 2. The work undertaken and performed, he bare
our sins in his own body on the tree.

1. The Act, or sentence of the Law against the breach of it standing in force,
and Divine justice expecting satisfaction, death was the necessary and
inseparable consequent of sin. If you say the Supreme Majesty of God being
accountable to none, might have forgiven all without satisfaction. We are not
to contest that, nor foolishly to offer to sound the bottomless deep of his
absolute prerogative, Christ implies in his Prayer, that it was impossible that
he could escape that cup: But the impossibility is resolved into his Fathers
will, as the cause of it. But this we may clearly see following the tract of
the holy Scriptures (our only safe way) that this way wherein our salvation is
contrived is most excellent, and suitable to the greatness, and goodness of
God, so full of wonders of wisdom, and love, that the Angels, as our Apostle
tells us before, cannot forbear looking on it, and admiring it; for all their
exact knowledge, yet they still find it infinitely beyond their knowledge, still
in astonishment and admiration of what they see, and still in search looking in
to see more. Those Cherubims still having their eyes fixed on this Mercy Seat.

Justice might indeed have siez'd on rebellious Man, and laid the pronounced
punishment on him, mercy might have freely acquit him, and pardoned all: But
can we name any place where mercy and justice as relating to condemned Man
could have met and shined jointly in full aspect, save only in Jesus Christ, in
whom indeed Mercy and truth met, and righteousness and peace kissed each other.
Yea, in whose Person the Parties concerned, that were at so great a distance
met so near, as nearer, can not be imagined.

And not only was this the only way, for the consistence of these two, Justice
and Mercy, but take each of them severally, and they could not have been in so
full luster, as in this. Gods just hatred of sin did out of doubt appear more
in punishing his own only begotten Son for it, than if the whole race of
Mankind had suffered for it Eternally. Again it raises the notion of Mercy to
the highest, that sin is not only forgiven us, but for this end God's own
coe^ernal Son, is given to us, and for us. Consider what he is, and what we
are, he the Son of his love, and we Enemies. Therefore it is emphatically
expressed in the words, he himself bare our sins. God so loved the World, but
love amounts to this much, that it was so great, as to give his Son: But how
great that is, cannot be uttered. In this says the Apostle, God commends his
love to us, sets it up to the highest, gives us the richest and strongest
evidence of it.

The foundation of this frame, this appearing of Christ for us, and undergoing
and Answering all in our stead, lies in the Decree of God, where it was
plotted, and contrived in the whole way of it from Eternity, and the Father and
the Son being one, and their thoughts and will one, they were perfectly agreed
on it, and those likewise for whom it should hold, were agreed upon, and their
Names written up, according to which they are said to be given unto Christ to
redeem. And just according to that Model did all the work proceed, and was
accomplished in all points, perfectly answering to the pattern of it in the
Mind of God. As it was preconcluded there, that the Son should undertake the
business, this matchless piece of Service, for his Father, and that by his
interposing Men should be reconciled and saved, so that he might be altogether
a fit Person for the Work, it was resolved, that as he was already fit for it
by the Almightiness of his Deity, and Godhead, and the acceptableness of his
Person to the Father, as the Son of God, so he should be further fitted by
uniting wonderfully, weakness to Almightiness, the frailty of Man to the Power
of God, because that suffering for Man was a main point of the work, so as his
being the Son of God made him acceptable to God, his being the son of Man made
him suitable to Man, in whose business he had engaged himself, and to the
business it self to be performed; and not only was there in him, by his humane
nature a conformity with Man (for that might have been by a new created Body)
but a consanguinity with Man, by a Body framed of the same piece, a Redeemer, a
Kinsman as the Hebrew word is* only purified for his use, as was needful, and
framed after a peculiar manner in the womb of a Virgin, as it is Heb 10. Thou
have fitted a body for me, having no sin it self, because ordained to have so
much of our sins as it is here, he bare them on his own body.

And this looks back to the Primitive transaction and purpose, Lo I come to do
thy will, says the Son, and behold my servant whom I have chosen, says the
Father, this Masterpiece of my works, none in Heaven or Earth fit to serve me
in it, but mine own Son, and as he came into the World according to that
decree, and will; so he goes out of it again, in that way, the Son of Man goes
as is determined, it was wickedly and maliciously done by Men against him, but
determined (which is that he there speaks of) wisely and graciously by his
Father, with his own consent: As in those two faced pictures, Look upon the
Crucifying of Christ one way, as complotted by a treacherous Disciple, and
Malicious Priests, and Rulers, and nothing more deformed and hateful than the
Authors of it; but view it again, as determined in Gods Counsel, for the
restoring of lost Mankind, and so it is full of unspeakable beauty and
sweetness, infinite wisdom and Love, in every tract of it.

Thus to the persons for whom, as their coming unto him reflects upon that
first donation, as flowing from that, all that the Father has given me shall
come unto me. Ioh. 6.

Now this being Gods great design; that he would have Men eye and consider more
than all the rest of his works, (and yet is least of all considered by the
most) the other Covenant made with the first Adam was but to make way, and so
to speak, to make work for this; for he knew that it would not hold, therefore
as this New Covenant became needful by the breach of the other, so the failing
of that other sets off and commends the firmness of this, the former was with a
Man in his best condition, and yet he kept it not, even then he proved vanity,
as it is Psalm. ^9 So that the second to be stronger, is made with a Man indeed,
to supply the former; but he is God-man to be surer than the former, and
therefore it holds; and this is the difference as the Apostle expresses it,
that the first Adam, in that first Covenant, was laid as a foundation, and
though we say not that the Church in its true notion was built on him, yet the
estate of the whole race of Mankind, the Materials that the Church is built of,
lay on him for that time, and it failed: But upon this Rock the second Adam, is
the Church so firmly built, that the gates of Hell cann^t pre^ail against
(...). The first Adam was made a quickening, or life giving Spirit. The first
had light but he transferred it not, yea, he kept it not, for himself drew in,
and transferred Death, but the second by Death, convey life to all that are
reckoned his seed. he bare their (...)

He bare them on the tree in that outside of his suffering, the visible kind of
death inflicted on him that it was hanging on the tree of the Cross; there was
an Analogy with the end, and main work, and was ordered by the Lord with regard
unto that, being a Death declared accursed by the Law, as the Apostle St. Paul
observes, and so declaring him that was God blessed for ever to have been made
a curse, that is accounted as accursed for us, that we might be blessed in him,
in whom according to the Promise, all the Nations of the Earth are blessed.

But that wherein lay the strength, and main stress of his sufferings, was this
invisible weight that none could see that gazed on him, but he felt more then
all. In this there are three things. 1. The weight of sin. 2. The transferring
of it upon Christ. 3. His bearing of it.

1. He bare as a heavy burden; so the word of bearing in general, and those two
words particularly used by the Prophet whither these allude, are the bearing of
some great mass or load, and thus sin is, for it has the wrath of an offended
God hanging at it, indissollubly tied to it, which who can bear the least of
it, and therefore the least sin, being the procuring cause of it, will press a
man down for ever, that he shall not be able to rise, Who can stand before thee
when once thou art angry, says the Psalmist, and the Prophet Ier. 3. Return
backsliding Israel and I will not cause my wrath to fall upon thee* fall as a
great weight, or as a Millstone, crushes the soul.

But senseless we, go light under the burden of sin, and feel it not, complain
not of it, therefore truly said to be dead in it, otherwise it could not but
press us, and press out complaints. O wretched man that I am who shall deliver
me? A Profane secure sinner thinks it nothing to break the holy Law of God, to
please his flesh, or the World, counts sin a light matter, makes a mock of it
as Solomon says, but a stirring Conscience is of another mind, Mine iniquities
is gone over my head, etc. Psalm. 38.4.

Sin is such a burden as makes the very frame of Heaven and Earth that is not
guilty of it, yea, the whole Creation to crack and groan ('it is the Apostles
Doctrine Romans 8.) and yet the impenitent heart whose guiltiness it is, not
moved, groaneth not; for your accustomed groaning is no such matter.

Yea, to consider in the present subject where we may best read what it is, it
was a heavy load to Jesus Christ, Ps. 40. Where the Psalmist speaks in the
Person of Christ he complains heavily, innumerable evils have compassed me
about, Mine iniquities, not his, as done by him, but yet his, by reckoning to
pay for them, they have taken hold of me, so that I am not able to look up,
they are more then the hairs of my head, therefore my heart fails me. And
sure that which pressed him so sore, that upholds Heaven and Earth, no other in
Heaven or in Earth could have sustained and surmounted, but would have sunk and
and perished under it. Was it (think you) the pain of that common outside of
his Death, though very painful, that drew such a word from him My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? Or was it the fear of it before hand that pressed a
sweat of Blood from him? No, it was this burden of sin, the first of which was
committed in the Garden, that then begun to be laid upon him and fastened on
his shoulders in the Garden, ten thousand times heavier than the Cross, which
he was caused to bear, that might be a while turned over to another; but this
could not. This was the cup he so trembled at, that Gall and Vinegar after to
be offered him by his Crucifiers, or any other part of his External sufferings.
'Twas the bitter Cup of wrath due to sin that his Father put into his hand, and
caused him drink, the very same thing that is here called the bearing our sins
on his body.

And consider, that the very smallest sins, went in to make up this load, and
made it so much the heavier, and therefore though sins be comparatively lesser,
and greater, yet learn thence to account no sin in it sell small, that offends
the great God, and lay heavy upon your great Redeemer in the day of his
Sufferings.

At his apprehending, besides the Soldiers, that invis^ble crowd of the sins
he was to suffer for came about him, for it was they that laid strongest hold
on him, he could easily have shak'd of all the rest, as appears: But our sins
laid the arrest on him, being accounted his, as it is in that forcited place
Psa. 40. Now amongst these, were even those sins we call small, they were of
the number that took him, and they were amongst those instruments of his
bloodshed: If the greater were as the spear that pierced his side, the less
were as the nails that pierced his Hands and his Feet, and the very least, as
the Thorns that were set on his precious Head. And the multitude of them made
up what was wanting in their magnitude, though they were small they were many.

2. They were transferred upon him by virtue of that Covenant we spoke of, They
became his debt, and he responsable for all they come to. Seeing you have
accepted of this business according to my will (may we conceive the Father
saying to his Son) you must go through with it, you are engaged in it; but it
is no other, than what you understood perfectly before, you knew what it would
cost you, and yet out of joint love with me to those I named to be saved by
you, you were as willing as I, to the whole undertaking, now therefore the time
is come, that I must lay upon you the sins of all those persons, and you must
bear them, the sins of all those Believers that lived before, and all that are
to come after to the end of the world. The Lord laid on him the iniquity of us
all, says, the Prophet, took it off from us, and chargd it on him, made it to
meet on him, or to fall in together as the word is, the sins of all, in all
ages before, and after, that were to be saved, all their guiltiness
reencountered, and met together on his back, upon the Cross, and whosoever of
all that Number had least sin, yet had ^o small Burden to cast on him; and to
give accession to the whole Weight. Every man has had his own way of
wandering; as the Prophet there expresses it, and he paid for all; all fell
on him: And as in Testimony of his meekness and patience, so in this regard
likewise, was he so silent in his Sufferings; in regard that though his Enemies
dealt most unjustly with him: yet, he stood as convicted before the Justice
Seat of his Father, under the imputed guilt of all our Sins, and so eyeing him,
and accounting his business chiefly with him* he did patiently bear the due
punishment of all our sins at his Fathers hand, and suited that of the
Psalmist. I was as dumb and opened not my mouth, because thou did i^.
Therefore the Prophet immediately subjoynes, that of his silent carriage, Isay*
53. To that which he had spoken off, the confluence of our iniquities upon him.

And if this our Sins were accounted his, then in the same way, and for that
very reason of necessity, his sufferings, and satisfaction must be accounted
ours, as he said for his disciples to the Men that came to take him, if it be
me ye seek, then let these go free: So he said for all Believers to his father,
his wrath then siezing on him, if on me you will lay hold, then let these go
free. And thus the agreement was. 2. Cor. 5. ult.

So then, there is an union betwixt Believers and Jesus Christ, by which this
interchange is made, he charged with their sins, and they clothed with his
satisfaction, and righteousness, and that union is first in Gods decree of
election running this way, that they should live in Christ, and so choose the
head, and the whole mystical body as one, and reckoning their debt as his in
his purpose, that he might receive satisfaction, and they salvation in their
he^d Christ: The execution of that purpose and union begun in Christ's
incarnation, being for them, though the nature be more common, he is said not
to take on the Angels, but the seed of Abraham, the company of Believers, he
became Man for their sakes, because they are Men: that he is of the same nature
with unbelieving Men that perish, is but by accident, ^s ^t were, there is no
good to them in that, but the great evil of deeper condemnation if they hear of
him, and believe not, but he was made Man to be like, yea, to be one with the
Elect, and he is not ashamed to call them Brethren, as the Apostle there says,
2. Then in the actual intention of the Son so made Man; he presenting himself
to the Father in all he did, and suffered as for them, having them, and them
only in his eye and thoughts in all: For their sakes do I sanctify my self,
Io. 17.1.9.3. The union is applied and performed in them, when they are
converted and ingrafted into Jesus Christ by faith and this does actually
discharge them of their own sins, and Entitle, them to his Righteousness, and
so justifies them in the sight of God. 4. The consummation of this union is in
glory, which is the result and fruit of all the former, as it began in Heaven
it is completed there; but betwixt these Two in Heaven, the intervention of
those other two degrees of it on earth were necessary, being intended in the
first, as tending* to the attainment of the last, these steps we have
distinctly in his own prayer Ioh. 17. First Ver. 2. Gods purpose that the Son
should give eternal life to those he has given him. 2. Ver. 4. I have finished
the work. 3. Ver. 6, 8. And often after, their faith, their believing and
keeping the word, and then the last Ver. 24. I will that they whom thou have
given me be with me where I am. There meets the first donation and the last.

Now to obtain this life for them he dyed in their stead, appeared as the high
Priest, being perfectly, and truly what the name was on their plate of gold
holiness to the Lord. Exodus 28* 36. And so bearing* their iniquity, as it is
added there* of the Priest Ver. 38. But because he was not the Redeemer, but a
perfect figure of him, he did not himself suffer for the peoples sin, but
turned it over upon the beasts, that ^he sacrific^d* signifying that
translation of sin, by laying his hand upon the head of the Beast: But Jesus
Christ is both the great High Priest, and the great Sacrifice in one, and this
seems to be here implied in these words, himself etc. On his own body he bare
etc. Which the Legal Priests did not, so Heb. 9.12. He made his soul an
offering for sin Isa. 53. and Heb. 9. He offered up himself, his whole self,
and in the History of the Gospel* his soul was heavy, and chiefly suffered; but
the bearing on his body, and offering it that is oftenest mentioned as the
visible part of the Sacrifice, and in his way of offering it* not excluding the
other. Thus Romans 12.1. We are exhorted to give our bodies in opposition to the
bodies of beasts, and called a living Sacrifice, which they are not without the
Soul, so his bearing on his body imports the bearing it on his Soul too.

3. His bearing that hintes that he was active, and willing in his suffering
for us; not a constrained Offering: He laid down his Life, as he tells us, and
this here, He bare, is, he took willingly off, lifted from us that burden to
bear it himself. It was counted an ill sign amongst the Heathens, when the
Beasts went unwillingly to be Sacrificed, and drew back; and goo^, when they
went willingly: But never Sacrifice so willing, as our great Sacrifice was, and
we may be assured, he has appeased his Fathers wrath, and wrought Atonement
for Us. Isaac in this, his Type* we hear of no Reluctance, but quietly bound,
when he was to be Offered up. There be two words in Esaias, the one bearing, the
other t^ki^g away, this is also that taking away the Sins of the World in St.
John, 1.29. Which Answers to both, and so he, to both the Goats, Levit. 16 He
did bear our Sins on his Cross, and from then^^ to his Grave, and there they
are Buried; and they whose Sins he did so bear, and take away, and Bury, they
shall hear no more of them as theirs to bear. Is he not then worthy to behold,
in that notion that John took him and designed him by: Behold the Lamb of God
that bears and takes away the sins of the World.

You then that are Gazing on vanity, be persuaded to turn your Eyes this way,
and behold this lasting wonder, this Lord of Life dying; but the most alas!
Want a due Eye for this Object; it is the eye of Faith alone, that looks aright
on him, and is daily discovering new worlds of excellency and delight in this
crucified Savior, that can view him daily, as hanging on the Cross without
the Childish gaudy help of a Crucifix, and grow in the knowledge of that Love,
that passes knowledge, and rejoice it self in frequent thinking and speaking
of him, in stead of these idle and vain thoughts at the best, and empty
discourses, wherein the most delight, and wear out the day. What is all
knowledge but painted folly in comparison of this? though thou had Solomon's
faculty to discourse of all plants, and have not the right knowledge of this
root of I^sse: If thou were singular in the knowledge of the Stars, and course
of the Heavens, and could walk through the Spheres with a Jacob's Staff; but
ignorant of this* Star of Jacob: If thou knew the Historye^ of all Time, and
the Life and Death, of all the famousest Princes, and could rehearse them all;
but do not Spiritually know and apply to thy self the death of Jesus, as thy
Life, thou art still a wretched Fool for them, and all thy knowledge with thee
shall quickly perish. On the other side, if thy capacity or breeding has
denied thee the knowledge of all these things, wherein Men glory so much; Yet
do but learn Christ Crucified, and what would thou have more? That shall
make thee happy for ever, for this is life eternal to know thee, etc.

Here St. Paul sets up his rest, I determined to know nothing but Jesus Christ
and him Crucified. Whatsoever I knew besides, I resolved to be, as if I knew
nothing besides this, the only knowledge wherein I will rejoice my self, and
which I will labor to impart to others.

I have tried and compared the rest, and find them all unworthy of their Room
beside this, and my whole Soul too little for this, and have past this
judgment and sentence on all. I have adjudg'd my self to deny all other
knowledge, and confined my self within this Circle, and I am not straitn'd, so
there is room enough in it, it is larger than Heaven and Earth, and him crucified,
the most despised and ignominious part, yet the sweetest and most comfortable
part of all, the Root, whence all our hopes of life and Spiritual joys do
spring.

But the most part hear this Subject as a Story, some a little moved with the
present found of it, but draw it not home into their hearts, to make it theirs,
and find salvation in it, but still cleave to sin, and love sin better than him
that suffered for it.

But you whose hearts the Lord has deeply humbled in the sense of sin, come to
this depth of consolation, and try it, that you may have experience of the
sweetness and ^iches of it, study this point thoroughly, and you will find it
answer all, and quiet your consciences. Apply this bearing of sin by the Lord
Jesus for you, for it is published, and made known to you for this purpose,
this is the genuine and true use of it, as of the Brazen Serpent, not ^emptily
to gaze on the Fabric of it, but to cure those that looked on it: when all
that can be said, is said against you, 'its true may you say, but it is
satisfied for, he on whom I rest made it his, and did bear it for me. The
person of Christ of more worth than all Men, yea than all the creatures, and
therefore his life a full ransom for the greatest offender.

And for outward troubles, and sufferings which were the occasion of this
Doctrine in this place, they are all made exceeding light by the removal of
this great pressure. Let the Lord lay on me what he will, seeing he has taken
off my sin, and laid that on his own Son in my stead, I may suffer many things,
but he has b^rn that for me, which alone was able to make me miserable.

And you that have this persuasion, how will your hearts be taken up with his
love? Who thus loved you, as to give himself for you, and by interposing
himself to bear off from you the stroke of everlasting death, and that
encountered all the wrath due to us, and went through: with that great work by
reason of his unspeakable love, Let him never go forth from my heart who for my
sake refused to go down from the cross. That we being dead to sin, should live
unto Righteousness.

The Lord does nothing in vain has not made the least of his work to no
purpose, in wisdom has he made them all, says the Psalmist, and that is not
only in regard of their excellent frame and Order, but of their end, which is a
chief Point of Wisdom; so then to the right knowledge of this great work put
into the hands of Jesus Christ, it is of special concern to understand, what is
this end.

This is the thing that his wisdom and love aimed at in that great undertaking,
and therefore will be our truest wisdom, and the truest evidence of our reflex
Love to intend the same thing, that in this the same mind may be in us that was
in Christ Jesus in his suffering for us, and for this very end is it expressed.

In this there are 3. Things 1st. What this death and life is. 2. The
intendment of it in the sufferings and death of Jesus Christ. 3. The effecting
of it by them.

Whatsoever this is, sure it is no small change, that bears the Name of the
great and last natural change that we are subject to, a death, and then another
kind of life succeeding to it, and in this the greatest part are mistaken, that
they take any light alteration in themselves for true conversion.

There be a World deluded with superficial Moral changes in their Life, some
rectifying of their outward actions, and course of Life, and somewhat too in
the temper and habitude of their mind, far from reaching the bottom of Natures
wickedness, and laying the axe to the root of the Tree, it is such a work as Men
can make a shift withal by themselves, but the Renovation that the Spirit of
God works is like himself, so deep, and through a work, that it is justly
called by the Name of the most substantial works, and productions a new birth,
and more than that, a new Creation, and here a Death and a kind of life
following it.

This death to sin, supposes a former living in it, and to it, and while a Man
is so, he is said indeed, to be dead in sin, and yet withal this is true, that
he lives in sin, as the Apostle joins the expressions, speaking of Widows,
she that lives in pleasures, is dead while she lives. So Ephesians. 2. dead in
trespasses and sins, and he adds, wherein ye walked, which imports a life,
such an one as it is, and more expressly Verse 3. We had our conversation in the
lusts of our flesh. Now thus to live in sin, is called to be dead in it,
because in that condition Man is indeed dead in respect of that Divine Life of
the Soul, that happy being which it should have in Union with God, for which it
was made, and without which it had better not be at all: For that Life as it is
different from its natural being, and a kind of Life above it, so it is
contrary to that corrupt being, and life it has in sin; and therefore, to live
in sin, is to be dead in it, being a deprivement of that Divine being, that
Life of the Soul in God, in comparison whereof, not only the base life it has
in sin, but the very natural life it has in the Body, and the Body by it, is
not worthy the Name of Life. You see the Body when the thread of its union with
the Soul is cut, becomes not only straightway a motionless lump; but within a
little time a putrified noisome Carcass, and thus the Soul by sin, is cut off
from God, who is its life, as is the Soul of the Body, it has not only no
moving faculty in good, but fills full of rotteness and vileness as the word
is. Psalm. 14. they are gone aside and become filthy. The Soul by turning away
from God turns filthy, yet as a Man thus Spiritually dead lives naturally, so
because he acts and spends that Natural life in the ways of sin, he is said to
live in sin; yea, there is somewhat more in that expression, than the mere
passing of his life in that way, for in stead of that happy life his Soul
should have in God, he pleases himself in the miserable life of sin, that which
is his death, as if it were the proper life, of his Soul that natural
propension he has to sin, and the continual delight he takes in it, as in his
Element, and living to it, as if that were the very end of his being. In that
estate his Body nor his mind stirs not without sin, setting aside his
manifest breaches of the Law, those actions that are evidently and totally
sinful, his natural actions, his eating, and drinking; his religious actions,
his Praying, and hearing, and Preaching are sin at the bottom and generally his
heart is no other, but a forge of sin, every imagination, every fiction of
things framed there, is only evil continually, or every day, and all the day
long, it is his very trade and Life.

Now in opposition to this life of Sin, living in it, and to it, a Christian is
said to die to sin, to be cut off or separated from it. In our miserable natural
estate there is as close an union betwixt us, and sin, as betwixt our Souls and
Bodies, it lives in us, and we in it, and the longer we live in that condition
the more the union grows, and the harder it is to dissolve it, and it is as
old as the union of Soul and Body begun with it; so that nothing but that death
here spoke of can part them: And this death, in this relative sense is mutual,
in the work of conversion sin dies, and the soul dies to sin, and these two are
really one and the same, the spirit of God kills both at one blow, Sin in the
Soul, and the soul to sin, as the Apostle says of the World, both are killed
the one to the other.

And there are in it chiefly these two things that make the difference. 1. The
Solidness. And 2. The universallity of this change under this notion of Death.

Many things may ly in a Man's way betwixt him and the acting of diverse sins,
which possibly he affects most, some restraints outward, or inward may be upon
him, the authority of others, or the fear of shame, or punishment, or the check
of an enlightened conscience, and though by reason of these, he commit not the
sin he would, yet he lives in it, because he loves it, because he would commit
it, as we say, the soul lives not so much where it animats, as where it Loves.
And generally that kind of Metaphorical life, by which a Man is said to live in
any thing, has its principal Seat in the affection that is the immediate link
of the union in such a life, and the untying and death consists chiefly in the
disengagement of the heart, breaking off the affection from it. Ye that love
the Lord hate evil. An unrenewed mind may have some temporary dislikes even of
its beloved sins in cold blood, but it returns to like them within a while. A
Man may not only have times of cessation from his wonted way of sinning, but by
reason of the Society wherein he is, and withdrawing of occasions to sin, and
diverse other causes, his very desire after it may seem to him to be abated, and
yet he not dead to sin, but only asleep to it, and therefore when a temptation
backed with opportunity, and other inducing circumstances comes and joggs him,
he awakes, and arises and follows it.

A Man may for a while distaste some meat that he loves (possibly upon a
surfeit) but he regains quickly his likeing of it: Every quarrel with sin, and
fit of dislike of it, is not this hatred. Upon the lively representing the
deformity of his sin to his mind, Certainly a Natural Man may fall out with it,
but these are but as the little jarres of Husband and Wife, that are far from
dissolving the Marriage, it is not a fixed hatred, such as amongst the Jews
inferred a divorce, if thou hate her put her away, and that is to die to it, as
by a Legal Divorce the Husband and Wife are civilly dead one to another in
regard of the ty and use of Marriage.

Again, some Men's Education and Custom, and moral principles may free them
from the grossest kind of Sins, yea, a Man's temper may be averse from them,
but they are alive to their own kind of sins; such as possibly are not so
deformed in the common account, Coveteousness, or Pride, or hardness of heart,
and either a hatred or disdain of the ways of Holiness that are too strict for
them, and exceed their size. Beside for the good of humane Society, and for the
Interest of his own Church, and People, God restrains many Natural Men from the
height of wickedness, and gives them moral Virtues. There be very many, and
very common sins that more refined Natures, it may be, are scarce tempted to,
but as in their Diet and Apparel, and other things in their Natural Life, they
have the same kind of being with other Persons, though more neat and pleasant,
so in this living to sin* They live the same life with other ungodly Men,
though in a little more deicate way.

They consider not, that the Devils are not in themselves subject to, nor
capable of many of those sins, that are accounted grossest amonst Men, and yet
are greater Rebels and Enemies to God than Men are.

But to be dead to sin goes deeper, and extends further than all these, Namely,
a most inward alienation of heart from sin, and most universal from all sin, an
antipathy to the most beloved sin. Not only he must forbear sin, but hate it, I
hate vain thoughts, and not only hate some, but all, I hate every false way. A
stroke at the heart does it, which is the certainest and quickest Death of any
wound. For in this dying to sin, all the whole Man of necessity dies to it, the
mind dies to the Device, and study of Sin, that vein and invention becomes
dead; the hand dies to the acting of it; the ear to the delightful hearing of
things profane, and sinful; the Tongue to the Worlds dialect of Oaths, and
rotten-speaking, and calumny and evil speaking, this is the commonest piece of
the Tongues life in sin, the very natural heat of sin that acts and vents most
that way; the Eye dead to that intemperate look that Solomon speaks of, eyeing
the Wine when it is red, and well colored in the cup. Prove. 23. That is, is
taken with looking on the glittering skin of that Serpent, till it bite, and
sting, as there he adds. Dead to that unchaste look that sets fire in the
heart, to which Job blind folded and deaded his eyes, by an express compact,
and agreement with them, I have made a Covenant with mine eyes.

The Eye of a Godly Man is not on the false sparkling of the Worlds Pomp and
Honor and Wealth, it is dead to them, quite dazzled with a greater beauty, the
grass look's fine in the morning, when it is set with those liquid Pearls, the
drops of dew that shine upon it, but if you can look but a little while on the
body of the Sun, and then look down again, the Eye is as it were dead, sees not
that faint shining on the earth that it thought so gay before, and as the Eye
is blinded, and dies to it, so within a few hours it quite evanishes and dies
it self.

Men think it strange that the Godly are not of their Diet, that their Appetite
is not stirred with the delights of dainties, they know not that such as be
Christians indeed, are dead to those things, and the best dishes that are set
before a dead Man, give him not a stomach. The Godly Man's throat is cut to
those meats, as Solomon advises in another subject. But why may not you be a
little more sociable to follow the fashion of the World, and and take a share
with your Neighbors, may some say, without so precise and narrow examining
every thing? It Is true, says the Christian, that the time was I advised as
little with Conscience as others, but sought my self, and pleased my self, as
they do, and looked no further, but that was when I was alive to those ways,
but now truly I am dead to them, and can you look for activity and conversation
from a dead Man; the pleasures of sin wherein I lived is still the same, but I
am not the same. Are you such a Snake, and a Fool says the Natural Man as to
bear affronts, and swallow them, and say nothing? Can you suffer to be abused
so by such, and such a wrong? Indeed says the Christian again, I could once
have resented an injury as you, or another, and had somewhat of that you call
high-heartedness, when I was alive after your fashion, but now that humor is
not only something cooled, but it is killed in me, it is cold dead as ye say, and
a greater Spirit (I think) than my own, has taught me another Lesson, has
made me both deaf, and dumb that way, and has given me a new vent, and another
language, and another Party to speak to in such occasions, see for this, Psalm.
38.12, 13, 14, 15. They that seek my hurt, speak mischievous things, and
imagine deceits all the day long. What does he in this cafe? But I as a deaf
man heard not, and I was as a dumb Man that opens not his mouth, And why? for
in thee O Lord do I hope. And for this deadness that you despise, I have seen
him that dyed for me, who when he was reviled, reviled not again.

This is the true Character of a Christian dead to sin, but alas! Where is this
Christian to be found, and yet thus is every one, that truly partakes of
Christ; he is dead to sin really, Hypocrites have a Historical kind of Death,
like this, as Players in Tragedies. Those Players have loose bags of Blood,
that receive the wound, so the Hypocrite in some externals, and it may be, in
that which is as near him as any outward thing, his Purse, he may suffer some
Bloodshed of that for Christ, but this death to sin is not a sounding fit that
one may recover out of again, the Apostle Romans 6. adds, that he is buried.

But this is an unpleasant Subject, to talk thus of Death and Burial, the very
Name of Death, in the softest sense it can have, makes a sour melancholy
discourse. It is so indeed, if you take it alone, if there were not for the
life that is lost, a far better immediately following, but so it is here, Living
unto righteousness succeeds dying to sin.

That which makes natural death so affrightful, the King of terrors, as Job
calls it, is mainly this faint belief, and assurance of the Resurrection, and
glory to come, And without this, all men's moral resolves and discourses are too
weak Cordialls against this fear, they may set a good face on it, and speak big,
and so cover the fear they cannot cure, but certainly they are a little
ridiculous, that would persuade Men to be content to die, by reasoning from the
necessity and unavoydableness of it, which taken alone rather may beget a
desperate discontent, than a quiet compliance, the very weakness of that
Argument is, that it is too strong, Durum telum. That of Company is
fantastic, it may please the imagination but satisfies not the judgment; Nor
are the miseries of life, though somewhat Properer a full persuasive for Death,
the oldest decrepitest, most diseased persons, yet naturally fall not out with
life, but could have a mind to it still, and the very truth is this, the worst
cottage any dwells in they are loath to go out, till they know of a better. And
the reason why that which is so hideous to others was so sweet to Martyrs, Heb.
11.35. And other godly Men, that have heartily embraced death, and welcomed it
though in very Terrible shapes, was, because they had firm assurance of
Immortality beyond it, the ugly Deaths head when the light of glory shines
through the holes of it, is comely, and lovely. To look upon death as
Eternitie's birth day, is that which makes it, not only tolerable but aimiable.
Hic dies postremus aeterni natolis est. Is the word I admire most of any
Heathen?

Thus here, the strongest inducement to this Death, is the true notice and
contemplation of this Life, unto which it sets us over, it is most necessary to
represent this, for a natural Man has as great an aversion every whit from
this figurative Death, this dying to sin, as from natural Death, and there is
the more necessity of persuading him to this, because his consent is necessary
to it, no Man dies this Death to sin unwillingly, although no Man is naturally
wiling to it, much of this death consists in a Man's consenting thus to dye:
And this is not only a lawful, but a laudible, yea a necessary self murder,
Mortify therefore your members which are upon the Earth. Says the Apostle Col.
3.5. Now no sinner will be content to die to sin, if that were all, but if it be
passing to a more excellent Life, then he gains, and it were a folly not to
seek this Death. It was a strange power of Plato's discourse of the Souls
Immortality that moved a young Man upon reading it, to throw himself into the
Sea, that he might leap through it, to that Immortality: But truly, were this
Life of God, this Life to righteousness, and the excellency and delight of it
known, it would gain many minds to this death that steps into it.

1 There is a necessity of a new being to be the principle of new acting, and
motion; as the Apostle says while ye served sin ye were free from
righteousness, so it is, while ye were alive to sin ye were dead to
righteousness: But there is a new breath of life from Heaven, breathed on the
Soul: Then lives the Soul indeed, when it is one with God, and sees Light in
his Light, has a Spiritual knowledge of him, and therefore Soveraignely loves
him, and delights in his will, and that is indeed, to live unto righeousness,
which in a comprehensive sense takes in all the frame of a Christian life, and
all the duties of it, toward God and toward Men.

By this new Nature the very Natural motion of the soul so taken, is obedience
to God, and walking in the paths of righteousness, it can no more live in the
habitude, and ways of sin, than a Man can live under water. Sin is not the
Christians Element, it is too gross for his renewed Soul, as the water is for
his body: He may fall into it, but he cannot breath in it, cannot take delight,
and continue to live in it, but his delight is in the Law of the Lord, that is
the walk that his Soul refreshes it self in, he loves it entirely, and loves it
most, where it most crosses the remainders of corruption that are in him, he
bends the strength of his Soul to please God, aims all at that, it takes up
his thoughts early, and late, has no other purpose in his being, and living:
but only to honor his Lord, that is to live to righteousness, he does not make
a by-work of it, a study for his spare hours, no, it is his main business, his
all. In this law does he meditate day and night. This life, as the other, is in
the heart, and from thence diffuses to the whole Man; he loves righteousness,
and receives the truth (as the Apostle speaks) in the love of it. A natural
Man may do many things that for their shell, and outside are righteous: But he
lives not to righteousness, because his heart is not possessed and ruled with
the love of it, but this life makes the godly Man delight to walk uprightly and
to speak of righteousness, his Language and ways carry the resemblance of his
heart Psa. 37. Ver. 30.31. I know it is easiest to act that part of Religion
that is in the Tongue; but the Christian ought not for that, to be Spiritually
dumb: Because some Birds are taught to speak, Men do not for that give it over,
and leave off to speak, the mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom, and his
Tongue talks of judgment, and his feet strive to keep pace with his Tongue,
which gives evidence of its unfainedness. None of his steps shall slide, or he
shall not stagger in his steps, but that which is betwixt these, is the common
Spring the Law of God is in his heart, of both, and from thence, as Solomon
says are the issues of his life, that Law in his heart, is the principle of
this living to righteousness.

2 The Second thing here is the design or Intendment of this death, and life,
in the sufferings and death of Christ, he bare sin, and died for it, that we
might dye to it.

Out of some conviction of the consequence of Sin, many have a confused desire
to be justified, to have sin pardoned, and look no further, think not on the
importance and necessity of sanctification, the nature whereof is expressed by
this dying to sin and living to righteousness.

But here we see, that sanctification is necessary as inseparably connexed with
justification, not only, as its companion, but as its end, which in some kind
raises it above the other, that it was the thing which God eyed, and intended
in taking away the guiltiness of sin, that we might be renewed, and sanctified:
If we compare them in point of time, either backward, holiness was always
necessary unto happiness: But satisfying for sin and the pardon of it, was made
necessary by sin, or if we look forward, the estate we are appointed to, and
for which we are delivered from wrath, is an estate of perfect holiness. When
we reflect upon that great work of Redemption, we see it aimed at there
Redeemed to be holy Ephesians. 5.25, 26. Tit. 2.14. And go yet higher to the very
Spring, the decree of Election. And then its said Chosen before, that we should
be Holy, and in end it shall Suit the design, Nothing shall enter into the new
Jerusalem, that is defiled, or unholy: Nothing but all purity there, not a spot
of sinful pollution, not a wrinkle of the Old Man, for this end was that great
work undertaken by the Son of God, that he might frame, out of polluted Mankind
a new holy generation to his Father, that might compass his throne in the Life
of glory, and give him pure praises, and behold his face in that eternity. Now
for this end, it was needful according to the all-wise purpose of the Father
that the guiltiness of sin, and sentence of Death should be once removed, and
thus the burden of that lay upon Christ's shoulders on the Cross, and that
done, it is further necessary, that Souls so delivered, be likewise purged, and
renewed, for they are designed to perfection of holiness in end, and it must
begin here.

Yet is it not possible to persuade Men of this, that Christ had this in his
eye, and purpose, when he was lift up upon the cross and looked upon the whole
company of those his Father had given him to save, that he would redeem them to
be a number of holy Persons. We would be redeemed (who is there would not) but
he would have his redeemed ones holy, and they that are not true to this his
end, but cross and oppose him in it, may hear of redemption long, and often,
But little to their comfort. Are you resolved still to abuse and delude your
selves? Well, whither you will believe it or no, this is once more told you,
there is unspeakable comfort in the death of Chirst, but it belongs only to
those that are dead to sin, and alive to righteousness. This Circle shu^s out
the impenitent world, there it closes and cannot be broke through, but all that
are penitent are by their effectual caling lifted in to it, translated from
that accursed condition wherein they were: So then if you will live in your
sins, you may, but then resolve withal to bear them your selves, for Christ in
his bearing of sin, meant of none but such as in due time are thus dead, and
thus alive with him.

3. But then in the Third place, Christ's Sufferings and death effects all this.
1. As the exemplary cause, the lively contemplation of Christ crucified, is the
most powerful of all thoughts to separate the heart and sin. But 2. besides
this working as a Moral cause, as that example; Christ is the effective natural
cause of this death, and life: For he is one with the Believer, and there is a
real influence of his death, and life into their Souls. This Mysterious Union
of Christ, and the believer is that whereon both their Justification and
Sanctification and the whole frame of their Salvation and Happiness depends;
and in this particular the Apostle still insists on it, speaking of Christ and
Believers as one in his Death and Resurrection, crucified with him, dead with
him, buried with him, and risen with him. Romans 6.

Being arisen, he applies his death to those he dyed for, and by it kills the
life of sin in them, and so is avenged on it, for its being the cause of his
death according to that of the Psalm, raise me up that I may requite them He
infuses, and then actuates and stirs up that faith and love in them, by which
they are united to him and these work powerfuly in this.

3. Faith look's so steadfastly on its suffering Savior, that as they say
intellectus fit illud quod intelligit, it makes the Soul like him, assimilates
and conformes it to his Death as the Apostle speaks. That which some fable of
some of their Saints of receiving the impression of the wounds of Christ in
their body, is true in a Spiritual sense of the Soul of every one that is
indeed a Saint, and a believer, it takes the very print of his Death, by
beholding him, and dies to sin, and then takes that of his rising again, and
lives to righteousness, as it applies it to justify, so to Mortify, draws
virtue from it. Thus said one, Christ aimed at this in all those Sufferings
that with so much love he went through, and shall I disappoint him, and not
serve his end?

4. That other powerful grace of Love is joint in this work with faith, for
Love desires nothing more than likeness, and conformity, though it be a
painful resemblance, so much the better, and fitter to testify love, therefore
'twill have the Soul dye with him that died for it, and the very same kind of
death, I am crucified with Christ, says the great Apostle. The Love of Christ
in the Soul takes the very Nails that fastened him to the Cross, and crucifies
the Soul to the World, and to Sin, Love is strong as Death, particularly in
this, the strongest and liveliest Body, when Death siezes it, must yield, and
so becomes motionless that was so vigorous before; And the Soul that is most
active, and unwearied in Sin, when this Love siezes it, it is killed to Sin,
and as Death seperates a Man from his dearest Friends, and Society, this Love
breaks all the ties and friendship with Sin. Generally, as Plato has it, Love
takes away ones living in them selves, and transfers into the party loved, but
the divine Love of Christ does it in the truest and highest manner.

By whose stripes ye were healed] The misery of fallen Man, and the mercy of
his deliverance, are both of them such a deep, as no one expression, yea, no
variety added one to another can reach their bottom. Here we have diverse very
significative ones. 1. The guiltiness of sin as an intolerable burden pressing
the Soul and sinking it, and that transferred and laid on a stronger Back. He
bare: Then 2. The same wretchedness under the same notion of a strange disease
by all other means incurable, healed by his stripe's. And (3.) again
represented by the forlorn condition of a Sheep wandering, and our Salvation to
be found only in the love and wisdom of our great Shepherd. And all these are
borrowed from that sweet and clear prophecy Isa. 53.

The polluted nature of Man is no other but a bundle of desperate diseases, he
is spiritually dead, as the Scriptures often teach, Now this contradicts not,
nor at all Lessen's the matter: But only, because this misery justly called
death, is in a Subject animated with a natural life, therefore so it may bear
the Name and sense of sickness, or wound, and therefore it is gross misprision,
they are as much out in their Argument, as in their conclusion, that would
extract out of these expressions any evidence of remains of Spiritual life or
good, in our corrupted Nature: But they are not worthy the contest, tho vain
heads think to argue themselves into life, and are seeking that life by Logic
in Miserable Nature, that they should seek by faith in Jesus Christ, Namely, in
these his stripes by which we are healed.

It were a large task to name our Spiritual Maladies, how much more, severally
to unfold their Natures, such a multitude of corrupt false Principles in the
mind, that as Gangrens do spread themselves through the Soul, and defile the
whole Man, and total gross blindness and unbelief in Spiritual things, and that
stone of the heart, hardness and impenitency, Lethargies of senslesness and
security, and then (for there be such complications of Spiritual diseases in
us, as in Naturals are altogether impossible) such burning fevers of inordinate
affections, desires of lust, and Malice, and envy, such racking, and tormenting
cares of Covetousness, and feeding on Earth and Ashes, as the Prophet speaks in
another case, according to the depraved appetite, that accompanies some
Diseases: Such tumors of Pride, and self-conceit that break forth, as filthy
botches in Men's words, and carriage one with another. And in a word, what a
wonderful disorder must needs be in the Natural Soul by the frequent
interchanges, and fight of contrary passions within it, and to these from
without, how many deadly wounds we receive from the tentations of Satan and the
World? We receive them, and by the weapons they furnish us, we willingly wound
our selves, as the Apostle says of them, who will be rich, they fall into
diverse snares, and noisome lusts, and pierce them selves through with many
sorrows.

Did we see it, no Infirmery nor Hospital ever so full of loathsome and
miserable Spectacles as Spiritually our wretched Nature is in any one of us
apart: How much more when multitudes of us are met together? But our evils are
hid from us, and we perish miserably in a Dream of happiness. That makes up and
compleats our wretchedness, that we feel it not, with our other diseases. And
this makes it worse still. This was the Churches disease. Rev. 3. Thou say I
am rich, and know not that thou art Poor. etc. We are usually full of
complaints of triffling griefs that are of small moment, and think not on, nor
feel not our Dangerous Maladies, as he who showed a Physician his fore finger,
but the Physician told him, he had more need to think on the cure of a
dangerous Impostume within him, which he perceived by looking to him, though
himself did not feel it.

In dangerous Maladies, or wounds, there be these evils, a tendency to death,
and with that the apprehension of the terror, and fear of it, and the present
distemper of the Body by them, and this is in sin. 1. There is the guiltiness
of sin binding over the Soul to death, the most frightful eternal Death. 2. The
terror of conscience in the apprehension of that death, or wrath that is the
consequent and end of sin. 3. The raging and prevailing power of sin, which is
the ill habitude and distemper of the soul: But these stripes, and that blood
that issued from them are a sound cure, applied unto the soul, they take away
the guiltiness of sin, and death deserved, and free us from our engagement to
those everlasting scourgings, and lashes of the wrath of God, and likewise they
are the only cure of those present terrors, and pangs of Conscience arising
from the sense of that wrath, and sentence of death upon the Soul. Our
Iniquities that met on his back, laid open to the rod, which in it self was
free, those hands that never wrought iniquity, and those feet that never
declined from the way of righteousness, yet for our works and wanderings were
pierced, and that Tongue dropping with Vinegar and Gall on the Cross, that
never spoke a guileful nor sinful word. The Blood of those stripes are that
Balm issuing from that tree of Life so pierced, that can only give ease to the
Conscience, and heal the wounds of it, and they deliver from the power of sin
working by their influence, and loathing of sin, that was the cause of them;
they cleanse out the vicious humors of our corrupt nature, by opening up that
issue of Repentance they shall look on him, and mourn over him whom they have
pierced.

Now to the end it may thus cure, it must be applied it is the only receipt, but
it must be received, if for healing. The most Sovereign Medicines cure not in
another manner, and therefore still their first letler is R, recipe, take such
a thing.

This is amongst those wonders of that great work, that the Sovereign Lord of
all, that binds and looses at his pleasure the influences of Heaven, and the
Power and workings of all the Creatures, would himself in our flesh be thus
bound, the only Son bound as a Slave, and scourged as a Malefactor, and his
willing obedience, made this an acceptable and expiateing Sacrifice, amongst
the rest of his sufferings, he gave his back to the smiters.

Now it cannot be, that any that is thus healed, reflecting upon this cure, can
again take any constant delight in sin, it is impossible so far to forget both
the grief it bred themselves, and their Lord; as to make a new agreement with
it, to live in the pleasure of it.

His stripes] Turn your thoughts all to consider this, you that are not healed,
that you may be healed, and you that are, apply it still to perfect the cure in
that part wherein it is gradual, and not complete, and for the ease you have
found to bless and love him who endured so much unease to that end. There is a
sweet mixture of sorrow, and joy in contemplating these stripes, sorrow sure by
sympathy, that they were his stripes, and joy that they were our healing.
Christians are too little mindful and sensible of this, and it may be somewhat
guilty of that Hos. 11.3. They knew not that I healed them.

Verse. 25.
For ye were as Sheep going astray, but are now returned to the Shepherd and
Bishop of your Souls.
IN these few words we have a brief, and yet clear representation of the
wretchedness of our Natural condition, and our happiness in Christ. The
resemblance is borrowed from the same place in the Prophet Isai. 53.6.

Not to press the comparison, and as it is usual in a postilling way, to strain
it beyond the purpose, in our lost estate. This is all or the main wherein the
resemblance with Sheep holds, our wandering, as forlorn, and exposed to
destruction, as a Sheep that is strayed and wandered from the fold. So it
imports indeed the loss of a better condition, the safety and happiness of the
Soul, that good which is proper to it, as the suitable good of the brute
creature here named is safe and good Pasture.

That we may know there is none exempt in Nature from the guiltiness, and
misery of this wandering, the Prophet is express in the universallity of it. All
we have gone astray. And the Apostle here is particular to his Brethren, so as
it falls not amiss to any other. Ye were as Sheep going astray. Ye, the Prophet
there to the collective universal adds a distributive, every Man to his own
way. Or a Man to his way. They agree in this, that they all wander, though they
differ in their several ways. There is an imbred Propension to stray in them
all, more than Sheep that are Creatures naturally wandering, but each one has
his own way of it.

And this is our folly that we flatter our selves by comparison, and every one
is pleased with himself, because he is free from some wanderings of others, not
considering that he is a wanderer too, though in another way, he has his way
as those he look's on have theirs. And as Men agree in wandering, though
different in their way; so those ways agree in this, that they lead unto
misery, and shall end in that. Think you there is no way to Hell but the way of
open Profaness? Yes sure, many a way that seems smooth, and clean in a Man's own
eyes, and yet will end in Condemnation. Truth is but one, Error endless and
interminable; as of Natural Life and Death, so of Spiritual, the way to Life is
one: But many out of it, Lethi mill aditus. Each one has not opportunity nor
ability for every sin, or every degree, but each after his own Mode and Power.
Isa. 40.20.

Thy Tongue it may be wanders not in the common Path road of Oaths and Curses,
yet it wanders in secret Calumnies, in Detraction and Defaming of others,
though so conveyed as it scarce appears: Or if thou speak them not, yet thou
art pleased to hear them: It wanders in trifling away the precious hours of
irrecoverable time, with vain unprofitable bablings in thy Converse, or if thou
art much alone, or in Company much silent, yet, is not thy foolish mind still
hunting Vanity* Following this selfe-pleasing design, or the other, and seldom
and very slightly, if at all, conversant with God, and the things of Heaven.
Which although they alone have the truest, and the highest Pleasure in them,
yet to thy Carnal Mind are tasteless and unsavory. There is scarce any thing so
light and Childish that thou will not more willingly and liberally bestow thy
retired thoughts on, than upon those excellent incomparable delights. Oh! the
foolish heart of Man, when it may seem deep, and serious, how often is it at
Domitian's Exercise in his Study, catching Flies.

Men account little of the wandering of their hearts, and yet truly, that is most
of all to be considered: For from thence are the Issues of life. It Is the heart
that has forgotten God, and is roving after Vanity this causes all the Errors
of Men's Words, and Actions, a wandering Heart, makes wandering Eyes and Feet, and
Tongue. It Is the leading Wanderer that misleads all the rest, and as we are
here called straying Sheep, so within the heart in it self of each of us, there
is as it were a whole wandering Flock, such a Multitude of Fictions Genesis 8.
Ungodly devices, the Word that signifies a thought in Hebrew, is from that
which is feeding of a Flock, and it likewise signifies wandering, and so these
meet in our thoughts, they are a great Flock, and a wandering Flock. This is the
Natural freedem of our thoughts, they are free to wander from God, and Heaven,
and carry us to perdition: And we are guilty of many Pollutions this way, that
we never acted. Men are less sensible of heart wickedness, if it break not
forth: But it is far more active in sin than any of the senses, or the whole
body. The motion of Spirits is far swifter than of bodies, it can go more way
in any of these wanderings in one hour, than the body is able to follow in many
days.

When the Body is tied to attendance in the exercises where we are, yet know
you not it is so much the more, if you do not know and feel it, and bewail it,
know you that the heart can take its liberty and leave you nothing but a
Carcass. This the unrenewed heart does continually: They come and sit before
me, etc. But their heart is after their Covetousness, it has another way to
go, another God to wait on.

But are now returned, etc.] Whatsoever are the several ways of our straying,
all our wandering is the aversion of the heart from God, whence of necessity
follows a continual unsetledness and disquiet, the Mind as a wave of the Sea
tossed too and fro with the Wind, it tumbles from one sin and vanity to
another, and finds no rest, as a sick Person tosses from one side to another,
and from one part of their Bed to another, and change their Bed it may be, in
hope of ease, and still it is further off, thus is the Soul in all its
wanderings: But shift and change as it will no rest until it come to this
returning. Jer. 2.36. Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way? Thou
shall be ashamed of Egypt as thou wast of Assyria. Nothing but sorrow and shame
till you change all those ways, for this one. Return O Israel says the Lord,
if thou will return, return unto me. It Is not changing one of your own ways
for another will profit you: But in returning to me is your salvation.

Seeing we find in our own experience, besides the woeful end of our wanderings,
the present perplexity and disquiet of them. Why are we not persuaded to this?
To give up with them all. Return unto thy rest O my Soul says David, this were
our wisdom.

But is not that God in whom we expect rest, incensed against us for our
wandering, and is he not being offended a consuming fire? True, but this is the
way to find acceptance, and peace, and satisfying comforts in returning. Come
first to this Shepherd of Souls Jesus Christ, and by him come unto the Father,
No Man comes unto the Father says he, but by me, this is via Regia, the high
and right way of returning unto God Io. 10, 11. I am the good Shepherd, and
Ver. 9. I am the door, by me if any Man enter in, he shall be saved: But if he
miss this door, he shall miss salvation too. Ye are returned says the
Apostle. Unto the Shepherd, And Bishop of your Souls.

There be Three things necessary to restore us to our happiness, whence we have
departed in our wanderings. 1. To take away the guiltiness of those former
wanderings. 2. To reducees into the way again. 3. To keep and lead us in it.

Now all these are alone performable by this great Shepherd 1. He did satisfy
for the offense of our wanderings, and so remove our guiltiness, he himself,
the Shepherd became a Sacrifice for his flock, a Sheep or spotless Lamb as Isa.
53. Resembled in the 6 th. Ver. We like sheep have gone astray, and immediately
after our straying mentioned. The Lord laid, or Made meet on him, the iniquity
of us all. Of all our strayings and Ver. 7. He that is our Shepherd, the same
is the Lamb for Sacrifice, so our Apostle Chap. 1. We are redeemed not by
Silver and Gold, etc. But by the precious blood of Christ: As of a Lamb without
blemish, and without spot so Io. 10. He the good Shepherd that lays down his
life for his Sheep. Men think not on this, many of them that have some thoughts
of returning and amendment, think not that there is a satisfaction due for
by-pass'd wanderings, and therefore they pass by Christ, and consider not the
necessity of returning to him, and by him to the Father.

2. He brings them back into the way of life, Ye are returned, but think not
this is by their own knowledge, and skill that they discover their error, and
find out the right path, and by their own strength return into it, No; if we
would contest Grammaticisms, the word here is passive, ye are returned,
reduced, or caused to return: But this truth hangs not on so weak notions, as
are often used, either for, or against it. In that Prophecy Ezekiel. 34.16. I will
seek, and bring again etc. and Psa. 23. Ver. 3. He restores, or returns My
Soul. And that this is the work of this Shepherd the Lord Jesus God-man, is
clear and frequent in the Gospel. He came for this very end, 'twas his errand
and business in the world, to seek and to save that which was lost, And in that
parable, he goes after that which is lost until he find it, and then having
found it does not only show it the way, and say to it return, and leaves it to
come after, but he lays it on his shoulder, and brings it home, and
notwithstanding all his pains in stead of complaining against it for wandering,
he rejoices in that he has found and recovered it, he lays it on his shoulder
rejoicing, and in this there is as much of the resemblance as in any other
thing. Lost Man can no more return unsought, than a Sheep that wandereth, which
is observed of all Creatures to have least of that skill. Men may have some
confused thoughts of returning: But to know the way, and to come home, unless
they be sought out, they cannot, this is David's suite, though acquaited with
the fold. Lord seek thy Servant. This did our great and good Shepherd through
those difficult ways he was to pass, for our finding, wherein he not only
hazarded, but realy laid down his life, and those shoulders that did bear the
iniquity of our wandering by expiation, upon the same does he bear, and bring us
back from it, by effectual conversion.

3. He keeps and leads us on in that way, into which he has reduced us, he
Leaves us not again to try our own skill, if we can walk to Heaven alone, being
set into the path of it: But he still conducts us in it by his own hand, and
that is the cause of our persistance in it, and attaining the blessed end of it.
He returns my Soul says the Psalmist, and that is not all, he adds he
leads me in the paths of righteousness for his names sake, by those paths are
the green pastures meant, and the still waters that he speaks of, And thus we
may be resolved, if we are of his flock, are we led in the paths of
righteousness? Do we delight our selves in him, and his ways? Are they the
proper refreshment of our Souls? Do we find his word sweet unto our Taste? Are
we taken with the green pastures in it, and the Cristall Streams of
Consolations that glide through it. Can we discern his voice, and does it draw
our hearts, so that we follow it? Ioh. 10. etc.

The Shepherd, and Bishop] It was the style of Kings to be called Shepherds,
and it is the dignity of the Ministers of the Gospel to have both these names*
But this great Shepherd, and Bishop, is peculiarly worthy of these Names, as
supeme he alone Universal Shepherd and Bishop and none but an Antichrist, that
makes himself as Christ, that kills and destroys the flock, will assume this
Title that belongs only to the Lord, the great owner of his Flock, he himself
is their great Shepherd and Bishop, All Shepherds and Bishops that are truly
such have their function and place from him, hold of him, and follow his Rules,
and example in their inspection of the flock; it were the happiness of
Kingdoms if Magistrates and Kings would set him, his love, and meekness, and
equity before their eyes in their government. And all those that are properly
his Bishops, are especially obliged to study this pattern, to warm their
affections to the flock, and tender care of their salvation by looking on this
Archbishop and Arch-shepherd, as our Apostle calls him, and in their measure,
to follow his footsteps, spending their life, and strength in seeking the good
of his sheep, considering that they are subordinately Shepherds of Souls, that
is in Spiri^ual things so communicable.

The Lord Jesus is supremely and singularly such, they under him Shepherds of
Souls: Because their diligence concerns the Soul, which excludes not the body
in Spiritual respects, as it is capable of things Spiritual, and Eternal, by
its Union with the Soul; But Christ is Sovereign Shepherd of Souls above all,
and singular, in that he not only teaches them the Doctrine of Salvation, but
purchased Salvation for them, and reaches the Soul powerfully, which Ministers
by their own power cannot do, he lays hold on it, and reduces, and leads it,
and causes it to walk in his ways. In this sense it agrees to him alone as
Supreme in the incommunicable sense.

And from his Conduct, and Power, and Love, flows all the comfort of his
flock, considering their own folly, and weakness. This alone gives them
confidence, that his hand guides them, and they believe his strength far
surpassing that of the roaring Lion. Ioh. 10, 28, 29, 30. His wisdom in knowing
their particular estate, and their weakness, and his tender love pitying them,
and applying himself to it. Other Shepherds, even faithful ones, may mistake
them, and not know the way of leading them in some particulars, and may be
sometimes wanting in that, tender affection that they ow, and if they have
that, yet are not able to bear them up, and support them powerfully: But this
Shepherd, is perfect in all these. Isa. 40.11. The young and weak Christian, or
the Elder at weak times, when they are big and heavy with some inward exercise
of mind, which shall bring forth advantage and peace afterward to them: Them
he leads gently, and uses them with Tenderness that their weakness requires.

And generally he provides for his Flock, and heals them when they are any way
hurt, and washes and makes them fruitful; So that they are as that Flock used
in the comparison Cant. 4.2. They are comely, but their shepherd much more.
Formosi pecoris Custos formosior. They are given him in the Fathers purpose and
choice, and so they that return, even while they wander, are Sheep in some
other sense than the rest that perish. They are in the secret love of election
of Christ's Sheep fold, though not actually, yet brought into it, but when his
time comes wheresoever they wander, and how far off soever, even those that
have strayed most, yet he reduces them, and rejoices Heaven with their return,
and leads them till he bring them to partake of the joy that is there. That Is
the end of their way wherein he guides them. Ioh. 10.27, 28. They hear my voice
and follow me, and it shall not repent them to do so; to follow him is to
follow life, he is the life, And he is in that Glory which we desire. And where
would we be, if not there where he is. Who at his parting from the world said,
where I am there they shall be also, To this happy Meeting and Heavenly abode
God of his Infinite mercy bring us Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS
Errata.
Page 3 line ult Apostl read Apostle p. 10 l. 6. vainglory r. vain glory p. 16
l. 12 oded r. obedience p. 19 l. 8 eternal r. external p. 20 l. 17 commaud r.
command p. 34 l. 23 blessiings r. blessings l. 24 valluable r. valuable p. 35
l. 25 ou r. ou^ p. 38 l. 4. natucal r. natural p. ^^ l. abli^ r. ability p. 41
l. last Thefore r. Therefore p. 42 l. 29 they have r. they livy p. 43 l. 26
sl^gard r sluggard p. 44 l. 15 assurence r. assurance l. 23 woldley r. worldly.
p. 114 l. 13 intelligeable r. intelligible p. 116 l. 7 waiing r. waiting l. 8
darkei r. darkness 121 l. 10 soretold r. foretold p. 114 l. 4 underdand r.
understand p. 132 l. 11 no stop after them p. 135 l. 4 wtih r. with p. 145 l. 2
porsperity r. prosperity p. 147 l. 11. Christain r. Christian p. 149 l. 17
impossiable r. impossible p. 150 l. 16 doctine r. doctrine p. 152 l. 27.
perfane r. profane l. antependt paculiar r. peculiar p. 174 l. 25 temperal r.
temporal p. 185 l. 11. his r. all p. 181 l. 10 appearnce r. appearance l. last
tiemes r. times p. 191 l. 24 and r. and 192 ult made delend p. 194 antepenult
cecevied r. received p. 196 l. 6 brethen r. brethren p. 198 l. 18 Evangelist r.
Evangelists p. 209 l. 10 is r. it p. 239 l. last Covenants r. Covenant p. 246.
l. 30 Ehp. r. Ephesians. p. ^46 l. 14 way r. may p. 258 l. 1 this esteem precious r.
this esteem. Precious p. 261 actrive r. active p. 264 l. 19 Priestood r.
Priesthood accept. to God: as here fei r. text r. acc: to God, as h. f. ^. t.
text p. 276 l. 22 speak; of r. speak of; p. 280 l. 29 speaks, of hard etc. r.
speaks of, hard etc. p. 282 l. 25 shalln or r. shall not l. 31 caulling r.
calling p. 303 l. last ceremoany r. ceremony p. 307 l. 14 poriton r. portion p.
315 l. 39 is r. it p 336 l. 12 their r. there p. 372 l. 13 partacular r.
particular p. 377 l. 23 thlng r. thing p. 432 l. ult wha the r. what he p. 481
l. 27 es r. us.


