Abra-Mule OR, A TRUE HISTORY Of the Dethronement of MAHOMET IV.

Written in French by M. Le Noble.

Made English by J. P.

LONDON, Printed for R. Clavel at the Peacock near St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleet Street. 1696.

To his most Serene Highness, Monseigneur the Prince of CONTI.
Monseigneur,
THe Unfortunate Abra-Mule, beloved by two Sultan's and a Visir, yet so, that
neither of the three could be happy in the enjoyment of her, is come into
France, to unfold the secret Intreagues which her Beauty occasioned in the
Serraglio, and which pulled down Mahomet from the Ottoman Throne.

She begs to appear under the Auspices of your Serene Highness, and she is in
hopes, Sir, that a Prince, who together with all the Virtues of a perfect Hero,
possesses all that Love is capable to inspire, will not refuse a Sultaness so
amiable and so virtuous, the honor of his Protection. She flatters her self
with it, Sir, and the troubles that overwhelm her will meet with a pleasing
Consolation, if your serene Highness, while you recreate your wearied Thoughts
in reading the fatal Success of a Tenderness so fatal as hers, afford it some
little sense of your Compassion.

But, Sir, Your serene Highness will not only behold in this short History the
secret of an amorous Intreague, you will see there the Events of War, which
will be yet more pleasing to that undaunted Courage which renders you the Glory
of your Country. This undaunted Courage, supported by all that can form an
accomplished Hero, is the fire of that Royal Blood that runs in your Veins; an
Emanation of the great Soul of that invincible Prince, that incomparable Conde,
whom France beholds with so much pleasure revived in your virtues.

Continue, Sir, continue to tread the steps of that Giant, and may that
formidable arm of yours, the weight of which the Enemies of the State so often
have felt, be one of the most firm supports of the first Monarchy in the World.
My good Wishes follow you where ever you go, and the chiefest wish I make at
present, while I take the liberty to offer you this little Piece, is, that so
long as I live, I may be,

Your Highnesses most Humble and most Obedient, LE NOBLE.

THE PREFACE.
IT IS not to be imagined that this is a Romantic Adventure grounded upon mere
Invention; for it is the real Truth of a secret Intreague carried on in the
Serraglio, which put Soliman upon attempting to set himself up in the room of
his Brother, merely to gratify an amorous Passion which rendered him his Rival.

I have writ nothing but what I had from the Memoirs of one of my intimate
Friends, who accompanying M. Gerardin in his Embassy, and abiding with him a
long time at the Port under Soliman's Reign, unravelled there the whole Secret
of this Adventure, concerning which upon his Return, he delivered all the
Informations into my hands, at the same time that upon what I had dived into by
the Correspondencies which I held in several parts of Europe, I published those
Dialogues which include an infinite number of Particulars, not to be met with
in other Historians.

This is therefore no chemerical Invention, but a true History; and if you take
the pains to compare it with those that are more General, you will find that I
am very exact in all the Circumstances of Public Events, and that I do but
unfold the secret Reasons that caused 'em

The Actions of Sovereigns are always divided into two parts; the one is the
Public Event, which all the World knows, and which is the Subject of Gazettes,
and the most part of public Histories; the other is that which they conceal
under the Vail of their Politics; and those are the secret Motives of the
Intreagues which cause those Events, and which are only known to, and revealed
by those, who had some share in carrying on those Intreagues, or who by the
penetration of their Genius, knowing one part, divine the to other.

For Example, we read every where of the taking of Buda by the Valor of Prince
Charles of Lorrain, seconded by the Duke of Bavaria; that they carried the
Place in view of an Army of Fourscore Thousand Men, Commanded by the Visir in
person, who could not relieve it; but the Relations never tell ye, that the
Conspiracy carried on by Prince Soliman, Siaous and Cuproli, who were plotting
the Ruin of the Visir, hindered the Succors, and tied that Minister's Arm.

In like manner we find in the Public History of Philip II. King of Spain,
that he was two Years in Flanders, without ever returning into England to visit
Queen Mary his Wife, not so much as during her mortal sickness, but we do not
see what motives of Love and Jealousy set 'em at variance.

Thus it may be said, that seeing Action is the Body, and that the motive is
the soul of that Action, there are very few or no Historians, but what give us
Bodies without Souls, while they never tell us the Motives which cause Princes
to Act, and give Motion to their Intreagues.

Which is the Reason that particular Histories are always more pleasing, and
more profitable then those which are General: They are more pleasing, because
there is more care taken to adorn 'em, and for that they mention those things
which are not to be met with in others: And they are more profitable, because
they are more precise in the Characters of Princes, and in the Private and
Domestic Actions, which are more proper to instruct, then the general Relation
of an Action, of which we know not the Motive nor the Causes.

An Explication of the Turkish Terms contained in this History.
SUltan. The Emperor of the Turks. Sultaness Valide. The Sultaness, Mother of
the Sultan. Sultaness Asseki. The principal favorite Sultaness. Grand Visir.
Chief Minister of the Ottoman Empire. Mufti. Chief Priest. Iman. A Doctor, or
Preacher of the Alcoran. Dervis. A Turkish Monk. Alcoran. The Mahometan's
Bible. Mosquee. A Mohammedan Temple. Seraskier. A General of an Army. Basha. A
Governor. Kaimakan. High Marshall of the Household, and Governor of
Constantinople. Janisaries. The Turkish Infantry, the Sultan's Guards. Aga.
Colonel of the Janisaries. Serraglio. The Sultan's Palace. Kiaia. A
Lieutenant. Kisler Agasi. Chief of the black Eunuchs, and superintendent of the
Serraglio. Kisler Kiasi. Deputy to the Kisler Agasi. Grand Teftardar. Lord
Treasurer. Bostangi Bachi. Superintendent of the Sultan's Palaces, Gardens and
Buildings, or chief Surveyor. Bostangi. A Gardner. Dragoman. An Interpreter.
Catacheriff. A Decree of the Sultan. Fetfa. A decree of the Mufti. Timar. A
Feofment for Life.
Abra-Mule: OR, THE HISTORY Of the Deposition of MAHOMET IV. EMPEROR of the
TURKS.
The First Part.
THE Revolution which happened in the Ottoman Empire, in the Month of November,
by the Deposal of Sultan Mahomet, and the Advancement of Soliman his Brother to
the Throne, is one of the greatest Changes that have fallen out in this Age;
and of which the secret Circumstances that caused it, not dived into by many
Persons, are most worthy to be known.

The greatest part have attributed 'em only to the misfortunes of the Ottoman
Arms, and to this Principle of the Musselmen's belief, that when Adversity
attends a Man, it is an infallible sign of the Wrath of God, and of the contempt
of their Prophet, and consequently that it is lawful to Sacrifice to the
Public Good the Prince whom they believe to be the subject of that Celestial
Anger.

But though it must not be denied, but that the unlucky Conjunctures
contributed very much to the Deposal of the Sultan, by reason of the pretenses
with which they were supplied; nevertheless, the Truth is, that Love was the
secret cause, and that that same Love only made use of a pretense which had its
rise from thence.

However, before we enter into the particulars of this same extraordinary
Story, it will be necessary for the better understanding of it, to give the
Public a general Idea of the Ottoman Family at that time.

Ibrahim, Emperor of the Turks, a Prince cruel even to Barbarism, was Strangled
upon a Revolt of his Janissaries, and Dying, left three Sons; Mahomet, between
Nine and Ten Years of Age, who succeeded him under the Regency of the Sultaness
his Mother; Soliman, about a year Younger, and Achmet, who was not then above
Four or Five Years Old, all three Born of different Sultanesses.

Some there are who have asserted, that Mahomet was not an Ottaman: That the
Sultaness only feigned her self with Child, that she might procure to her self
the Title of Asseki, or Sultaness Mother of the Firstborn Prince: That he was
the Child of a Jewish Woman that was brought to Bed in a Chamber near the
Sultanesse's; that the Infant was carried to her in a Basket of Flowers, and
afterward set up and owned by Her for a Child born of her own Body. The Author
of the Ottoman Mirror publishes this Story. But it is neither credible, nor to
be imagined, that a project of this Nature should be put in practice within the
Serraglio; and if there had been the least Suspicion for a ground of this
Fable, Sol^man, who dethroned him, would never have spared his life, nor the
life of the Prince his Son, who at this day wears the Ottoman Diadem.

That which might have been the occasion of this Fiction, might be this
perhaps; that the Sultaness never had any other Children; that she was at
continual Odds with Mahomet, when he reigned by himself; and for that she
Protected the other two Princes against the Violences of her Son, every time
that he went about to attempt their lives.

Mahomet, for Stature, was somewhat Taller then the ordinary Height, well
Proportioned, black Hair, little Eyes, but Quick, more ill Favored then
Comely; nimble in all the Exercises of the Body, Valiant, Courtly, Profuse,
Magnificent, passionate in his Amors, a lover of Hunting even to Excess; an
extraordinary discerner of Merit; but Rash, Obstinate, Ungrateful, and one
that suffered himself to be very much governed by the Ministers of the
Serraglio.

Soliman was very Tall, Straight, Majestic, inclining to Fat, a pleasing
Countenance, large and black Eyes, with a lively and fair Complextion; his Nose
and Mouth admirably Shaped, the turn of his Countenance somewhat Oval, his
Hands white and Fleshy. He was Nimble at all Exercises that required no great
labor; he was naturally Melancholy, and full of Dissimulation; he spoke
little; and whether it were out of Policy, or by Inclination, he devoted
himself to the study of the Alcoran, which he unfolded like a Doctor. He was
Generous, Crafty and Bold, with a Heart most tenderly enclining to Love; but he
was one who had an admirable Gift at concealing a secret.

As for Achmet, in regard he has no share in this History, it is needless to say
any thing of him, only that Nature had deformed his Body, and that he retained
something of his Fathers Stupidity, but nothing of his Cruelty.

The Janissaries in the fury of their Sedition, set Mahomet upon the Throne, and
engaged him to give Order for putting his Father to Death. And for the
Sultaness his Mother, she was one of the most beautiful Women in the World; a
Circassion, but of mean Birth, and one who from a Slave had mounted to the
highest degree of Female Glory, by means of a genius most sublime, and capable
of governing a great Empire.

To fix her self in her Authority, she thought it behooved her to advance to the
Dignity of Grand Visir, such a person as should be beholding to her for his
Fortune and Preferment; and knowing the Capacity, the Courage, and the Wit of
Basha Cuproli, who then lay laden with Irons at the bottom of a Dungeon, she
obtained his Release, conferred with him in Private, drew from him what
Protestations and Assurances she pleased her self, and at the same time
delivered to him the Seal of the Empire, and set him at the head of the
Council, and the Ministry.

His Government was Prosperous and Prudent, his Fidelity inviolable, his
Services advantageous; and laden with Honors and Victories, by a strange
fortune without example in the Ottoman. Empire; he had two Sons, and two Sons
in Law, that succeeded him in his Employment.

His Father was a French Renegado, born in Champagne, near Chalons, in a
Village called Cuperli, from whence he took his Name, being a Sergeant in a
Foot Company, and which he left to his Posterity. A certain Murder which he
committed, enforced him to fly his Country, and the Bark to which he betook
himself being taken by the Turkish Corsairs, he thought it more convenient to
wear a Turbant, then to see himself chained to the Oar; and being a handsome
person, he was soon enrolled among the Janisaries, among whom, having raised
himself by his Valor to signal Employments, he obtained a Timar, or a
proportion of Lands for Life, and spun so fair a Thread for himself, that by
degrees he arrived to the highest place of the Empire. This is the truth, both
of the Original and Name of the Cuproli's, and whatever is aver'd to the
contrary is mere Fiction.

The cruel Polities of the Ottomans was the reason that formerly the Sultans
always sacrificed the Blood of their Brothers to the security of their
Government. But, the first Counsel which Cuproli gave the Sultaness Valide,
that is to say, Mother, was carefully to preserve the two Princes, Soliman and
Achmet, not only to prevent the Extinction of the Ottoman Blood, but out of a
secret Aim which the Visir had to make a Bulwark for his own safety, both of
the one and the other, and to have in his hands wherewith all to keep his
Master in continual aw, in case that when he came to Rule by himself, he might
be induced by some intreague of the Serraglio, to deprive him of the chief
Ministry.

Thus it came to pass, that those two Princes were beholding to Cuproli for
their lives, who by a mavelous Dexterity of Wit, being desirous to manage at
a distance the several Humors both of Mahomet and Soliman, so ordered it, that
his Eldest Son, who was about the Sultan's Age, was bred in his Company among
the Children of Honor, and that the Youngest was nurtured in company with
Soliman. I relate this particular circumstance, because it will prove
serviceable to unfold the intregue of this Revolution carried on by this Young
Cuproli. And indeed Soliman from his Infancy contracted so strickt a Friendship
with him, and with Siaous, who was next him in the same Quality, that those two
Persons were his most secret Confidents. But in regard that as well by Nature,
as by the care that was taken to instruct him, he was become a Master in
Dissimulation; this confidence was so well managed, that it never gave Mahomet
any cause of Suspicion.

After this general Idea, we are now to enter into the secret of the History.

The great Cuproli being dead in the midst of his Tryumphs, had for his
Successor his Eldest Son, who was bred up with Mahomet, but he dyed within a
short time after his Advancement.

At that time the Ottoman Empire enjoyed a perfect Tranquillity, by virtue of a
Truce that was signed by the Christian Princes. Mahomet also, by the Sultaness
Asseki, had a Son, a handsome Young Gentleman, and of promising Hopes, about
twenty Years of Age, and he quietly enjoyed the Fruit of his Victories which
had acquired him Candie, Kaminiec, and some places in Hungary; so that he
abandoned himself to the sports of Hunting, and the pleasures of Love,
notwithstanding the raging jealousy of the Sultaness, who oft-times broke his
measures.

But because it is the temper of some Men, that they cannot contain themselves
when they are well, Kara Mustapha, whom he had made choice of for his Grand
Vizier, constrained him indiscretly to break his Truce with the Emperor, and
plunged him into a War no less fatal to him then unjust.

The Truce was broken, Vienna Besieged; but at the same time that the Ottoman
Puissance seemed ready to overturn the Western Empire, the God of Battle, who
distributes Victory according to the decrees of his Providence, struck the
Visir with a Spirit of Terror and Confusion; the Seige was raised by the
assistance of the King of Poland, and the Valor and Conduct of Charles of
Lorrain signalized all the following Campaigns with new Conquests.

Mahomet, during his Misfortunes, remitted nothing of his sports; he had
several Favorites, among the rest whom he honored in a more particular
manner, there was one Basha, who was called by the Name of Soliman, and whom he
had made Serasquiss, or General of his Arms, upon the Borders of Poland. He was
about Thirty Years of Age, and it was a hard matter to meet with a more
Graceful Person. He was a Man who had never a whit the less Valor for having
been bred up in the soft pleasures of the Court. He was Tall, and his Beauty
which was Masculine, and full of Fire, was seconded with a sparkling Wit, which
no way lessened his Judgment; his undauntedness was proof against all Danger,
and his Address imcomparable, in managing the Intreagues of the Serraglio,
wherein he had for his principal and inviolable Friend, the Kisser Agasi.

This Officer is an Officer of the greatest command and power in the Serraglio:
He is a black Eunuch, and is the chief of all the Eunuchs: To him belongs the
superintendancy over all the Sultanesse's Guards: Whatever concerns 'em depends
upon his absolute Power; and it is a hard matter for a Woman to obtain or
preserve the favor of the Sultans, but by the intregues of this Eunuch. He
ruins, or becomes serviceable to those whom he has a mind to Favor, or
Destroy. And from thence it is an easy thing to conceive what immense. Riches
he heaps up by means of the Presents which he receives from the Sultanesses,
who are sensible of his Kindness, or fear the Effects of his Ill Will; or from
those, who by the assistance of his Credit aspire to great Employments. Lastly,
his place is so considerable, that he has Six Hundred Horses kept for his
service only at the charges of the State.

Soliman undertook the Command of the Arms upon the Frontiers of Poland, at the
beginning of the Campaign that was signalized by the Battle of Gran. At what
time one of the principal Orders which he had to put in Execution, was to take
his just measures for the conveighance of a considerable relief into Caminiec.
To which purpose, he went himself one day at the head of two Hundred Horse, to
view a narrow Lane through which the Convoy was to pass. But he was no sooner
within sight of certain hollow ways; when he heard a great Noise of a sudden,
when his Scouts brought him word that a body of four or five hundred Polonians
had fallen upon two hundred Tartars that guarded the close Wagons.

Soliman never stood to consider, but marching directly toward the Noise, fell
with that Fury upon the Squadrons of the Enemy, that he broke 'em at the first
Charge, slew a great number upon the place, while the rest being dispersed,
made their escape to a Wood, whither he thought it not convenient to pursue
'em, but to make immediately up to the Wagons; where he heard the cries of
certain persons in distress, and presently cast his Eye upon four Women, among
which there was one in a Muscovite Habit that seemed to be not above Sixteen
Years of Age, but so wonderfully Beautiful, and so accomplished in all outward
Perfections, that he could not choose but behold her with astonishment.

The Fright she had been in, the Emotion of her Spirits, which the Noise and
Surprise of the Skirmish had occasioned within her, did but serve to redouble
the lilly whiteness and liveliness of her Complexion. Soliman, who was
naturally Amorous, and who at that very instant felt in his Heart a more than
ordinary Commotion, paid her all the respects that his Character would permit
him, and which the excellency of her Beauty deserved. But if the Charms of this
unknown person caused so great a surprise in Soliman, she became no less
sensible, when she beheld the the goodly Aspect, the delicate Lineaments, and
obliging Manners of her Preserver. He never left the Convoy till he had seen
her safe beyond the narrow pass, and having seen her in the plain, he sent
along with her fifty of his Horse for her greater Security, with Orders to the
Commander of the Party, exactly to inform himself, who that assable Person was,
whither she was Traveling, and where she was to make her stay.

After this, Soliman, having acquitted himself of every thing that his duty
required from him, returned to his Camp. But it was imposible for him to apply
himself to any other thoughts then those which the Idea of the unknown Lady had
imprinted in his Mind; and his restlessness caused him to expect with
impatience the return of his Detachment, which at length arrived; and at the
same time the Commander brought him an account, that the Lady, whom he had seen
was called Abra-Mule, taken about six years of Age, in an incursion made by the
Tartars into Muscovis; that a rich Merchant of Samarcan had bred her up, and
carefully preserved her for Ten Years together, and that he was t^^velling for
Belgrade through Transylvania, in order to carry her to the Grand Visir, Karah
Ibrahim, but according to all the conjectures by what he could draw from him,
his design was only to get Letters of Favor from him, for admission to present
her to the Sultan. That the Convoy and the Wagons staid at Kolenko, a Castle
seated within two miles of the Camp, and that they were resolved to stop there
for one day, to recover the young Lady from the Disorder into which the
Encounter with the Polonians had put her.

Such was the Love that Soliman had conceived for this young Muscovite, that
the first growth of it had made such a deep impression in his Heart, that the
last part of this Relation was like a clap of Thunder to his Senses. In the
midst of his first Thoughts, he persuaded himself, that being Master of the
Armies through the whole extent of the Frontiers of Poland, and both Banks of
the Niester, it would be easy for him to find pretenses to stop the farther
journey of the unknown Lady, and to prosper the attempts of his Love. But so
soon as he considered, that she was designed for the Sultan, despair took
possession of his Soul; nor could all his Wit imagine which way to flatter his
Desires. In the midst of these Agitations he omitted nothing of his Duty, but
having issued forth his necessary Orders, he was ready to retire into his
Cabinet, that he might surrender himself with more Tranquillity to his amorous
Contemplations, when word was brought him that the Tartarian Merchant desired
to kiss his Hands.

Mursa, for that was the name of the Tartar was no sooner arrived at Kolenko,
but after he had taken all the requisite Precautions for the security of his
Company, he bethought himself, that it not only behooved him to pay his
acknowledgement to the Seraskier, but that he might obtain from his generosity
Letters of Recommendation to the Visir, and the Kisler Agasi, with pass-ports
requisite for the crossing of Transylvania; and to the end that his Compliments
and his Presents might be the more graciously accepted, he would needs have 'em
accompanied with a few lines from Abra-Mule, and a present in her Name.

Upon the proposal which he made the fair Muscovite, she fell into a Disorder,
which might have easily unravelled the thoughts of her Heart, had not the
Merchant attributed to her modesty the ruddy Blushes that spread themselves in
her Cheeks. Soliman's victorious Merit, at the first sight, had cast into her
Soul the Sparkles of a Passion, which the condition she was in, commanded her
to stiflle. On the other side it was no small pleasure to her, that it was in
her power to oblige him to renew her in his Memory, by means of an opportunity,
that put neither her Chastity nor her Modesty in any hazard; only she was
afraid least her Heart should dictate too much to her Pen. This combat
suspended her Resolution. But at length Mursa, who was to her instead of a
Father, pressing her with the Authority of a Master, she took her Pen and wrote
the following Lines.

Abra-Mule to Soliman Basha, Seraskier.
I Am too much beholding to your Valor, not to join my particular
acknowledgment with that of Mursa's; I obeyed him with delight. I could
willingly desire, Sir, you could but apprehend to what a degree this Obligation
is engraved in my Soul: the remembrance of it shall be Eternal. But in regard I
have only good wishes, wherewith to acknowledge so generous a service, they
will never be to my satisfaction, till Heaven has bestowed upon you all the
Happiness which you deserve, and which I wish you.

ABRA-MULE.


This Letter she accompanied with a rich Scan of Gold Tissu, Embroidered with
Pearl, the work of her own hands. Mursa also took along with him a magnificent
Turbant, and with twenty Horse arrived at the Seraskier's Camp.

It Is no hard matter to imagine how much to his satisfaction he was received.
Mursa gave Soliman to understand that Abra-Mule was the Daughter of a Boyar or
Muscovite Nobleman whose name was Mule-Alexowitz, who being too confident of
maintaining his Ground against an Inundation of Tartars into his Castle of
Sinolo seated upon the Frontiers, had the misfortun^ to be taken by storm, to
have all that he ha^ plundered, burnt or put to the Sword; that the Boyar
himself was slain in the first heat of the onset; that a common Tartar having
his Scimiter lifted up to Massaker Abra-Mule, an Officer compassionating the
tender Beauty of the Infant, stopped his Arm; that the same Officer took her as
part of his share, and sold her to himself; that she was bred up with his
Daughter, and that her Beauty every day increasing, and being arrived at an
accomplished perfection, he designed to make a present of it to the Sultan;
that he had already written to the same purpose, both to Kara Ibrahim, the
Grand Visir, and to the Kisler Agasi, who had returned him favorable answers,
with orders to set forward with all speed; that he was expected at Adrianople,
where the Sultan intended to spend the Summer; and that he made all the have
that possibly he could. That his Instructions were to receive Orders from the
Visir at Belgrade, and lastly that he besought Soliman to second him yet
farther with his Letters of Recommendation.

This Recical not a little perplexed the Seraskier, and his Grief would have
more loudly manifested it self, had not Abra-Mule's Letter somewhat calmed his
Sorrows. What an unexpected joy! What Agitations did he not feel within his
throbbing Heart! though it contained no more then a bare Compliment, he thought
he discovered somethings in it that flattered both his Imagination and his
Love. He kindly accepted the presents, promised Mursa whatever he demanded; and
while his attendants were entertaining the Merchant with usual Refreshments, he
betook himself to his Cabinet, and returned the following answer more
circumspect out of Policy, then his Love would otherwise have prompted him to
make.

Soliman Seraskier to the incomparable Abra-Mule.
THE little service which my good Fortune gave me an oppertunity to perform,
did not deserve so great a Recompense as that which I receive from the fairest
and most amiable person in the World. I will give my self the true delight of
coming my self to thank you for so much goodness so little expected, and to
offer you whatever lies within my power. I hope then, to let you understand,
that there cannot be any person more devoted to your service then is

Soliman.


The Seraskier delivered this Letter open to Mursa, and told him withal, that
since he was to stay a whole day at Kolenco, he would be there upon the morrow,
on purpose with a small entertainment to alleviate the hardships he had
suffered in a toilsom Journey: That it was the least he could do to wait upon a
Person designed for his Master's Embraces; in the mean time he would take care
for the making ready such Orders, as should render more supportable the
fatigues of their ensuing Travels.

Mursa departed very well satisfied, and Soliman retiring, took his Letter, and
read it over and over again, and kissing it as often as he cast his eyes upon
it, Can it be possible fair Abra, said he, that the Remembrance of Soliman
should ever be eternal in thy Memory? But, answered he to himself, to what
purpose would that Remembrance serve, but to render me more miserable! Stifle
thy Love unfortunate Soliman, thou would dispute thy Right in Abra with any
other but thy Sultan; but in contesting with thy Master, there is nothing that
can flatter thy hope. Stifle then, this Love, before it gets too powerful a
Dominion over thee.

After this, he walked to and fro in a profound silence, till at length his
Passion getting the upper hand. Well! said he, What signifies it? Maugre my
despair, can I prevail upon my self to say I will not Love her? No, no, -- I
will love her -- and make known to her the Passion which she has kindled in my
Heart: What is to be done, should she by chance love me? But Oh -- that is the
Question. A thousand Accidents, which I foresee not, may favor the success of
my Love. The Kister Agasi is my sure Friend, he is the Master of the Serraglio:
Mahomet loves me; nor is it a new thing for the Sultans to honor their
Favorites with Wives out of their Serraglio: The Sultaness Asseki is jealous:
Mahomet may be hinderd from fixing his Affection upon Abra. Lastly, there is
nothing but what my be hoped for from Time, and my Intregues.

With these Chimera's he flattered his Passion, and then revolving in his
memory the same Thoughts over and over again, he considered, that before he let
himself loose to these Imaginations it was to be presupposed that he was
beloved by Abra, and after he had been sometime reflecting upon this, at length
he resolved to try whither he could gain her, and then to carry on his
Intrigues, as Accidents and Opportunities should offer.

Having spent the night in these restless Expostulations of his contending
thoughts, he sent his Servants the next morning to Kolenco to make ready, with
all the magnificence that possible could be, the Entertainment which he had
premeditated: he apparelled himself as sumptuously as possibly he could, girded
his Vest with the Scarf that Abra had presented him, put on Mursa's Turban, and
accompanied with eight or ten of the principal Officers of his Army, to the end
his Journey might be the less suspected, or rather that it might be looked upon
as a piece of Honor paid the Sultan, he arrived at Kolenco.

The Collation was Superb; the Dances after the Turkish manner; Wrestling,
Racing, and the rest of the Divertisments were successfully performed; and
toward Sunset a Promenade in a little Grove served for an Interval, in
expectation of the Fireworks that were to enlighten the first Appearances of
darkness.

Soliman could not till then meet with an Opportunity to discourse Abra; but
then he gave her his hand; and while the Officers made their several
Applications to other Women, the whole Company perceived themselves near the
Entrance into a long green Arbor. Soliman led in the young Muscovite; and
Mursa, who had given her Directions to request something of the Seraskier,
which he durst not presume to ask himself, kept his post, out of respect, at
the entrance into the Arbor, and his Example obliging all the rest to separate
themselves, some one way, some another, Soliman caused Abra to seat her self
upon a Bank of Turf, and perceiving that though he might be seen, he could not
be heard by the Merchant, he thought it behooved him not to lose an Opportunity
so favorable to his Passion. Presently therefore with a low Voice, and a
passionate and tender Look.

Fair Abra, said he, how dear has my good Fortune cost me! that I should have
the pleasure to come to your Relief, but that that same succor should prove
the only occasion of my Torments. I ought indeed, to bury 'em in silence from
ye; the Respect which your Eyes Imprint, the Grandeur to which you are
designed, and my duty to the Sultan, all these Considerations should lock up my
Tongue, but my Love o'rerules me. Perhaps I may never have but this moment of
my life to let you know it. But though I were sure it would prove my Ruin, I
could not resolve with my self to loose so happy a Minute,

Abra, who till then had never perceived in all the Seraskier's Conduct, other
then respectful Wariness, by means of which he had understood so well to
conceal the Sentiments which he revealed to her, did not expect so lively a
Declaration of his Love. Wherefore, as much inclined as her heart might be to
please it self with the thoughts of being beloved by a Person whom she found to
be altogether Admirable, yet was she tossed with a most terrible Combat between
the Pleasure of knowing the effect of her Charms, and the fear of explaining
her self upon a subject of which she her self was so sensible.

A sudden Blush redoubled the Luster of her Complexion; she cast her Eyes upon
the ground, for fear they should betray the trouble of her mind, and with the
same restriction upon her Voice.

Heaven, Sir, said she, does not consult our Hearts to regulate our Destinies.
I am a Victine Sacrificed to the interest of a Tartar; would you hinder me from
suffering my self to be led without murmuring to the Altar? Alas, as free a
Woman as I shall enter into the Serraglio, I shall endure perhaps but too much
pain to see my self the slave of false Grandeur that will signify nothing to
one that contemns it as I do; and would you labor to redouble the Torments
that are preparing for me in that place?

Ah, Madam, replied Soliman, did you look upon as a surplusage of pains what I
have said to ye, how happy should I be; since then I might hope that my Love
would make some impression in your Heart, The word is slipped from my Mouth, and
I can no longer hold my Tongue. I love ye Madam, I Adore ye, I Burn, but with a
Fire that never can be extinguished. Ah, Madam, what is there that I would not
strive to merit, so that I might not be indifferent to your Affection!

Here Soliman stopped, but finding that Abra continued silent, and that with her
Eyes fixed upon the Ground, she seemed to be in a kind of uncertainty what
answer to return; Speak, fairest Abra, continued he, speak, or give me my
Deaths wound, and perceiving some Tears drop from her Eyes, yes, charming Abra,
repeated he, I love ye beyond all that man can Love, I Adore ye: Can you look
with indifferency upon a Passion so tender and so lively?

Ah, Sir, answered the Muscovite, with a sigh that she could nor restrain, had
your Passion been indifferent to me, I should have told ye but too much ere
now. I never had so great a dread, added she, of being sacrificed to the
Passions of an unknown person, as since I know that man of all the world most
worthy to possess my heart. I now have said too much, Sir, but time which is to
you so Precious, and your Eternal Separation make me forget my self, and put me
quite to Shame. I Blush for my Weakness, in not being able to conceal the
Triumph of your Merit. However, Sir, abuse not this my Weakness, it has
betrayed me. But since Heaven has surrounded this Passion with an invincible
Obstacle, let us stifle it in its Birth, and let not this secret be known to
ye, for any other reason then to forger it.

Who I? Madam, replied Soliman, I must then forget the only thing that can
procure my Happiness. If Heaven obstructs the accomplishment of my desires, at
least it shall not hinder me from easing my Torments with the pleasure of
knowing that your Heart is not insensible of my Love. Leave the rest to time,
to my Fortune, and to my Industry. I shall be at Adrianople after the Campaign
is over; trust to the Kisler Agasi, I will instruct him what he is to do in my
behalf, and confide in the inviolable fidelity of Soliman.

And you; Sir, since your Merit has forced me to betray the impression which it
has made in my heart, assure your self that it shall be my chief delight to
prefer you before all the Crowns of the Earth; and that all my Consolation in
the Horrors of my close confinement shall be to find that you are constant.

The fear of rendering suspicious a longer Discourse made Abra rise. The
Seraskier led her by the hand, they rejoined Mursa, and all the company being
come together, they went to the Banks of a River, upon which there were
prepared a great many Fireworks; while a magnificent Collation under a stately
open Tent by the River side concluded the Divertisements.

Soliman departed a thousand times more enamored then at his first Arrival;
and the next morning Mursa continued his Journey, having obtained of the
Seraskier whatever he could desire. But if he traveled with contentment, the
nearer he advanced to his journeys End, the more mortal was Abra's Grief for
the remoteness of a Separation, so much the more dreadful to her, because she
could not foresee any means or way by which she should ever meet again with the
person who already she loved so tenderly, and with such a sincere Passion.

'Twas no hard matter soon to perceive the Melancholy that began to weaken
her, and which was ascribed to the fatigues of a long Journey. But her slave
Sarai, who had always attended her as a Governess, penetrated into the true
reason of it; and in regard she lay by her side, her Sighs could not escape
her. She also observed, that ever since the morning of her departure from
Kolenco, she had in the Agitations of her Dreams several times repeated the
Name of Soliman, so that having a singular kindness for this Amiable Virgin,
and on the other side the merit of the Seraskier, and his Generosity having an
influence upon her Mind, she ventured to push her Penetration a little farther,
and to seek some remedy for the pains her Mistress endured.

With this purpose the Night following when they were alone, and that she heard
her Sigh more violently, she drew near her Bed, and embracing her, I love ye
tenderly, my dear Abra, said she, I love ye tenderly, and will you conceal any
longer from me what I already know too well? Open your self to me, and expect
from my Fidelity and my Descretion whatever my zeal can offer ye.

Abra, surpised at this Discourse, answered only with a Sigh. But Sarai
embraced her more closely, and conjured her with so much importunity, and after
such an affectionate manner, to trust her with what she could no longer conceal
from her, that at length Abra, melting into Tears laid open her Heart. Sarai
on the other side, promised her all assistance, and assured her, that if she
had a thousand Lives, she would venture 'em all to make her happy.

From that very moment Abra appeared more blithe, as if by entrusting her
secret, she had discharged her self of some weighty Burden. And in regard that
Soliman sought allways imaginable with safety to convey his mind in writing to
Abra, Sarai spared him the fruitless trouble which he put himself to, while he
thought to accomplish his desires by any other assistance then hers.

A correspondence of that Importance hazarded the Life both of the one and the
other, and therefore to avoid all Danger, it was agreed, that the Seraskier's
Letters should be so contrived, as if he had an Affection for Zaid, who was
Sarai's Niece, and Beautiful beside, and that Sarai her self should write
Abra's Letters, in Zaids Name. The intercourse was thus settled upon the third
day after the Separation of the two Lovers, and the first Letter that Abra
received from the Seraskier, contained these kind Expressions.

Soliman to Zaid.
TO Love every day, to be sensible of the still remote Separation from us of
what we love much more then our selves, and not to know whether ever she shall
meet again; what an Affliction, Adorable Zaid, what Torments are these! But it
would be much more cruel, if at the same time I should have any reason to doubt
the Sincerity of your Words. Remember the promise you have made me, and be
assured, that if I love you more then it is possible for all other men together
to do, my Fidelity is equal to my Love, and that nothing shall ever change the
Heart of

SOLIMAN.


Abra received this Billet from Sarai's Hands, and Dictated to her the
following Answer.

Zaid to Soliman Seraskier.
MY Aunt delivered me your Letter, which has afforded me the only Pleasure I
have had since I lost the sight of your Person. What sorrows do those Minutes
cost me every day, which once enjoyed are now no more to be expected! Yet is it
written in Heaven that they shall nere return! Love, Sir, Love on; but let your
Love be never so true, be assured it equals not my love for you, and if your
Fidelity be in Violable, my Constancy shall be Eternal. Pity my Fate, and think
often of

ZAID.


These Letters were attended by some others; and in regard that Soliman in his
second testified a great desire to see Abra once again, Sarai's Advice was that
she should fain her self sick, to the end they might be forced to stop in a
kind of a Castle seated upon the Edge of a Forest. The measures taken by Sarai
were put in Execution, and the Seraskier being fully informed of Sarai's
contrivance, he took Post by the means of laid Horses; and under pretenses
which he never wanted, arrived at the place appointed; where he disguised
himself in the Habit of a Dervis, or one of the Turkish Priests; in great
Veneration among those People, and particularly thought to be endu'd with a
power to cure all sorts of Sickness by reading in private certain Chapters of
the Alchoran, laid upon the head of the sick Person. Sarai therefore had
prepared all things ready for the Applications of the Dervis to Abra's
Distemper, and the superstitious Mursa was fallen into the snare, so that 'twas
no hard matter to introduce Soliman under that disguize, which Mursa so little
suspected, that seeing him coming at a Distance, he fell with his Face upon the
Ground, and made all his Servants do as much, while the counterfeit Saint past
forward with a great Alchoran, which he held open, and resting upon his
Forehead, as upon a Desk, to the end he might the better hide his Face.

Soliman being thus entered into Abra's Chamber, thought it not convenient to
spend his time in reading the Alchoran, but throwing himself at Abra's Knees,
and embracing 'em, who would have thought, said he, fair Abra, who would have
thought that I should ever have been so happy to see you again.

Abra, that she might oblige him to a posture more becoming his Grandeur,
seated her self upon a Couch that was close by; but Soliman still continuing
with one Knee upon the Ground, and perceiving that Saria was retired to have an
Eye at the Door, he took both her hands between his own, and continuing his
Discourse. No, No, Madam, No, said he, I no longer question your Love, since
without any he^^ation or scruple you have ventured all to afford me this
alleviation of my Pains. Ah, Madam, what a Pleasure it it, what a Satisfaction
to me to see you once again! Sir, replied Abra, if the Pleasure of seeing what
we love be to be measured by love, your Joy is not superior to mine. But with
what bitternesses is this secret Pleasure intermixed, when we consider that
it is but for a Moment, which will be attended with a long and perhaps perpetual
Separation.

Hope better Madam, replied Soliman, and since our Prophet himself affords me
this day by the help of this Disguise, an Opportunity of seeing you, be assured
that he approves our Fires, and that he will direct us to find our which way to
enjoy our Affection with more freedom. I come here chiefly to instruct ye what
measures are to be taken, to prevent our being exposed to the Sultan's
passions. To which purpose here is a Letter to the Kisler Agasi, which Sarai
shall take care to deliver him, before he receives those wherewith Mursa is
entrusted; and provided you can but preserve me your heart till I return to
Adrianople, and that the Kisler does but prevent your being seen by Mahomet, I
will set all Engines at work, and I presume so much upon his Highness's favor,
that I despair not to obtain you as his own gift.

If it only depends upon my Constancy, said Abra, to avoid the Sultan, and
enjoy your Love, you may rely upon me, Sir, that nothing shall be wanting on my
part to prosper the success of your Passion: But take care, Sir, that I may not
be deprived in the Serraglio of the comfort of having my faithful Sarai about
me; my Heart is in her hands, and she will be of great Use to us.

This, replied Soliman, is one of the principal Motives of my Letter: for I do
not discover to the Kister the secret of so dangerous a Passion. I referr that
till we come to discourse together: But I send to him only to do me those
Kindnesses, which I can only expect from his Industry in favoring my desires.
He is Master of the Serraglio; he shall keep Sarai with ye, no doubt of it;
and he shall do nothing without consulting her. And to the end, that by knowing
what I have written, you may the better be able to understand how to govern
your Affairs, here is a Copy of it. Abra took the Copy, and calling Sarai, read
the following Lines.

Soliman Seraskier to the Illustrious Isouf Kisler Agasi.
YOur Mightiness will receive by the Tartarian Merchant Mursa Letters of
Recommendation, to the end the Present which he designs to his Highness of the
Noble and Virtuous Slave Abra-Mule, may be the more graciously accepted. You
have always found me to be your Friend; and I know the Reasons of your being
supported by the Favor of the Sultaness Asseki, which obliges me, as a
Confident, to admonish you not to be too forward in exposing this new Commer to
the Sultan's view till I return to Adrianople, at what time I will inform you
of every thing. In the mean time fail not to let Sarai continue with her; to
the end she may be serviceable to you, in calming Abra's impatience to arrive
at that Honor to which Karah Ibrahim's Cabal designs her. The Advice is of
great Importance, therefore despise it not.


After the reading of this Letter, Soliman instructed Abra and Sarai, in all
the secret Intreagues of the Serraglio, and how it behooved 'em to manage their
Affairs; so that they might be able to second whatever he sent to the Kisler.
After this, two the Lovers fell into private discourse, wherein they omitted
nothing to give each other reciprocal Marks of their most tender and ardent
Passion. At length the time which the Dervis usually employ with their sick
Patients being almost spent, and the fatal Moment of Separation approaching,
Abra took out of a little Trunk three of her own Portraitures, and requested
Soliman to make choice of one. He took that which he thought most like her, and
at the same time Abra threw the other two into the fire.

What d' ye do, Madam, cried Soliman, why d' ye so profusely destroy the
Images of Natures Masterpiece. In regard I have but one Heart, replied Abra,
and that never any Person in the World shall enjoy it but your self, for whom
would you have me preserve those other Portraitures? I offer 'em up to that
which I give you, and which I beg you to keep; as I sacrifice all the rest of
the Earth to the only Love I have for Soliman.

The Seraskier admired the Delicacy of Abra's Heart, and kissing the Hand from
which he received the Portraiture, how sweet a thing it is, Madam, said he, how
sweet a thing it is to be beloved after so tender and delicate a manner. I
accept this precious pledge of your Love, I will preserve it till Death, and it
shall be a perpetual Testimony of my Constancy. After this the Seraskier took
leave of Abra, who could not restrain her Tears, and at the same time taking
his Head between her Arms, and pressing it close to her Bosom, she gave him a
kiss upon the Forehead, and then permitted him to take the same liberty upon
each hand. Which done, Soliman rose up, and after he had prevailed with Sarai
to accept a magnificent present in Jewels, he left the Chamber with the same
Ceremony as he entered in, Mursa attending him with a great Train to the Gate
of the Castle. Abra recovered her Health; the Reputation of this Dervis was
spread abroad, and Soliman quitting his Religious Habit, took Post again, and
returned to the Army.

Mursa extremely satisfied with the pretended Miracle of the Alchoran, which
redoubled his Superstition, departed the next morning, proceeding prosperously
in his journey, while Abra comforted her self in Sarai's Bosom, with reading
the Letters ^^ich she received from time to time directed to Zaid, and spending
some nights in returning answers to 'em.

They crossed Transylvania, traveling easy Journeys, and Michael Abaffi
defraying their charges all along; and being arriy'd at Belgrade, at a time
when Karah Ibrahim was there, obtained Mursa from him, whatever Letters of
Recommendation he desired. At length he got to Adrianople, where the Sultan had
been since the Spring, that he might be never at hand to issue forth his orders
for the motion of his Troops, and that he might be the more punctually informed
of every thing that fell out.

Sarai, whose Diligence inclined her to spare for nothing, and who understood,
that in the Serraglio all things were moved by the Springs of many, was no
sooner arrived there, but she won the heart of the Kislers first Dragoman, or
Interpreter, and caused Soliman's Letter to be delivered to that powerful
Eunuch, before Mursa had made any progresses toward his obtaining Audience. The
Kisler being thus anticipated, kept the Tartar above two Months before he
suffered Abra to be introduced into the Serraglio; besides, that he found a way
to bring her in undrest, and among a Huddle of eight or ten others which
various Basha's had sent, and made choice of a day that the Sultan was vexed and
out of humor upon the receipt of some ill News; so that Mohomet being taken up
with the troublesome Consultations, wherein the taking of Neuhansal had engaged
the whole Divan, together with the raising of the Siege of Gran, which the
Turks had fruitlessly attempted, and the loss of a Battle fought within two
Leagues of that place, and being more over continually besieged by the
Sultaness Asseki, and Abra never seeking to expose her self, it was no
difficult thing for the Kisler to put her into an Appartment out of the way,
and keep her out of Mahomet's Eye.

But if Abra avoided the sight, and consequently the love of the Sultan, till
the end of the Campaign, she found her self exposed to another Amor, which
though at first it appeared less dangerous, yet the Consequences of it were
most terribly fatal.

Mahomet kept his Brothers under a kind of Confinement, where nevertheless they
had freedom enough. He forced 'em to attend him in all his Progresses, and they
were then in the Serraglio at Adrianople served as Princes in their several
Appartments; and the Sultan who would not deprive 'em of their Pleasures, but
was unwilling however they should have any Children, took care that they should
not be suffered to come at any Women, but such as were past Child bearing; yet
that they should provide for 'em the handsomest that could be found out at
those years.

Prince Soliman, who, as I have said, was a handsome person, notwithstanding he
seemed so addicted to the study of the Alchoran, was of an amorous Complexion,
and was not satisfied with the superannuated Mistresses with which they
endeavored to amuse him. He was wily, and full of dissimulation, and having
acquired a perfect confidence with an Elderly Woman, called Marama, who was
imposed upon him for one of his Bed-fellows, he had so much influence over her,
as to engage her to supply him by dextrous Intreagues, with younger pastimes
then those to which he was forced to confine himself, and she had already
succeeded in several Negotiations that required a most nice conduct.

She had her Appartiment in the same Gallery where Abra had hers; and in regard
she was extremely Insinuating, full of Flattery, together with an Anticipating
and frolic Wit, she soon struck in with the young Muscovite, and fastened her
self to her in a strict familiarity, which their near Neighborhood allowed of,
and which the Kisler favored, to the end she might be taken up with
divertisements, that might hinder her from thinking of the Sultan.

Marama had no sooner knit the knot of this familiarity, but having found out
that Abra had no ambitious design of making her self known to the Sultan, it
came into her Head to intregue her with Soliman. To which purpose she made such
a lively Description of the young Muscovite to the youthful Prince, that
without any trouble she infused into him a violent desire to see her; and on
the other side, she made use of all her Wit in magnifying to Abra the merits of
Soliman.

Now to create an opportunity for the Prince to satisfy his Eyes with the
sight of an Object which she had painted to him adorned with so many
Accomplishments, she obtained leave of the Kisler to give a Collation to five
or six of her Friends in the Sultaness's Valides private Garden, and she so
ordered her Business, as to engage Abra to be one of her Guests.

The Collation was served up at the end of an Alley that was overlooked by a
Cross-bar'd window of Soliman's appartiment, who from thence had a full view of
the Muscovite, whom he found infinitely more beautiful then Marama had set her
forth to be; and of a sudden fell so violently in love with her, that his dear
confident coming in the Evening to visit him, he shut himself up with her, and
closely embracing her, I am a dead Man, my dear Marama, said he, if you afford
not some asswagement to that love which you have kindled, and which can only be
expected from your address and diligence.

This Relief replied Marama, depends not upon me; I have found the way to bless
your Eyes with an Object that most deserves the love of the greatest Prince in
the World. This is but the first step; it behooves me now to sound her Heart,
which seems to me but very indifferent as to all sorts of Pleasures, and less
inclined to love then any other Passion. But the main difficulty is for you to
see her, and speak to her. However leave that to Time and my Diligence, and be
assured that I shall omit nothing to bring it to pass.

This Promise something quieted Soliman's first Disturbances; he relied upon
Marama's cunning, and in the mean time not believing that a Woman of the
Serraglio could hold out against the Love of an Ottoman Prince, He flattered
his Passion with that success which was at a great distance from him.

In the mean time Marama united her self more closely to the young Muscovite,
and by her Assiduities she also insinuated her self into Sarai's Confidence,
and at length she carried her self so pliant, that Abra who sought only for
Pastimes to conceal and assuage her Anxieties, could not live without her
company.

When she found her self so well settled in a heart which she thought void of
Love, she attempted to infuse that Passion by a general discourse of the
pleasures that attended the Union of two Persons in a charming Affection. Abra
listened to her, and seemed to give Credit to her discourse, because that all
she said to her flattered her Inclinations for the Seraskier: And Marama, who
was persuaded she had made some Impression upon her Soul, imagined that nothing
remained for her to do, but only by some Artifice to get Soliman and Abra
together, which she thought might be easily brought to pass.

The body of the Building wherein were the Appartiments of Abra, Marama, and a
great number of other Women, was directly opposite to that wherein the Princes
were lodged; and to prevent their Communication, and seeing one another, a very
thick and high Wall divided the Court, by which they were separated.

The body of the Building wherein were the Appartiments of Abra, Marama, and a
great number of other Women, was directly opposite to that wherein the Princes
were lodged; and to prevent their Communication, and seeing one another, a very
thick and high Wall divided the Court, by which they were separated.

Amurath, who built those two Structures, or Piles of Lodgings, to be himself
in the one with the favorite Sultaness, and to lodge the most beautiful Women
of his Serraglio in the other, had contrived a private little Gallery under
Ground, whereby he might pass from one Building to the other, and avoid the
jealous Eyes of the Sultaness when he had a mind to visit his other Women. The
Entrance into that Gallery jutted upon the Appartment possessed by Prince
Soliman, and led to Marama's Cabinet; but two Doors a long time since made up
prohibited the use of it.

To attempt the opening of a place in the Serraglio closed up, was a Crime
sufficient to awaken Mahomet's jealousy, and to hazard Soliman's life: But in
regard it was the only way that Marama could think of, she furnished her self
with Irons, and false Keys, requisite to make a Breach, and when all things
were ready prepared, and concerted with Soliman, she engaged Abra to come to
her Chamber, and while her Slaves kept Sarai in a pleasing Chat, she led her
alone into her Cabinet.

Soliman got through, and had hid himself behind the hanging that hung before
the Outlet of the Gallery: At what time Marama having seated Abra upon a heap
of Cushions covered over with a Carpet, entertained her with high Applauses of
the mavelous luster of her Beauty, the brightness of her Eyes, the whiteness
of her Skin, and all her other Charms; and after that, shifting her Discourse,
she fell to talk of Prince Soliman, and cried up his Merits to the Skies;
insomuch that the portraiture that she gave of him seeming to have a fair
resemblance of the Air, the lovely Mien, and Lineaments of the Seraskier, the
poor betrayed Lady, out of an innocent openness of heart, gave her self the
liberty to signify, that if the sight of the Prince had not been forbidden by
the strict Rules of the Serraglio, her Curiosity might have been prevailed upon
to see him.

Upon those words, Soliman, who thought he had met with the Minute proper to
make his Appearance, bolted of a sudden from behind the Hanging, and falling
upon one Knee at Abra's feet, with his Eyes fixed upon hers, which she cast
toward the ground in a deep surprise, that rendered her Immovable, Madam, said
he, behold a Prince that burned with impatience to behold the most wonderful of
all perfections that ever Nature produced, and who is come to prostrate his
Heart at your feet, and put his Life in your hands.

Abra who could not recover her self from her Astonishment, durst not cast an
Eye upon Soliman; but upon Marama she threw a look that seemed at once both to
reproach her Treachery, and bemoan the trouble into which she had plunged her.
A Ruddiness more then ordinary spread it self upon her Cheeks, her whole Body
trembled, and not knowing what course to take under a Circumstance so little
expected, she stood in a profound silence, when Soliman resuming his first
Addresses, I see, Madam, said he, I see, that the Happiness I have had, for the
sight of you, to surmount those Obstacles that would have appeared invincible
to any other Love but that which I have for your self, offends ye; but impute
to the power of your Charms, and the tenderness of my heart, this Crime that
has affrighted ye, and which you will pardon me, when you consider that no man
living can behold those Eyes without adoring 'em.

Abra, who during this disorder, felt her anger augment as her astonishment
began to quit her, cast a smart look upon Soliman, and at the same time turning
again her Eyes away from him, Sir, said she, did you only expose my life by an
Enterprise so dangerous both for you and Marama, you should not have seen me
tremble. But Sir, what is it you aim at by an Undertaking no less fruitless then
rash and indiscreet? I am not ignorant of the full extent of your Merit, and I
pay it the real homage of my Esteem: But if you have forced those Obstacles
that forbad you the sight of me, there yet remains others far more invincible,
that forbid my heart to entertain a Passion that must never enter there.

Oh, Madam, were the Sultan so happy as to have touched your heart, I might
justly fear the meeting with an invincible Obstacle to my Love; but since I
know that he has never cast his Eyes upon you, and that you your self are
careful to avoid his sight, what Obstacle can the Love of a Prince, who adores
ye, meet with in a heart so free as yours? A Prince, who would sacrifice the
whole Earth to the satisfaction of infusing into your Soul the smallest Passion
for him.

Prince, replied Abra, whatever liberty Mahomet gives my heart, you will not
find it less insensible then if he had the sole possession of it. Stifle
therefore a Love that may precipitate ye into a thousand dismal
Inconveniences, I am not ignorant of the danger to which, at this Instant, you
have exposed your self; nor has the surprise into which you have put me; or my
indignation to see my self thus betrayed by Marama so clouded my Reason, as not
to consider what I have to do. I esteem and respect ye, Sir, too much to deny
ye my silence for the security of your head. Be gone Sir, and do not ruin your
self for the sake of an Amor, where there is no probability of success.

You may, Madam, never have any Affection for me, but I can never cease to have
a Love for you. If my pure Flames offend ye, here is my head, deliver it up to
my Brother to punish the Presumption of my Adoration.

Sir, said Abra, a heart like mine, never seeks Revenge, and the Injuries done
by Love are always excusable, nor will I revenge my self of that which yours
has done me, but in laboring to extinguish it: I also pardon Marama's
Treachery, for the sake of her friendship for you. Require of my heart all the
Esteem that is due to a Prince of extraordinary Merit: It Is your due, and I pay
it freely. But require not a Love from a heart that is not at Liberty, and
which it would be therefore in vain to importune.

Though this same mildness that Abra showed was only an effect of her Prudence
and Discretion, yet Soliman, who easily flattered himself in his pleasures,
vainly imagined that the reason why she so willingly consented by her silence
to conceal an Attempt so criminal, was only because his Love and his Character
had made the first Impressions in her heart; and judging that he had done
enough for the first meeting, in having shown himself in person, and declared
his Love, he wittily turned the Discourse upon other things more general, and
after he had stayed sometime in the Cabinet, he took his leave.

So soon as he was gone, Marama, who had the same thoughts as he, presently
began to put Abra upon a new Discourse of the Prince's love, imagining that she
would open her Mind with more freedom to her: But she was soon convinced, by
the Reproaches of her Infidelity, and the smart Answers which she made her,
that that there was nothing less in her heart then those Inclinations wherewith
Soliman flattered himself; and that if she intended to make any farther
progresses toward the vanquishing her Indifferency, or to preserve the
familiarity she had with her, it behooved her either not to say a word more of
that Amor, or else to make use of Artifices more nice and delicate.

While this Intreague, which in the Conclussion proved so fatal to Mahomet was
taking root in the Serraglio, the end of an Unsuccessful Campaign redoubled the
Sultan's Anxieties.

Prince Charles of Lorrain had the year before undertaken the siege of Buda;
but the jealousy of his Enemies which he had in the Emperor's Council, and who
envied those Honors which eclipsed their own, caused the Miscarriage of that
Enterprise, by maliciously keeping from him those Supplies which were most
necessary for the Attacque of so important a Place, and the subsistence of his
Men. So that wanting every thing, and not being able to hinder Cheitan Basha,
Serakeire of the Armies in Hungary from releiving it, he was forced to raise
his siege.

Enraged at the Success of his Enemies Malice, the next year he took more
certain Measures, to the end he might not be exposed to the same
Inconveniences, and opened a Glorious Campaign with the siege of Neuhansel.

The Vizir Karah Ibrahim, who rather chose to employ the Valor of other men,
then to act himself, and who from Belgrade issued forth all his Orders to all
the Armies, in hopes to make a Diversion, laid siege to Gran. But in regard the
Turks found more resistance there then they expected, after they had wasted
twelve days in vain they raised their siege, and joined all their Forces under
Cheitan Serakier, to oppose Prince Charles, who without discontinuing the siege
Newhansel, marched directly with the Body of his Army to decide the destiny of
the Campaign by the fate of a Battle.

The Armies came in view of each other within three Leagues of Gran, there
being nothing between 'em but a Morass, which could not be crossed but through
narrow Passes at a distance one from the other; besides that the Cheitan had
sixty thousand Men; so that Prince Charles, who had not above forty five,
thought it would be a rash attempt to pass the Morass in view of the Enemy, and
within the reach of their shot, to attacque 'em in their Entrenchemnt. He
therefore tried whether he could engage 'em to pass it first themselves, which
it was not difficult to do by two Stratagemes. The one by spreading a false
report, that his Army was reduced to forty thousand Men; and the other, by
faining a precipitate and false retreat.

This double Stratagem succeeded to a wonder: for the Turks observing the
motion of that faign'd retreat, passed the Morass in the night time. But then
Prince Charles who marched slowly, understanding they were got over, faced
about, Embattell'd his Army, and having given the left wing to the Elector of
Bavaria, and taking the right himself, advanced toward the Enemy.

The Onset was Vigorous on the Turks side, who thought they had been marching
to a Victory, not to a Combat. They charged the two Wings three times, and the
Principal weight of their Strength falling upon the Right Wing where the
Princes of Conti and Roche sur Yon fought as Volunteers at the Head of
Lanthiers's Squadron, the immovable steadiness of these Princes rendered
ineffectual the Enemie's Efforts, and their undaunted Valor contributed not a
little to the winning of the Battle.

The sight was long and Obstinate on the Turks side, who gave ground, and
rallied as often as they were broken, and returning to the Charge, endeavored
still to Flank the right Wing, where lay the main strength of the Battle; but
at length the Elector of Bavaria, after he had first broken and dispersed all
that stood before him, fell with his left Wing upon the Turks, and put 'em into
such a general Confusion, that being every where Broken they betook themselves
to flight, and repassed the Morass, beyond which they were still pursued with
the Loss of Ten thousand men, and not daring to stay in their Entrenchments,
never thought themselves safe till they were got under the Cannon of Buda.

After this great Victory, Newhansel was taken by Storm, and the Emperor
carried his Victorious Arms as far as the Drove, ruining the Bridge of Esseck,
and by taking a good Number of other Places, put the Divan into such a
Consternation, that upon the false Information of Karah Ibrahim, whose ill
Conduct and Cowardice had not a little contributed to the Misfortunes of this
Campaign, and who was a Mortal Enemy to the famous Count Tekeli, they blindly
took a Resolution to seize upon that Count at Waradin; and to have him carried
laden with Fetters to Adrianople. Which completed the Ruin of the Turks
affairs in Hungary.

Karah Ibrahim soon after attended upon the Sultan, and finding him incensed at
the Misfortunes of the Campaign, that he might turn the Effects of his Anger
upon some other Head, so dexterously laid the Cause of all the Summers ill
success upon the ill Conduct of the Seraskier Cheitan, that Mahomet, who was
naturally ungrateful, forgetting the Signal Services which he had done him both
in Poland, and the Relief of Buda, ordered him to lose his head, which was
publicly put in Execution.

By his Death the Employment of Seraskier of the Hungarian Armies became
Vacant; and for the supplying it, the Sultan cast his Eyes upon the Seraskier
Soliman, whom we left upon the Frontiers of Poland, and who had promised the
fair Abra, that after the end of the Campaign he would be at Adrianople.

He had performed his Duty with so much conduct and valor, that all the
Efforts of the Polanders proved abortive, and that notwithstanding all their
Opposition, he had supplied Caminiec with a considerable Convoy. But
notwithstanding his Assiduity in the performance of his Duty and his Vigilance,
which carried him where ever his Presence might be useful, he took his times,
by Sarai's Address, and the assistance of some Eunuchs of the Serraglio, whom
she had won to her side, to let the fair Muscovite frequently hear from him,
while on the other side he received from her no less obliging Marks of her
fidelity.

At length, as soon as possibly he could, he arrived at Adrianople, and was
received by the Sultan, as one who had the greatest share in his favor, and
who alone of all his Generals during the Campaign had prevented the Misfortunes
of ill Success.

So soon as he alighted he had a long and private conference with the Sultan,
touching the General State of Affairs, and in regard he was a particular Friend
of Count Tekeli's, he visibly made appear the false Steps which they had made,
who counseled his Arrest; and from this Accident passing to the Grand Visir's
Conduct, who was the Author of that pernicious Advice, he so sensibly made out
all his Mistakes, that Mahomet, in whose favor that Minister began already to
totter, was absolutely determined to degrade him, and at the same time to
satisfy the favorable Inclinations which he had always had for Soliman; so
that the Seal of the Empire was soon after taken from Karah Ibrahim, and given
to Soliman, who was declared Grand Visir.

Yet did he not rejoice at his Exaltation so much for any other reason, as that
he now hoped that Mahomet's favor would not refuse him the happiness which he
far more desired; seeing that if the Sultans did not sometimes disdain to give
their own Daughters to their Grand Visirs, he might well obtain a Stranger
taken out of the Serraglio. But he thought it not convenient to be too hasty,
before he had taken his right measures; he considered with himself that in the
New dignity which he held, and which would fasten the Kisler Agasi more closely
to his Fortunes, he might discover to him his love for Abra, and that it
behooved him to make, use of the Industry and Assistance of that Eunuch, as well
as his own Credit to obtain the main Aim of his Intentions, and to give the
Sultan some notice of it before hand, so soon as an Opportunity offered.

Abra received the News at once both of the Arrival of her dear Soliman, and of
his Advancement to the chief Dignity in the Empire, and Sarai it was who
brought her the Intelligence into her Cabinet.

Now though she had bin informed that he would be in a short time at Adrianople,
nevertheless because the reiterated Orders of the Sultan had precipitated his
Journey, he prevented the time which he had perfix'd, and this was that which
made her more sensible of the joyful news which she received from her dear
Confident. She was in hopes she should have heard from him the same day; but he
could not withdraw himself from the Importunate Throngs that crowded to load
him with their Homages; nor could he quit the Urgency of those pressing Orders
wherein he spent the rest of the day, and good part of the night.

At length being with a world of trouble disengaged from so many slaves, the
Adorers of his Fortune, about midnight he detained the Kisler Agasi with him,
and took him into his private Cabinet, under pretense of most Important Orders
which he had to impart to him.

After they had paid to each other what was due to a long and reciprocal
Friendship, the Kisler gave Soliman an Account of the Artifices which he had
been forced to make use of, to hinder Mahomet from the sight of Abra, and the
precautions which he used every day, to make the best of the warning he had
given him in his Letter, but that things could not long remain in the same
posture, unless recourse were had to other ways more hazardous. For that within
a few days the Sultanesses Festival was to be kept, and that day all the Women
of the Serraglio appeared in the private Mosquee, with the Habits and Ornaments
which the Sultan ordered to be distributed among 'em.

This news was no way pleasing to the Visir, however it did not put him quite
out of those hopes wherewith he flattered himself; so that at length; after
repeated Expressions of the Syncerity of his Affection, he opened his Heart to
the Kisler, told him he was passionately in love with Abra, and that she
corresponded with his Affection.

The Kisler, surpised at the acknowledgement of so bold a Passion, remained
for some time without answering and gave the Visir to understand, that the
Entrusting him with such a Secret had put him into a strange Consternation.
Nevertheless, after he had considered a while, and recovering himself of a
sudden, Sir, said he, the more dangerous the Trial is upon which you put my
Friendship, the more I am assured of yours. You are not ignorant to what a
dreadful danger you expose me, but since we have begun, it behooves us to make
an end. Should I go about to repair the Crime I am guilty of in the eye of the
Sultan, I should become an Offender in respect of my Friend, and yet not cease
to be the same in respect of my Sovereign. And therefore depend upon my
Fidelity, as I depend upon your prudence.

Upon those words the Visir embraced the Kisler, and imparted to him his design
to obtain Abra, by begging her of the Sultan. Ah, Sir, said the Kisler, would
you ruin your self and me too? The Sultans will sooner part with their own
Daughters, then the meanest slave in the Sarraglio; because their Daughters are
Burdens to 'em, which they would willingly be rid of, and for that by
bestowing 'em upon their wealthy Ministers, they sell 'em the Honor of that
Alliance, or make use of it as a snare to sacrifice 'em to their Avarice. But
Mahomet, jealous of every Woman that he keeps in his Serraglio, would look upon
the Gift of one of his Woman, as a most sensible loss, and therefore since Abra
has an Affection for ye, and will not refuse to correspond'd with our
Contrivances, we must seek which way to take some safer methods. After this
they proposed to themselves several intreagues, but came to no resolution, only
referring all things to time, to chance, and their own diligence, for the
carrying on so nice an Enterprise, the Kisler retired. But the Visir could not
think of taking any repose till he had writ to his dearest Abra; when at the
very time that he was going about it, an Eunuch brought him a Billet, which
after he had opened it, he found to be Sarai's Hand, who only wrote what her
Mistress dictated, and read the following lines.

The Loyal One to the Only One.
I know ye to be near me, and laden with the Favors of Fortune; this might be
sufficient to satisfy the Transports of my Joy, did not my Love desire
something else. When the distance of whole Provinces separated us, 'twas less
cruel to me to endure your absence, but the nearer you are, the more painful is
it to me, to find my self deprived of the pleasure of your Presence. I have
heard no news of you: Ambition has robbed my Love of one whole day: It Is too
too long; but I expect ye, that I may seal your Pardon. Sarai, who better then
my self understands the Condition of my Heart, will give you an Account of it;
and you will then find that you have no reason to complain, not so much as of
one of all those Minutes which I wast remotely distant from you. If you love
me, do something that is impossible, to come and see the

Loyal One.


Notwithstanding the Visir was overjoyed upon the receipt of this Letter from
Abra, yet was he no less perplexed to find out a way to get into her
Appartiment, but in regard he put his whole confidence in the Address and
Friendship of the Kisler Agasi, he flattered himself that he should accomplish
his design; and with these hopes, he took his Pen, and returned the following
Answer, with which he entrusted the same Eunuch,

THE Favors I have received from Fortune, have not prevailed upon my Heart to
lose a moment of my wanted exactness in thinking upon you. They would have been
more acceptable to me, if the load of troublesome Affairs would have suffered me
to satisfy the impatience of my Love. The Honor which the Sultan has
conferred upon me, pleases me no otherwise then as it flatters my hopes. I have
seen my Friend; there is nothing which I have not attempted to fulfill your
Orders. Love me, think upon me, and live for my sake, as for your sake lives the

Only One.


But while Mahomet's Favor raised the Visir to the highest pinnacle of Fortune,
and that Soliman met in Abra's Constancy, with all that his Love could wish for
from a Heart entirely devoted to him, Prince Soliman still flattered himself
that by Marama's Intreagues he should at length gain the heart of the young
Muscovite.

To which purpose that crafty Female-friend, having concerted with the Prince
what Methods to take, lived with Abra under the greatest circumspection
imaginable; and ever since the Enterview in her Cabinet, which had not the
success which she expected, she observed her with a wonderful attention; and in
regard she had a peircing wit, and a smooth insinuating way to dive into the
most hidden Folds of the heart; she perceived that the young Muscovite was not
without some inward disquiet, and rightly judged, that such disquiet could not
proceed from any other occasion then Love.

These Thoughts she imputed to Prince Soliman, and in regard Mistrust is
inseparable from Love, and that the twitches of Jealousy do but serve to
inflame a Heart the more, he found himself, by this Information, jealous
without an Object, and more enamored then he was before; and in the midst of
these Agitations that inspired his Jealousy, he would needs put Pen to Paper,
and accordingly wrote the following Billet.

Prince Soliman to the Divine Abra.
THE fear of offending ye, more powerful over my Heart, then that of losing my
Life, has hindered me from seeking any farther Opportunity to pay you a second
Visit. You will not Love me, you say, but your Insensibility will not always
oblige me not to Love you. I repeat it then, divine Abra, that I adore ye, but
with a Passion so lively, and so violent, that it is impossible your Heart
should be insenble of it, were it free from all other Engagement. If a Rival be
the Obstacle you meant, it shall not be so invincible as you say it is, since
there is no Love but what must give way to that, which he till death will have
for ye, who writes himself

Prince Soliman.


Marama undertook the delivery of this Letter, and judging well that Abra would
refuse to receive it from her hands, she thought it the best way to call to her
assistance Natural Curiosity. And therefore she made her a visit on purpose,
and in the midst of a world of pleasant and divertising discourse, having found
a way to slide the Billet under Abra's Toylet, so soon as she had done she
withdrew, and left her to her self in hopes that the next day, by the effect of
that Letter she might read in her Countenance whether her heart were engaged or
no.

In the mean time the Visir went to the Kisler, and showed him Abra's Letter;
and pressed him with so much earnestness to procure him admittance in her
Appartiment, of which he was the Absolute Master, that at length in despite of
all the Hazar'd which the Eunuch ran, after he had considered the most proper
ways to put in Execution so perilous an Attempt, seeing the Visir had but
little Beard, he carried him into his Cabinet, ordered him to rubb his face and
hands with Ethiopian Blacking, and putting him in an Eunuchs Habit, he feigned
to make a private Visit in the Women's Appartiments, and to that purpose
demanded all the Lamps in the Galleries to be put out, and with a Dark-Lanthorn
accompanied only with the Visir in disguize, he made as if he looked into other
Appartiments in his way, and at length chopped into Abra's, who was just going to
undress herself.

Though Abra might have some apprehension of the Truth, yet seeing the Kisler
with a black Eunuch enter at such an unseasonable hour of the Night, her
surprise not permitting her to recollect who the Black Eunuch should be, she
thought at first that the Chief Minister of the Sultan's Pleasures had been
come by his Order to fetch her away, and expose her to his Passion; so that in
the sudden Tumult which that surprise had raised in her heart, of which she
was not then the Mistress, she swoonded away in Sarai's Arms.

They laid her upon the Bed; and the Kisler commanding the rest of the Slaves
to quit the Room, went to work together with the Visir to recover her out of
her fainting fit, when Sarai, who held Abra's Head, and took the Visir for one
of Kisler's Eunuchs, bid him fetch a Gold Bottle of Cordial water, that stood
upon the Dressing Table; which the Visir readily did, and at the same time
seeing a Billet lying by the Bottle, slipped it into his Bosom. After this Abra
recovered her Spirits, and the Kisler understanding the Reason of her swooning
gave her to understand in two words how much she was deceived; and then
discovering to her who the person was in a habit that so ill became him, he
retired with Sarai, to the farther end of the Room, that the two Lovers might
have the more liberty to entertain each other.

How did they power forth their Hearts to one another! What Reciprocal
Tendernesses! What Assurances of Fidelity! What Tortures of Minds to contrive
which way to arrive at that happy Union which equally they Both desired. At
length after a thousand Oaths and Protestations to love each other till death,
and Measures taken to prevent her appearing at the Sultanesse's Feast, the
Kisler admonished 'em, that without extraordinary danger they could not stay
any longer.

The Visir delayed as long as possibly he could the cruel moment of their
Separation, but at length taking both Abra's hands, and fixing his Lips upon
'em he took his leave of her and departed. The Kisler carried him back to his
Lodging, he quitted his Disguise, embraced the Kisler, and retired to his own
Home.

But under what a strange surprise was the astonished Lover, when opening the
Billet which he found upon Abra's Toylet, he found that it came from Prince
Soliman; that he was not only in love with Abra, but that he had seen her, that
he had wrought himself into such a Confidence with her as to send her Letters,
and that which seemed more Cruel to him was, that Abra had told him no thing of
it; so that her Silence appeared to him a Mystery that created in him a most
furious Jealousy.

He read the Letter over and over again, and though it plainly showed him that
Abra had never Corresponded with his Rival's Passion, nevertheless, in regard
the Prince had an outward Merit which was taking, that it was certain he had
seen her, he attributed that which was only an effect of prudence to the
wavering of a shaken Heart.

Is this, said he, in a terrible Agony of mind, is this the fidelity which the
Ungrateful has sworn to me with so many Oaths! If her heart be so impenetrable
to the Passion of this Prince, why did she not let me know it! At those words,
whatever the fury of jealousy could suggest to a mistrustful Love, and which
believed it self to be offended crowded into his thoughts: And he was about to
have ruined his Rival by revealing his attempt to the Sultan. But besides that
it was his Interest to conceal Abra from him, he had a heart too Great and
Generous to do any thing that was base and treacherous. To Impart it to the
Kisler, was to create a most terrible Confusion in the Serraglio, and in all
the Ottoman Family; and to dissemble his Resentment with Abra, was to favor
the Projects and Contrivances of his Rival; to make known his jealousy to her,
was to charge her with a piece of Infidelity of which perhaps she might not be
guilty; and to accuse himself of a Curiosity, no no less indiscreet then
Inconsiderate. At last all these Irresolutions ended in sending to the Kisler
to let Sarai have the Liberiy to wait upon him.

Marama, who had a vigilant eye upon every thing that past in the Muscovites
Appartiment, knew that the Kisler had been there, and not doubting but it was
to prepare her to see the Sultan, she was alarmed for the Princes sake, and
restless to know the fate of her Billet she went the next morning to Abra's
Appartiment. At what time the secret which she imparted to her of the Kisler's
Visit, confirmed her the more in her first Conjectures; and for her better
satisfaction, she cunningly dropped into a discourse about Prince Soliman, but
finding that Abra returned her no Answer, by which she could apprehend that she
had ever seen his Letter, she presently began to think, that it might have lit
into the Kisler's hands.

The Dread of this, constrained her to open her mind to Abra, and frankly to
ask her whither she had seen what Soliman had wrote to her. Abra, surpised,
and falling into the same Dread, blushed and looked pale, both at the same time;
and having assured Marama that she never saw any thing, the Billet was sought
for up and down to no purpose, so that the Prince's Witty Procuress being
quite overcome with her fears and Grief could not refrain from sending forth a
loud Cry, and looking upon Abra with an Eye of Consternation, Ah, Madam said
she, Prince Soliman is sacrificed to Mahomet's fury, the Kisler, of whom you
say not a word to me, and who came that night to your Appartiment to prepare
you for the Passion of his Master, has the Letter without doubt, if you conceal
your self from my Syncerity, you are agreed with the Sultan, and Soliman is
ruined; but if the Kisler has got the Letter, and you know nothing of it, you
are also ruined as well as the Prince.

You do me wrong, said Abra, I am not guilty of betraying the Prince, since you
know that my silence buried the dangerous attempt he made to see me. As for the
Kisler's visit, It hought my self not bound to give any Body an account of it;
I have no Correspondence with the Sultan; and therefore if I am ruined, and the
Prince too, by the surprise of his Letter, he must impute it to the imprudence
of the Person that ventured it. But let happen what will, you will do me a
kindness, to dissuade the Prince to desist the putting of me to any farther
trouble to no purpose.

Abra and Marama were under equal Agitatinos of mind, but the one and the other
being persuaded that the Letter had lit into the Kisler's hands, they expected
some terrible disorder about it. The rest of their Discourse was no way
divertizing; and the Passion she saw Abra in, besides those other Anxieties
that were plainly perceptible in her Visage, caused the other presently to
imagine, that since the Kisler Agasi's Visit was not upon the Sultan's Account,
he was setting some other Important Engine of Love at Work, which rendered Abra
so inaccessible to the Prince.

She retired therefore, but with a Resolution to watch all Abra's Motions so
narrowly, that it should be impossible for her not to discover the
Correspondence. Abra, on the other side, having called Sarai to her, gave her a
full account of all her grievances; she informed her of Prince Soliman's
Passion which her prudence had concealed from her, and laid open to her her
Disquiet for the loss of the Billet. But at the same time that these discourses
put 'em into most dreadful Agonies, their terrors were yet more augmented by
the Arrival of a Black Eunuch, who brought Sarai an Order from the Kisler, to
attend him at his Appartiment.

This was only to send her privately to the Visir, who stayed for her, and no
sooner saw her, but casting a look full of Fire and Indignation upon her; Very
well Sarai, said he, you are then in a confederacy with Abra to betray me.
Prince Soliman is in Love with her, he Visits her, he writes to her, and you
from whom I expect an Account of all these things, you see me at her
Appartiment, and conceal this Infidelity from me.

Sarai answered the Visir with all the prudence and Modesty that such a nice
Justification required: But when Sarai, going about to clear Abra, assured him,
that our of her singular discretion, she never had made known to her the
Addresses of Prince Soliman, till she came to be disturbed for the loss of the
Billet. How! cruel Sarai, said the Visir, what is that thou tell me? Did
Abra conceal from thee the Prince's love? Had not that Love made some
Impression in her heart, would she have ever concealed it from thee? Abra does
not yet perhaps correspond with the Prince's Affection, but who can assure me
she will not yield at last, since she is so willing to carry it on at the
beginning; who shall assure me that her heart does not already begin to waver,
since her Silence tells my jealousy what ever I can prognosticate of most
Funest and fatal to me?

Sarai lest nothing omitted that lay in her power to calm a mind that she saw
turmoyl'd with all that the most restless Suspicions, and the most piercing
Pains have in 'em of tumultuous and tempestuous. However 'twas impossible, upon
the first sight, to reduce him to a perfect Tranquillity. Nevertheless she left
him in a Condition, so as to wish that he might be absolutely convinced of
Abra's Innocence: He told her, 'twas he himself who had lit upon the Letter,
that the Kisler knew nothing of it; and that he was so generous, that though he
were betrayed, he would not for the satisfaction of his Revenge, make a base
and treacherous use of what his Curiosity, perhaps too Indiscreet, had put into
his hands.

Abra was under Mortal fears, when Sarai returned and came to give her an
Account of what the Visir had said. But she was almost at her wits end that he
had lit upon Soliman's Letter. So that whatever danger would have befallen the
Prince or Her, had the Kisler found the Letter, she would have been more
contented rather to have perished, then to have given her Lover any Ground for
those Suspicions he had of her.

Her Grief and Vexation for this Accident caused such a Commotion in her Veins,
as cast her into a Violent fever; so that she took her Bed, nor would she
suffer Sarai to stir from the Bed side, to the end she might be some
Consolation of her Pains, by sharing with her in her Tears.

In the mean time night was come; and Marama with a wonderful Exactness had a
watchful Eye upon every thing that passed in the Muscovites Appartiment, and in
regar'd she durst not confide in any Body but herself, but yet avoided all
discovery, she took the Habit of one of her Slaves, and sat upon a Bench not
above two or three Paces from Abra's Door.

The Lamps were not as yet lighted in the Galleries of the Serraglio, and it
began already to be so dark, that there was no distinguishing colors, when she
saw an Eunuch, who stopping about ten paces from her, clapped with one of his
hands upon the other. Marama, who made no question but this was some concerted
Signal, did the same; and at the same time the Eunuch coming up to her, Who Is
there, said he, Sohema? Yes, said Marama. Here then, replied the Eunuch, carry
this Letter to Sarai, and at the same time putting the Billet into her Hands,
he vanished. On the other side, Marama returned to her Appartiment, and opening
the Letter read the following lines.

The Only One to the Faithless One
COuld I have thought it possible that I should ever have given you this Name!
The more I seek for Terms proper to Express the Excess of my Grief, the fewer
can I meet with; and the more I desire to excuse the Infidelity, the less I
find you Innocent. It Is not the Quality of my Rival that terrifies me, it is the
little assurance I have of your heart, since you have seen Prince Soliman, and
that you have concealed from me, Your Love, your Interview, and his Letter. You
will be offended perhaps at my presumption, in taking it off your Toylet, but
all things are lawful for a Love so violent and jealous as mine. Would to God
you were as Innocent as Sarai would make me believe. She will give ye an
Account of my discretion, and thence you may judge, that what ever wounds you
give my heart, I shall never cease to love ye.


Marama did not know the Visir's hand; but discovering by the Letter, that Abra
was in Love, and that she was beloved, and that that same Lover had been
introduced into her Appartiment by the Kisler himself, she rightly judged that
it must needs be a person of the Highest Quality.

She could not inform Prince Soliman that evening of an Adventure that so
nearly concerned him; but the next Morning she failed not to be with him. But
it was a double Astonishment to him to understand that he had a Rival, whose
Credit extended so far as to give him Admission into the Serraglio; and that it
was in the power of that Rival, having his Letter, to incense the Sultan to his
Ruin.

A thousand different thoughts presented themselves all at once to his mind;
but none but only such as appeared no less Terrible to threaten his Life then
his Love. He knew not the Visir's hand, but Mustapha Cuproli, who arrived about
two days before from Chio, of which Island, and of the rest of the Archipelago,
he was Basha, being come to pay him a Visir, He showed him some lines of the
Letter, and asked him whether he knew the Hand. As well as my own, replied
Cuproli, it is the Visir Soliman's: Nor Can any Body know it better, because he
was Kiaia to my Brother Cuproli Oglou, when he was Visir; and for that at that
time I had great Correspondencies with him.

The Knowledge of his Rival's Quality redoubled Prince Soliman's Vexation, and
his Grief with all. Cuproli was Witty, Ambitious, Bold Intreaguing, Undaunted,
a great Captain, and Soliman's Intimate Friend. He had married his Sister to
Siaous Basha, General of the Spahi's; and in regard that Cuproli had been the
Son and Brother of two Visirs, nothing could beat it out of his Head* but that
that same preferment was due to him; nor was there any one who was advanced to
that Dignity, but he became his Mortal Enemy at the same time, and whose
downfall he did not wish in hopes of having his Turn.

These Ambitious thoughts he never concealed from Soliman, and the Prince was
so far from condemning 'em, that he flattered 'em, and assisted him under hand,
in hopes that if Cuproli should obtain the Chief Ministry of the Empire, he
might prove a favorable Support to his Affairs.

With a mind thus disposed and inflamed with jealousy against the Grand Visir,
he carried Cuproli into his Closet, and shutting himself up alone with him, Do
you love me so well Cuproli, said He, as that I may rely upon your Fidelity?
There is nothing, answered Cuproli, that I would not undertake, to assure ye
that I am less my own then I am yours. The Sultan has made choice of a Visir,
replied the Prince, and Favor only has exalted Basha Soliman to a Dignity
which is your Due; he is the most Intimate of my Brother's Favorites; but he
hates me, and my life is not safe so long as he Governs the Empire; we must
find out a way to ruin him in the good Opinion of the Sultan, and that the
Dignity wherewith he has honored him, may prove as fatal to him, as to those
that preceded him. Unite you Friends, and Siaous's, to the end they may concur
in a Design, which will secure me from a Death which otherwise I certainly
foresee, and which will remove the Obstacle to the Fortune you deserve.

What you say, replied Cuproli, is conformable to the Inclinations of my heart;
but it is no easy thing to bring this Enterprise to pass: nor is there any way
to succeed in it, but by Contrivances managed at a distance. So soon as I have
sounded Siaous, I Will give ye an Account what Course is to be followed.

Soliman thought it sufficient to incense Cuproli with the consideration of his
fortune, and the concern he had for the Life of a Prince his friend; and that
there was no need of imparting to him the secret of his Amor, which would have
only served to have rendered his Proposals more suspected, as proceeding more
from Interest.

Cuproli conferred with Siaous, and they both concluded, that 'twas not
possible directly to attack the Visir by any open Attempts, to exclude him from
the Grand Seignior's Affection; for he loved him too well, and therefore that
would be to ruin themselves; but that it behooved 'em so to order it, during the
whole Campaign, as to frustrate all his Designs, and to render all his
Undertakings so successless, that his Misfortunes might work him into Disgrace.
That every thing seemed to favor 'em in this Contrivance, seeing the Visir had
proposed Cuproli to Command the Armies in Hungary; for which reason it was that
Mahomet had sent for him from Chio; and that for his part he could not be
dispensed with, because he Commanded all the Spahi's, which rendered him
absolute Arbitrator of the success of all such Battles as should happen to be
fought.

Things being thus resolved between Siaous and Cuproli, and the time for
entering into the Field approaching, the Sultan hastened, and indeed anticipated
the Departure of the Visir, and obliged him to be with all speed at Belgrade,
that he might issue forth all requisite Orders for drawing the Army together.

In the mean time the Fever that seized Abra proved to be of long continuance
and dangerous. The Visir also, not having received any Answer of the Letter
which he had written, began more and more to suspect the worst: He was
therefore desirous to be better satisfied by Sarai, who informed him, that
never any such Billet was brought to Abra's Appartiment. Upon that the Eunuch
was sent for, who affirmed that he gave it to Sohema; but Sohema denying the
matter, it was judged that the Letter had been intercepted, and Sarai charged
Marama with the Treachery. But because the Visir would not that the Kisler
should be informed of Soliman's being in Love with Abra, for fear it should
come to the Sultan 's Ear, he thought it sufficient to obtain that Favor from
the Master of the Eunuchs, that Marama should be removed to an Appartiment out
of the way.

The Kisler also did him the kindness to introduce him a second time into
Abra's chamber disguised in a Physician's habit, to the end he might obtain his
satisfaction from her self; which absolutely dissipated all his Jealousies, and
which much more conduced to the Recovery of her Health, then if he had been a
real Artist.

'Twas the next day after he had received this Satisfaction that the Sultan
Commanded him to depart for Belgrade, and to draw together the most powerful
Army that possibly he could to oppose the Enemies Designs and Resolutions, as
Fame had given it out, to besiege Buda.

It Is well known that the Visir did all he could to persuade the Sultan to go
in Person into Hungary, and take upon him the Command of the Army; insomuch
that 'twas the wonder of the whole Port, that he should desire the presence of
a Person, who would but lessen and eclipse his Power. But it was the effect of
Jealousy and his fear, least Mahomet, during his Absence, should happen to cast
his Eyes upon Abra, the Consequences of which might prove fatal to his Love.
Whereas the Sultan carrying his Brothers along with him, it would have
delivered him from that disquiet which Prince Soliman's Passion caused within
him.

But Mahomet thought it not convenient to hazard his Person, considering the
Condition of his Affairs. So that the Visir being obliged to a hasty departure,
could not have the pleasure of bidding his dear Muscovite farewell, and
therefore instead of taking his personal leave, he was forced to content
himself with writing the following Letter to pay her that Homage.

SOLIMAN Visir to his Dear ABRA.
A Hasty Order forces my Departure, and I am going to endeavor to render my
self as worthy of your Esteem, as I am persuaded of your Love. How tedious does
this Campaign seem to me already, and with what Unwillingness should I act, did
I not know that you would Love me less, if I had less a Love for Honor: If you
keep your word, no Rival will be the better for my Absence. Afford me the
Consolation of frequent understanding the Condition of your Heart, and be
assured, that nothing shall ever abate the Love of

Soliman Visir.


The care for the safe delivery of this Letter, was the last which he took at
Adrianople; and being thus departed in order perform his Duty, within a few
days after the Sultan removed to Constantinople, with his two Brothers, and all
the Train of his Serraglio.

The End of the First Part.
Abra-Mule: OR, THE HISTORY Of the Deposition of MAHOMET IV. EMPEROR of the
TURKS.
The Second Part.
THE Vizir marched long marches directly to Belgrade, and the farther his
Marches removed him from her, the more he felt his heart oppressed with the
burden of his sighs. What ever Confidence he had in the Assurances that Abra
had given him of an inviolable Fidelity, Prince Soliman's Love galled him, and
the great difficulty always to conceal that Beauty from the Sultan's Eyes made
his Love tremble.

On the other side Prince Soliman, whose Passion was no less violent then
unfortunate, found himself over whelmed with an infinite number of threatening
Difficulties: He saw that Abra's heart was no way touched with his Love, that
it was prepossessed with the Merits of a beloved Rival; that this Rival was in
great Power, and the Favorite of a distrustful Brother, and that the Kisler
was deep in his Intreague, that Marama was become suspected, and for that
reason all access to the fair Muscovite was forbid her; that the Resolutions of
Siaous and Cuproli would perhaps become useless to him through the tediousness
of Execution, that Mahomet might fall in Love with Abra, and in the midst of
these Reflections he saw nothing but grounds of Fear and Despair.

'Twas at the beginning of May that Mahomet, with all his Court, arrived within
sight of Constantinople. The weather was the most lovely in the world, and the
Bostangi Basha had taken care to dress up the pleasant Gardens of the
Serraglio, and set 'em out with all the Beauty and Politeness that their Master
could desire.

The Prospect of these Gardens is wonderful to those that come to
Constantinople by Water; more especially that same admirable Terrafs, which
Achmet caused to be raised for a Walk for the Sultanesses, and which surpasses
all the magnificence that can be imagined enchanting the Eyes with the sight of
it. To devertise himself with so delicious a Prospect, Mahomet having lain by
the Sea side about three Leagues from Constantinople, embarked together with
the Sultaness Asseki, in a light Saique, magnificently adorned, and steered by
the Bostangi Basha. The rest of the Women, and Persons belonging to the Court,
were distributed into smaller, but very neat Barges. And thus the floating and
magnificent Court rowed toward the Haven which is formed by a little Bay, made
in the likeness of a Canal, at the foot of the Serraglio.

They were just entering into it, when a terrible Tempest rising of a sudden
caused so great a Disorder among the Barges, and made such a confusion, that
there was no longer any Order to be observed. The Sultan's Bark put in first*
and set him a shore, while the rest confusedly crouding together fell foul one
upon another, and one of them which carried the Women had the misfortune to
over-set. As for the Seamen they took care for no Body but themselves, leaving
the Women to perish* when Prince Soliman, who was in the next Bark to that
which had miscarried, not only encouraged the Seamen with large promises of
Reward, to succor the poor Women in distress, but to enliven 'em by his
Example, threw himself into the Water and luckily took one by the Hair, as she
was just going to sink, and recovering his own Bark, by the help of his slaves,
got her out of the danger.

The Disorder which this unexpected Accident had caused, the motion of the
Waves, the darkness of the gloomy Weather, would not permit the Prince to know
at first the Person to whom he had lent his Assistance. But how strangely
astonished, How overjoyed! when he understood, that but for him the fair Abra
had been swallowed up by the merciless Waves. She was fallen into a Swoond, and
whatever they could do, she did not recover her Senses till the Prince was
landed, and had got her ashore.

Then it was that she opened her Eyes, and calling to mind what had befallen
her, her first care was to ask for her dear Sarai: The Seamen had had the good
luck to save her, and the greatest part of the rest; but Sarai who thought Abra
lost, was fallen into fainting Fits, from which she could not recover: However
there was a necessity of carrying her to her Mistress let her Condition be what
it would, in regard that nothing but her own Eyes could assure her of the Life
of so dear a Confident. It would have been Imprudence for Soliman to have
troubled her with his Love, considering the condiction she was in, and
therefore he thought it sufficient not to quit her till he had caused her,
together with Sarai, to be carried into one of the Bostangi's Lodgings, which
was opposite to the nearest Gate; from whence the Kisler Agasi, who was
informed of the Accident, took care to have her removed to the Appartiment
which he had appointed for her.

This Adventure, which one would have thought should have been favorable to
Soliman begat him new Vexations, because that what ever care the Kisler took
to stifle the noise of it, the Bostangi, to whose Lodging she was first
brought, informed the Bostangi Bachi, and gave him a wonderful description of
the Muscovite's Beauty, whose Name the Sultan bad hardly heard of, that that
same great Officer, who was deeply concerned in his Master's pleasures, was not
only contented to give him a Relation of the Accident, but aggravated with so
much Vehemence what he had heard, that the Sultan the same Evening demanded an
Account of her from the Kisler Agasi

The Eunuch, who saw himself upon the brink of the fatal Moment which he had
always dreaded, and who kept himself prepared for all Accidents, answered the
Sultan, without lessening or magnifying the Sultan's beauty, that she kept her
Bed, in so weak a Condition, and brought so low, by the Terror of the Affright
into which the danger she had escaped had cast her, that he knew not whether
she would live or no; that nothing but Rest for some time could recover her,
and that so soon as she should be in a Condition to enjoy the Honor of
appearing before his Highness, he would not fail to come and receive his
Orders, and yield him Obedience. The Sultan being satisfied with the Kisler's
Answer, commanded him to take particular care of her, added two thousand Aspers
a day to her former Allowance, and Ordered his chief Physican Sedekias, a Jew,
to visit her, and give him an Account of her.

The Kisler Agasi having warded off this first Blow had the leisure to see
Abra, as he did forthwith, under pretense to give her notice of the Sultan's
Generosity, but indeed to consult together what Methods were requisite to make
her self appear to Sedekias more sick then she was, and to drill out a
counterfeit Distemper, till they could think of some other Intreague to fend
off she Blow: And in the mean time he wrote to the Visir, and gave him a full
Account of the Accident, with all its Circumstances.

'Twas no hard matter to amuse the Sultan for above a Month, and till he
received the News, that the Siege of Buda was fully resolved upon in a Council
of War which the Emperor held at Neustadt, and that Prince Charles, and the
Elector of Bavaria, were upon their march at the head of Fourscore Thousand
Men, in order to sit down before the place: That the Governor of the Town, who
was a resolute Renegado, had already burnt Pest, that he might have nothing
else to do, but to mind the Defense of Buda, and that there was nothing wanting
for a vigorous resistance.

The Emperor's Attempt upon that Place, which bad proved unsuccessful two Years
before, the new Fortifications of the Town, the numerous Garrison, the vast
Stores of Ammunition and Provision, and the Confidence he had in the Valor of
Visir Soliman, who was able to draw together above a hundred Thousand Men to
relieve it; all these things were great Assistances to set the Sultan's Heart
at rest, and made him give himself up to his Pleasures with as much security,
as if he had been reposing in the Arms of a profound Peace. Therefore in regard
he daily pressed the Kisler to hasten the the pleasure which be expected from
the Muscovite, and it being impossible any longer to fain a continuation of the
Sickness, the Eunuch, who found he could no longer delay the presenting her
before the Sultan, thought it high time to awaken the Jealousy of the Sultaness
Asseki, so that she being privately made acquainted with the Diversion that was
preparing to interrupt her Pleasures, all Engines might be set at work to
thwart, the new Desires that now inflamed the lustful Mahomet.

In the mean time, Soliman, who flattered himself that so considerable a piece
of Service as he had done the Muscovite, deserved a favorable Acknowledgment
of his Love, burned with impatience to give her a Visit: But the familiarity
which Marama had with her was broken off, and all that she could learn by means
of her Slaves was this, that a long Ague had attended the Accident that befell
her, and that she kept her Bed very much, so that there was no coming at her,
and all that the crafty Procuress could agitate by her Artifices was to corrupt
one of Abra's slaves, and engage her to slide a Letter into her Mistresses
hands, yet so as that she should not discover by what hand it came. This Marama
make known to Soliman, who unwilling to lose the Opportunity, put Pen to Paper,
and gave the Billet to his Confident.

The Slave whom she had won, and well instructed, discharged her Trust with so
much dexterity, that Abra found the Billet in her Bosom, not knowing who had
been so bold as to put it there, and not able to withstand her Curiosity, she
opened it, and read the following Lines.

Prince Soliman to the Divine Abra.
A Lover whose Happiness it was to wrest you from the Jaws of Death, labors
under most mortal disquiets, because he can hear nothing of a life more
precious to him them his own. What fatal destiny so orders it, Divine Abra,
that you are as invisible to my Eyes, as your heart is impenetrable to my Love.
How happy is the Visir, Madam, and how do I envy the good Fortune of my Rival!
He enjoys you, though never so remote, while I am only near you, to feel with
so much the more grief the weight of your insensibility. Nevertheless, I adore
ye, as little Compassion as you have upon the Pains which you cause me to
suffer; and how severe soever you are, you only shall possess a Heart which
will ever be at your Devotion, while lives*

Prince Soliman.


Abra owed her life to the Prince, and nothing grieved her more then that she
was beholding to him; seeing that her heart being absolutely the Visir's, she
could not pay to his Rival all that acknowledgment which he expected for so
great a piece a Service. Her acknowledgment therefore went no farther, then
only to pity him for throwing away his Affection upon an object that could not
admit it. But after she had read a second time that part of the Letter which
gave her to understand that the Visirs being in love with her, was not unknown
to the Prince, it struck her with a more then extraordinary Grief; and not
doubting but it was the letter which had been intercepted in the Gallery, the
consideration of that infused into her a Detestation of such a paltry Trick,
and that Detestation of the fact, soon turned to a hatred of the Person; for
that being persuaded that since the Visir and he both knew themselves to be
Rivals, they could not but hate each other, her heart never waver'd which side
to take. So that Seliman's Billet was so far from moving Abra's heart, that it
did but inspire her with hatred, tell then she never had for the Prince, and
that she might not undergo the same Reproaches which the Visir had made her
upon her first silence, the first time she wrote she sacrificed to his view
this Letter from her Rival.

This was the Posture of Affairs at Constantinople, while other intreagues were
in Agitation at Belgrade. Siaous and Cuproli Basha's, who were the most
signalized for their Valor and Conduct, had as I have already said, devoted
themselves to serve Prince Soliman's Passion by the ruin of the Visir. Finding
therefore that Buda was beseig'd, and that the Visir had given out Orders for
the drawing together a numerous Army, with a design to relieve the place, they
resolved by all manner of Artifices to prevent the succor of it, and rather so
to order it that the Visir should lose a Battle, then have the Honor of saving
it; not questioning but a loss of that importance would be attended with the
Downfall, and perhaps the Death of that Minister. Nevertheless the better to
conceal their correspondence, and not to endanger both their Heads, at one
time, in the hazards which this conspiracy might produce, they thought it
convenient that Siaous, who had a great Reputation among the Soldiers should
remain in the Army, and that Cuproli, who had accepted the command of the
Dardanells, which is an Employment of great Trust, should keep his post there,
where he might so much the more effectually make use of his power to detain or
divert the Succor and Subsistence of the Armies. On the other side, Prince
Charles of Lorrain, being desirous to take all the precautions imaginable that
might conduce toward the success of his Enterprise, thought it convenient that
Michael Abaffi, Prince of Transylvania, should be constrained to declare
himself for the Emperor, to the end the Turks might be deprived of the
subsistances which they drew from him as their Tributary; and to the end, that
at the same time they might act in the Upper Hungary, and by keeping Tecekly in
play, prevent his joining the Ottoman Army.

The Visir, who forsaw the consequence of these two designs, did two things in
hopes to disappoint 'em. In the first place he ordered Sultan Galga and the
Basha, with all speed to unite their forces with Takeli's, in order to make a
powerful diversion in the Upper Hungary, and at the same time to defend the
Passes of Transylvania.

Siaous began the Execution of his Conspiracy with his thwarting the prudent
contrivances of the Visir, and having at the same time engaged the Basha of
Walachia in his intreague, 'twas no hard matter for the Imperialists to beat
the Ottoman Troops that showed themselves upon the frontiers of Transylvania.
They made themselves masters of Hermansbourg, forced Abaffi to break with the
Turks, and reinforced with his Troops, fell upon the Tartars, forsaken by the
Basha of Walachia, so that by this first blow of Siaous's intreaguing
Treachery, the Visir found himself at the beginning of the Campaign deprived of
that subsistence he was wont to have out of Transylvania, and upon which he
relied; and at the same time bereft of that Advantage which he expected from
his projected Diversion in Hungary.

Prince Charles laid Siege to Buda with Forty Thousand Foot, and Twenty
Thousand Horse, Sixty great Pieces of Cannon, and forty Mortars; and Abdi
Basha, the Renegado, left nothing omitted that a prudent, undaunted, and
accomplished Governor could do for the preservation of a place that was
furnish with a Garrison of Ten Thousand Men, and all things necessary for a
long defense.

On the other side, the Trenches and Attacks were carried on with all the
Vigor and all the Art imaginable; the Sallies were frequent and terrible, and
it cost the Germans a world of Blood, before they got to the body of the place.

In the mean time the Grand Visir gave out Orders every way for the
rendevouzing an Army sufficient to raise the Siege, and manger all the secret
Obstacles that he met with, but of which he knew not the reason, having
mustered together an Army which he thought sufficient to decide the fortune of
Buda by a Battle, he crossed the Theysse. But they still foundered his purposes
with so many new oppositions, that he was no sooner got over the Bridge of
Esseck, toward the end of July, but Buda, after a close Siege of six weeks,
began to be very much distressed.

Nevertheless he surmounted all these difficulties, and about the beginning of
August advanced within five Leagues of the Lines, and encamped upon the rising
Grounds adjoining to the Danaw. Now in regard that Abdi Bosha had sent
intelligence, that his frequent Sallies had extremely weakened his Garrison,
and promised him to hold out all the rest of the Campaign, provided he might be
reinforced with fresh supplies of Men, the Visir commanded the Seraskier to
force his way, and put in a Relief of two Thousand Janisaries.

To this purpose the Seraskier set forward with six Thousand Foot and three
Thousand Spahi's, which made up a body to defend the two Thousand Janisaries.
Their intention was to force the Imperialist's Quarter, while Adbi made a Sally
upon the Bavarians, and by that means to throw in two Thousand men into the
Town. But Siaous having found a way, by means of a Deserter, to inform Prince
Charles of all these designs, he sent forth a numerous Body to meet the Enemy
without the Lines. The Combat was smart and cruel; the number of the slain on
both sides was very great; the Turks no sooner broken, but rallied again,
perhaps they would have forced their passage, if the Spabi's, whose Officers
observed the private motions of Siaous, had not forsaken the Janisaries; so
that the Infantry being left alone and attacqn'd on every side, could no longer
defend themselves against fresh Troops that poured in upon 'em, and the Visir
not being able to come to a general Decision, among the Mountains where his
Enemies lay entrenched, the Seraskier was routed, his Infantry broken, almost
all the Janisaries slain, not one being able to get into the place.

The Visir enraged at this Repulse, and desirous to put all to the venture in
order to force the Enemies lines, called a Council of War; where Siaous, who
cunningly carried on his Intreague, feigned at first to applaud the Visir's
Resolution, and threw upon the Seraskier all the blame of the success; but then
his own Creatures which he had ready prepared starting contrary Sentiments,
supported by reasons that appeared extremely plausible, he turned of their
side, and drew the rest of the Officers after him. Nevertheless, in despite of
their Advice, the Visir would follow his own judgment, and got every thing in a
readiness to fall upon the Enemy next Morning. But then Siaous raised a kind of
Sedition among the Spahi's, so that the Visir fearing to be set upon himself in
the heat of the Tumult, pulled down his Tents and removed three Leagues farther.

He thought by this means to have calmed their Fury, and proposing the same
thing a second time, he saw 'twas impossible to overcome the resistance of the
Basha's. So that all he could do, in the height of his Vexation was, to pull
thirty Thousand Ducats out of a little Chest, and tell 'em to two Thousand
Janisaries, who for the sake of that sum, primis'd to lose their lives every
man, or to get into the Town.

They marched in the Night time, seconded by a part of the Army, and fell upon
the Quarter of the Brandenburghs and Croates with so much fury, that they made
all give ground before 'em, and had not the vigilance of Prince Charles put a
stop to it, the Succor had infallibly cut their way through; but he having
drawn up his whole Army in Battalia, after a bloody slaughter, the Turks were
repulsed, by reason that eight thousand Spahi's refused to obey the Visir's
Orders; so that of two Thosand there were not above four Hundred Janisaries
that could force their way over the bodies of the slain into the Town, the rest
being all devoured by the Sword.

But this Disobedience of the Spahi's remained not unpunished; for the Visir
having caused some of the most Mutinous to be empla'd, he called another
Council, and told 'em, that he did not call 'em to deliberate, but to show 'em
the Sultan's Order, which was, rather to venture all then lose Buda; and that a
Moor having swam the River had brought him Letters from Abdi to let him know
that he could hold out but a very few days longer.

Having dismissed this Council, he caused his Army to march, and reapproach'd
the Lines, and having drawn up his Army in Battallia, ready to fall on, he
detached a thousand Spahi's, two thousand Janisaries, and two thousand Tartars
to begin a false attaque on the Imperialists side, while he fell upon the
Bavarians Quarter with the body of the Army.

Prince Charles, being well informed of the Visir's design, displayed his
Courage, his Wisdom and Experience to a Miracle. The false attack was so
violent, and the medley so hot, that the Prince had his Camp Adjutant slain
close by him; the besieged also made a vigorous Sally. But Prince Charles had
ordered every thing with so much prudence and foresight, that the Turks were
repulsed with great loss, at the same time that they who began the false attack
were beaten and disperss'd. So that the Visir, who at that very moment was
about to have fallen upon the Bavarians, found such a Pannick fear among his
men, because they saw the Count of Schaffemberg's Volant Camp pass the Danaw
Bridge, that 'was impossible for him to command the Obedience of the Soldiers;
insomuch that he was constrained to retire without making any farther attempt.

This last Blow put him into a Fury, and therefore discovering that the two
Bashas who commanded the false attack, had not done their duty, he commanded
their Heads to be struck off, and to repair his losses, he sent to an Aga, who
commanded six thousand Janisaries at Esseck, to join him with all speed; and to
other Basha's he sent Orders to spare him what men they could.

But while he was preparing for new Efforts, Prince Charles, perceiving the
Breaches open and level enough for a general Assault, he stormed the Town in
three several places; the Renegat Abdi was killed upon the Breach, and the
place carried, and nothing escaped the Sword of the victorious Soldiers, but
what the generosity of the Princes could save from their Fury.

The Visir, at his Wits end for the loss of so important a place, retired under
the Guns of Esseek, and there without passing the Drove, entrenched himself.
Prince Charles followed him, but could not force him to a Battle, which would
have been a vain thing against a victorious Army. Therefore he kept himself
close in his Entrenchments, where he had the misfortune to receive the News of
the loss of Segeden, and some other places of less consequence; but at length
repassing the Drove in his Return to Belgrade, the Imperialists burnt the
Bridge of Esleck, and so ended the most glorious of all Prince Charles's
Campaigns.

In the mean time the sad tidings of the loss of Buda, and other places, were
carried to Constantinople; which wrought upon the People the full effect that
Prince Soliman, Siaous and Cuproli desired. But the Visir was too well fixed in
the Sultan's favor, not to find him graciously inclined to hear his
justifications; which was the only Consolation left him in the heap of his
Afflictions; for that while he lay at Belgrade, he understood by Letters from
the Kisler, that the Sultan had seen Abra, and that he was desperately in love
with her; nevertheless, that the fair Muscovite was resolved to be constant to
him, though Mahomet had ordered her to be removed into the Serraglio of
Calcedon, called the Serraglio of Looking Glasses; however in regard the Sultan
did not prosecute his Amors like a Turk, but as a courtly and generous Prince,
he did not believe that Mahomet would seek to enjoy her against her will, but
that he would make use of his Courtship to win her Affection.

Let us therefore leave the Visir a while at Belgrade, settling Affairs in the
best method he could, and making all the have his business would permit to
return and give the Sultan an Account of a Campaign, the ill success of which
he was sure could not be imputed to his ill Conduct; and let us see how things
were carried at Constantinople between Abra, Mahomet and Soliman.

The Sultan, who before he had seen the young Muscovite, but barely upon the
relation of the Bostangi Bachi, had placed her by an augmentation of her
Pension in the Rank of his Favorites, pressed the Kisler to satisfy his
amorous Impatience; so that the Eunuch after long delays, which tended only to
give motion to the Jealousy of the Sultaness Asseki, could no longer defer
fulfilling the Duty of his Employment; and therefore he told the Sultan that
Abra being in perfect health was now in a Condition to appear, and that the
next morning she would be walking upon the Sultanesses Terrass.

The Eunuch however was so crafty, that he would not permit any more then eight
or ten to walk along with her, who being every one of 'em exquisite Beauties,
he was in hopes that such a dazzle might puzle the Sultan's heart, and cause an
amorous diversion. He also obliged 'em to add to their natural Charms whatever
Artifice could procure, while Abra, who had no designs of conquest, appeared
with all the carelessness that modesty and decency would permit her.

However he could not so order it, but that the Sultan found her much more
assable then all the rest, who would have been much more willing to have
answered his desires. After a turn upon the Terrass, which was only spent in
general converse, and in expressing his surprise at the sight of so much
Beauty, and his Astonishment that he had not seen nor taken notice of her at
her first Entrance into the Serraglio; they walked down into the Garden of
Fountains, where a noble Collation was prepared in a Grotto, adorned with Coral
and Mother of Pearl, and wherein the Water sported after a thousand delightful
manners. After this Entertainment, Mahomet, who had not till then applied
himself particularly to the Muscovite, took her from the rest of the Women, who
retired, and leading her into a green Arbor, he declared to her those Motions,
to which he imagined she would not have testified the least coyness.

But he was strangely surpised to find in her that coldness and indifferency,
which he least expected; however he imputed it to that awe which the Majesty of
a Sultan might imprint in her upon the first sight; and therefore being endu'd
with a Noble and Courtly mind, he forbore to press her, in hopes that the
pleasures he should receive from the hands of Love, would be infinitely more
sweet then those for which he was beholding to his Power and Authority.

The next morning at the time that Abra rose, the Kisler attended by six
Eunuchs entered her Chamber, and kneeling with one knee kissed a gold Box
enriched with Diamonds, which he held between both his hands, and without
speaking a Word set it upon her Toylet, and at the same time the six Eunuchs,
who had every one a Basket of Gold Filagreene, with a Present in each, set down
the six Baskets by Abra, and after a profound Bow retired, leaving the Kisler
alone with her. Abra, who understood well enough the meaning of all this
Serraglio-Mummerie, could not forbear weeping, and casting a sorrowful Eye uyon
the Kisler: Must it then be, dear Agasi, said she, must it then be, that this
Evening my heart and the Visir's must receive their deaths wound from your hand.

I betray not, said the Kisler, neither your Love, nor the sincere friendship I
have for the Vizir, I only discharge the indispensable Duty of my Employment,
wherein if I should fail, I should disable my self from serving ye.

Ah, what service can you do me, cruel Agasi, replied Abra, when you have once
delivered me over to the Sultan. As a slave, replied the Kisler, I owe my
Obedience to the Sultan, and as a Friend my Service to the Visir, and I fulfill
both these Duties, by telling you in favor of his Highness, that if Ambition
could tempt ye, and that you could but conform to the Sultan's Love, there
would be nothing wanting to the Grandeurs which he has designed you. But if
your Love be still more prevalent on your heart then these ambitious Prospects,
I must tell you also in his behalf, that you have no more to do but to persist
in your Coldness for Mahomet: I know him: he loves to be beholding to his Merit
and his Passion, and not to his Power, nor does his Presumption ever call
violence to the succor of his lust, he will try allways of persuasion to gain
your affection, but he will never proceed to constraint; act according to these
Instructions, and trust the best Friend the Visir has.

Ah, dear Agasi, replied Abra, you restore me to Life, and never doubt but I
will rather lose it a Thousand times then prove unfaithful to your Friend. I
must also acknowledge to you, that since I have heard what you have said to me,
it is something of a Pleasure to me to see my self beloved by the Sultan,
because it afford's me a pleasing Opportunity to sacrifice to the Visir all
Mahomet's Grandeur. May nothing Extinguish so noble a flame, replied the
Kisler; but it will be necessary, Madam, added he, that you read the Sultan's
Letter, and that I carry him your Answer. It Is in that Box. Abra opened the
Box; and found a Letter Written in Purple Characters upon White Taffata,
Embroidered with Gold, and folded up in a Handkercher of most Delicate
Workmanship, where after she had opened it, she read the following Expressions.

Sultan Mahomet To the Sultaness Abra Mule. May the Prophet cover ye with all
manner of Prosperities.
MY Pen gives you this August Title, before I have obtained that you should
receive it from the Hands of Love. That Love which I have conceived for you is
equal to your Beauty, and it is sufficient to tell ye, that since there never
was a Beauty ty so accomplished, my Love shall solely act to merit yours; your
Coldness tells me that you know the Extent of your Charms, and that they are of
a high Value, when they make a Sultan sigh; but my acknowledgment shall no less
Esteem the Sight which you shall spare to

Mahomet Sultan.


Would to Heaven, said Abra, that Mahomet would be as good as his word, and
that he would keep within the Bounds which he prescribes himself. But, added
she, casting a wishful look upon the Kisler, is there no way to be dispensed
with from writting to him? That would be the way, replied the Kisler to ruin
all: Nor dare I look the Sultan in the Face unless I carry him your Answer.
Thereupon Abra set Pen to Paper and wrote the following Billet to Mahomet.

Abra Mule to Sultan Mahomet.
AMong so many Slaves who aspire to nothing more then the favors which your
Highness is pleased profusely to bestow upon me, why Sir, do you design. 'em
for a Heart that is not capable to make a suitable Return? I see the Character
of a Virtue so magnanimous dazlingly shinning in the Letter wherewith you have
honored me, that I pity your Love for the Unfortunate Choice it has made.
Spare me Sir, the sorrow for being ungrateful, and be contented with the most
profound Esteem that Womankind can have for a most Generous Monarch, and suffer
to be at quiet the Heart of the Insensible

Abra Mule.


The Sultan, who valued himself for being an Artist in the Curiosities of
Courtship, found something in this Billet wherewith to flatter himself, that
this same first Reluctance was only an artificial Slight to inflame his
Passion so much the more. And therefore he undertook to vanquish it by regular
Attacks; and his first care was to conceal from the Sultaness, the Methods
which his Love should oblige him to take.

On the other side Prince Soliman, having received no answer to his Billet,
sought all the ways imaginable to see Abra. She was accustomed to walk in a
private Garden, which consisted only of a Bowling green, and a Labyrinth of
Palisado's. Soliman therefore had screwed himself into the Friendship of one of
the Bostangi's that were wont to work there; and by him it was, that he was
informed of her frequent walking there.

The Prince under pretense of a bare Curiosity, made so many Presents and
Promises to this old Bostangi, that he consented to furnish him with a Habit of
his Companions, and to let him into the Garden after the Hour of third Prayers,
provided he hid himself in a nick or hollow Seat which he fitted for him, in
the body of one of the Palisado's of the Labyrinth; assuring him that that was
the part of the Garden which Abra most usually frequented.

This contrivance was put in execution to Soliman's wish: Abra failed not to
come, and after she had taken a Turn in the Bowling-Green, she entered into the
center of the Ladyrinth, where she sat down, together with her Confident, upon
a Bank of Turf, which adjoined to the Receptacle of the Fountain.

She had received the Evening before a very tender Letter from the Sultan, and
fearing least at length he should come to exert his Love like a Tyrant, she
chose this time to condole her Misfortunes in Sarai's Company, and to impart
her Sorrows to her for the ill success of the Visir.

No sooner were they sat down, but Abra, continuing the Discourse which they
had had before, Be you judge, dear Sarai, said she, whether it be possible for
a Woman to be exposed to greater Misfortunes. It Is not anough that Heaven has
destm'd me to Love the Visir to that degree that nothing can be more beloved;
that this Love was not inspired into me till I was sacrificed to dismal
Slavery; that the Visir, notwithstanding his Valor and Conduct has miscarried
in all his Enterprises; that his Misfortunes expose him to the Murmurs of the
People, and perhaps to the Sultan's frowns; but that still to the heap of my
Misfortunes and my Sorrows for his ill success, I must be yet more afflicted
with the troublesome Passion of Prince Soliman; and then to the accomplishment
of my Afflictions, the Sultan has seen me, and is in Love with me.

What was then Prince Soliman's astonishment and grief may readily be
conjectured. He found his Love disarmed, the Visir beloved, and as a surplusage
of Afflictions he perceived he had a new and more dangerous Rival, the Sultan
himself. While his heart lay drowned in these deep inundations of Despair and
Grief, Sarai pursuing the Discourse, Heaven usually reserves, said she, her
greatest-Misfortunes for the greatest Souls. But what reason have you to make
such loud Complaints? You love, and are beloved; may not the Visir's Courage
recover his Misfortunes; the Sultan loves him, and excuses him already: And
what need Prince Soliman disturb ye, considering how little you esteem his
love, and his want of power to molest ye: As for the Sultan, you know he
scorns to make any Attempts upon your heart, but by ways of Love. And therefore
never abandon your self to the agitations of a Despair, that proceeds rather
from Imagination then any real Grounds.

Ah! dear Sarai, my Passion is mounted to that degree, that if the Visir cannot
find a means to release me from this slavery, or that the Sultan's Lust
transports him to the least violence, a Dagger shall punish my heart for all
the Vexations it has put me to. Alas! Into what seas of Grief will it not
plunge the Visir? What Jealousies and Fears will overwhelm him, when he
understands that Mahomet is his Rival, he that was so vehemently jealous of
Prince Soliman? Nevertheless, said Sarai, I never perceived that you had the
least spark of love for that Prince. Who I, replied Abra, I knew the worth of
Prince Soliman, I could not blame his Passion for me; I admired the excess of
it, that caused him to expose his head, that he might discover it to me;
besides that I am so unfortunate to owe my Life to his preservation; all this
might prevail something over a heart that was not prepossessed. But mine is not
my own, nothing can deprive his Rival of it; and seeing then they must hate
each other, seeing they know themselves to be Rivals judge thou how hateful
that Prince must be to me, and how careful I ought to be to avoid his company.

How extraordinary soever Soliman's trouble might be, this Confession however
left him some room to flatter his hopes, and imagining that the Opportunity
might be favorable to some new Effort, he was about to show himself from the
Palisado, when a great noise gave him to understand that the Sultan was
approaching. The Sultan took a turn or two, and being informed that Abra was in
the Labyrinth, thither he went: She rose up, but Mahomet engaged her to reseat
herself upon a Bank of Turfs, so near to Soliman, that he might be almost heard
to breath. Mahomet sat down by her, and they had a long and courtly Conference
together, which terminated on the Sultan's part only in amorous Importunities,
and in respectful and modest denials on Abra's side. At length the Sultan rose
up, gave his hand to the fair Muscovite, and having led her to the Garden door,
he went off through another with the Bostangi Basha, to communicate some
Intelligence to him which he had received.

It may be easily imagined in what condition Prince Soliman was, and what
various Agitations turmoyl'd his heart. How! said he, have I two Rivals at one
time? One of which is beloved, and the other has all the freedom imaginable to
declare his Passion, and is able to make himself happy when ever he pleases to
make use of his Power, while she is insensible of my flames, and it is my
Misfortune that I cannot meet with an Opportunity to make known my noble fires.
No -- it is impossible for me to continue under such a sultry Violence, nor to
suffer the felicity of two Rivals both at one time.

He was then laboring under the Tumults of his thoughts, and left his station
possessed with as much fury as Love: but in regard the Bostangi, who had placed
him in his convenience was without, he was obliged to stay till the dusk of the
Evening began to confound the sight, and render the Objects of it less
discernable, and then he made a shift to eseape; but he could not do it so
dexterously, but one of the Bostangi Basha's Eunuchs perceived that a Man had
hid himself in the Lybyrinth while the Sultan was there, of which the Sultan
was informed; and though it could not be discovered who the Person was who had
ventured to that degree, yet in regard that Love is always ingenious to afflict
it self, it soon came into Mahomet's head, that Abra's coldness to him must
needs be the effect of some mysterious Love; that his assiduity to get into the
Labyrinth was the Effect of that Love, that it must be some unknown Lover that
had been so daring, and never suspecting the Prince his Brother, he resolved to
prevent the Consequences of such an Intreague, and to that purpose ordered the
Kisler the same day to carry Abra over the straight of Calcedon, and shut her
up in the Serraglio of Looking-glasses.

The Eunuch could not avoy'd the putting this Order in Execution, though it
grieved him to the Soul, and broke all the measures he had taken to serve the
Visir: for that being obliged to remain in the Grand Serraglio near Mahomet's
Person, the Serraglio of Looking-Glasses was governed by the Kisler Kiasi, who
is a kind of Deputy to the Kisler Agasi; and because not being able to go
thither, but when he was ordered by the Sultan to attend him, Abra was now
destitute of the Consolation and Advice which he was wont to give her. So that
all the good he could do her was only to place such Slaves about her as she
desired, and Eunuchs for whose fidelity he could be answerable.

In the mean time Constantinople was all in an Uproar, by reason of the
continual bad Tidings that followed one another of the Misfortunes of the
Campaign; and Siaous's and Cuproli's Friends spread abroad Reports so
disadvantageous to the Visir's Conduct, that he was become the Object of the
Peoples Aversion and Scorn.

But when the Prince understood by Marama, that the Sultan had removed Abra,
and put her into the Serraglio of Calcedon, and had caused her to take upon her
the name of Sultaness, his jealousy made him believe that she had Surrendered
to the Love of this new Rival, and his despair not being able to imagine any
other way to enjoy her, but by making himself Master of his Brother's Throne,
from that very Moment he took a Resolution to pull down his Brother, and to
take the Advantage of the Conjuncture to dispose the exasperated minds of the
People to Revolt.

His Mysterious applying himself to the study of the Alcoran, had made him take
particular care always to insinuate himself into the Friendship of the Mufti's,
who are the Sovereign Pontiffs of the Law, and to be in a Continual familiarity
with the Imans, who are the Preachers that hold forth in the Mosquees, and with
all the Mohammedan Clergy; by which means he had gained their Hearts by the
affected shows of a superstitious Devotion, and by the Liberality of his Alms
of which he made them the Trustees; so that 'twas no hard thing for him to
incense those senseless Ecclesiastics, and put 'em upon railing publicly
against the Authors of all the Disorders in the Empire, under pretense of
Preaching Repentance to the People.

From the Abuse of this false Zeal, it was that the first Inclinations to
Revolt, slidd themselves into Male-contented Breasts. But Mischief was yet a
great way off, and therefore before they could fall upon the Person of the
Sultan, there was a necessity of ruining the Visir, who was his Zealous
Favorite, and who possessed the hearts of the Principal Officers of the Empire.

The Prince was therefore persuaded that the loss of Buda, that the victorious
Progresses of the Christians, even to the Bridge of Esseck, and that the
Murmurs of the People against his Chief Minister, would wean the Sultan's
Affection from him. But he was surpised when he saw the Visir arrived at
Constantinople, with a Writting signed by all the Principal Officers of the
Army, and Siaous himself, who was forced to swim with the stream, for fear of
Discovering his Intentions, and that this Writing was an Encomium of the
Visir's Conduct, prudence and Courage, and which justified him in every
particular that could be Objected against him.

The Sultan, who had always had a kindness for him, was overjoyed that his
Soldiers gave his Favorite so advantageous a Testimony: He received him with
open Arms; and ordered him to hasten more powerful Preparations, that he might
the next Campaign repair the Misfortunes which were not to be imputed to any
defect in Him.

Prince Soliman, who began to buckle the Spurrs of his Ambition with the
Impetuous desires of his Love, and who by the loss of one of his Rivals, was
desirous to hasten the downfall of the other, finding that whatever Siaous and
Cuproli had done during the Campaign proved fruitless, labored under
unimaginable Vexations. Siaous and Cuproli were arrived at Constantinople, and
Prince Soliman so ordered it, as to meet 'em both in a place, wither he came to
'em in disguize.

Presently the Prince told 'em, that after what they had done the last
Campaign, things were reduced to that Extremity, that either they must ruin the
Vizir, or expect all three to perish by the Bow-string; that there was no time
to be lost; that since the Loss of Buda, of such Importance to the Empire,
wrought no effect upon the Sultan, but that his Minion was still as much in
favor as ever, there was but one way to succeed, which was to make themselves
absolute Masters of the Army; that they should cause 'em to revolt in the midst
of the Campaign, and oblige 'em to demand the Head of the Grand Visir, and of
all his principle Friends; Seeing then, that the Sultan afraid of himself,
would be forced to sacrifice him to his own Security; and that then the Seal of
the Empire could fall into no other hands, but either Siaous's or Cuproli's.

The two Basha's acknowledged that the Prince spoke nothing but what was
reason, however they did not yet penetrate into all his Designs; and Soliman,
like a crafty Politician, was desirous to render 'em still more Guilty before
he imparted to 'em the last Crime they were to commit. All this while they
followed the Interests of their own Ambition, and as the first steps they had
made engaged them to push forward the ruin of the Visir, or else patiently to
submit to their own destruction, they promised Soliman to go on with the
project, of which he had given the draught.

The favorable reception which the Sultan gave the Visir, and the augmentation
of his Power and his Credit did not abate his deadly Afflictions, to find that
his Master was his formidable Rival, in whose power it was to make him happy.
Nor was the Kisler any longer able to give him the Opportunities of seeing his
beloved Mistress. All that he could do, was cunningly to conveigh his Billets
to her by Saria's means, and the fidelity of the Eunuchs which he had placed
about her. So that the Visir having no other consolation left, desired his
friend to get the following Letter delivered to her.

The Unfortunate to his dear Unfor^^nate.
BY what Cruelty of Fate, my Dear Abra, must I be the most unhappy of your
Lovers, when I am the most be loved! You refuse the Sultan's Vows, but he has
the pleasure of seeing you when he pleases; and if he be not the most happy,
yet he may be so when ever he has a mind to it. Prince Soliman may comfort
himself for your indifferency, with the pleasure that he had to save your life;
only the unfortunate Visir, as much beloved as he is, can neither see you, nor
pay you any service. The Sultan continues his favors to me. Alas! Let him take
'em from me, and restore me the Blessing of which he has deprived me; all his
Empire is not worth a sigh from your Lips. If you love me still, you will judge
of my Sorrows by your own Grief; they are deadly, if Heaven does not furnish me
with some Expedient to break your Chains.


The Kisler caused this Letter to be faithfully delivered: In the mean time the
Sultan, maugre all the Vigilance of the jealous Sultaness, found out pretenses
to go to Calcedon. For the murmurs of the People, and the insolent Harangues of
the Imans, afforded him anow; and therefore faigning not to be safe in
Constantinople, he frequently crossed the Straight, and to give the more color
to his Pretenses, he many time held the Divan in the Serraglio of
Looking-Glasses, and then he ordered the Visir to attend him.

One Evening that he went thither with his chief Ministers, and that they two
were just entering into his Cabinet to prepare what was fit to be propounded the
next day to the Divan, they were amazed to hear the loud Cries and Skreekes of
Women quite through the Galleries, at what time they were informed that a
sudden Fire was broken forth in the Body of the Building, and that the Flames
besieged the principal appartiment on every side, which was the appartiment
where the Sultan had placed his fair Muscovite; so that hastening thither,
together with the Visir and their Train, they found the Conflagration so
violent, that neither Slaves nor Eunuchs durst venture thorough to succor the
Women who were in extreme Danger.

The Sultan's Voice and his Orders encouraged 'em, but the Visir understanding
which was Abra's Appartiment, was the first that flew to her Aid; and having
sought and found her alone in a Swoon in her Chamber, he took her in his Arms,
and seeing that the violence of the Flames had seized that part at which he
entered, he made his may through Clouds of Smoke, and through another Gallery
which led to an Appartiment a good way from the Fire.

The Sultan, who neither saw the Visir return, nor knew what was become of
Abra, thought her lost, and displayed his Sorrow at a more then usual Rate;
some Women that were saved could tell no tidings of her; neither could Sarai
her self make any Discovery, who was not with her Mistress when the Fire broke
out.

In the mean time, Abra being carried to the furthest end of that Appartiment,
which the Tumult had quite Emptied, recovered her Spirits, and found her self
in the Visir's Arms. However she was still in an Amazement, nor could she
apprehend the meaning of such a surprising Adventure. But the Visir, who was
not willing to lose so precious an Opportunity, threw himself at her Feet, and
Embracing her with no less Ardour then Respect; Ah, Madam, said he, you behold
once more your Unfortunate Lover; Heaven could not remove the Obstacles that
rendered you invisible, but by exposing your life to the most dreadful of all
Dangers; nothing but a miraculous accident could afford me this opportunity of
seeing you. Lucky Danger! Favorable Meeting! But may I know, Madam, whither
your heart be as constant as mine: I was afraid of a Rival who had no power;
but Fate has found me out another who can do whatever he pleases; have I no
cause to fear neither his Love, nor his Power?

His Empire, answered Abra, may be absolute over every thing else, but over my
heart. But as for my heart, I preserve it for your self till Death, and I will
lose a thousand Lives, before I prove unfaithful to you. But, Sir, will you
suffer me to perish in his Fetters, are they so invincible that you cannot
release me?

Ah, Madam, replied the Visir, there is not any Reason, or danger that can
hinder me from doing it, if it be your desire, and this is the most favorable
opportunity in the world if you can resolve to make use of it. The whole
Serraglio is in an upproar, the Sultan will believe ye lost in the Flames,
stay but a minute here, and I Will go fetch one of my white Eunuch's Habits, and
set ye out of the Serraglio, through the door of one of the Gardens, of which
I have the Key; for the rest never trouble your self, Love, Prudence and
Opportunities will direct us.

How odd and dangerous soever this proposal appeared, such was the cruel
Condition that Abra was in, that without any more ado she accepted the offer.
The Visir was soon furnished with the Habit he desired, and having disguised
her, he let her out at the Garden Door, and delivered her into the charge of
one of his most faithful Eunuchs, who not knowing who she was, but taking her
for some new Eunuch that had been presented to his Master, put her into a
little Fisher Boat with a disign to land her in Constantinople.

The Visir, having thus entrusted his Treasure to the Fidelity of that Slave,
went to attend the Sultan, a thousand accidents presenting themselves for
pretenses to excuse his Absence. Mahomet was at his wits end; though the Fire
was quite Extinguished, by leaving the Flames to feed upon the grand
Appartiment, while they stopped it from going any farther, by pulling down some
building between that and the rest of the Serraglio; but search was made for
the Muscovite in every corner, so that at length the Sultan gave her over for
lost; and that which confirmed him the more in that Opinion was, that after the
Fire was put out, they found the remainders of five or six Bodies.

In the mean time, Abra's Vessel rowed directly to Constantinople by the bright
Rays of the Moon, and she flattered her self that she should now soon enjoy the
only Person whom she Loved above all the World; but there is nothing more to be
wondered at then the Fantastic changes of Fortune.

The News of the Fire in the Serraglio of Looking-Glasses was brought to the
chief Sultaness about Midnight; therefore because she kept the chiefest part of
her Treasure there, and for that she knew besides that the Sultan was gone
thither, these two disturbing reasons obliged her to send for the Kisler, and
take her Saick immediately, with orders to cross the Water to Calcedon. But no
sooner had she put to Sea, but by the dawning light of day, they discovered a
little Fisher Boat making for the Europaean shore; upon which the Sultaness who
was willing to hear News, constrained the Visir's slave to come aboard her
Vessel. Presently she asked him several Questions, and finding him tripping in
his Answers, she sent for the White Eunuch, with whom he said he was entrusted.

No sooner was he come into the Cabin in Disguise, but the Kisler, who
accompanied the Sultaness knew Abra notwithstanding her disguise; and the
Asseki, charmed with the Beauty of the Eunuch, declared that she would keep him
to attend upon her. But the Kisler being a man of a cunning, sharp and present
Wit, and quickly conceiving that Abra had made her escape by some contrivance
of the Visirs, he knew that if the Sultaness should carry her back to Calcedon,
'twould be the ruin of both the two Lovers, and therefore never hesitating what
course to take, he put all the People out of the Cabin, excepting the White
Eunuch, and that done, the Kesler taking Abra by the hand, and squeezing it in
his own to prevent surprise, he looked upon the Sultaness, and putting the
Question to her as it were in jest, may a man rely upon ye, Madam, should he
trust ye with a secret which you would be glad to know? I had thought, replied
the Sultaness you had known me better then to doubt it. Upon your word then,
Madam, I must put so much confidence in you, as to let you understand that this
fair Eunuch is the lovely Muscovite with whom the Sultan is so desperately in
love, but who no less obstinately refuses to correspond with his Amor. I find
she has taken her opportunity in the confusion caused by the Fire to get away.
Would you, Madam, carry her back to Mahomet whom she avoids, and who without
question hunts after her in a thousand disquiets of mind? My duty indeed
requires that I should seize her, and deliver her back into his hands; but I am
too much your friend to take that course. It Is for you, Madam, to do as you
think sitting; and if you will take the Advice of a Slave, that is solely
devoted to your interests, I would not have ye let go this happy opportunity
that Heaven has put into your hands; you may at once deliver your self from the
fears of so amiable a Rivaless, and at the same time release her from all her
Pains. Bury this important secret in a profound silence, and content your self
with allowing her a safe sanctuary from the Sultan's Passion, which at length
perhaps may cool and return to its first object.

The Asseki, confirmed by Abra's confession, who instead of revealing to her
the secret of the Visir, gave her to understand, that she had of her own head
made her escape from the Sultan, embraced her, and promised her all manner of
favor and security, and by concert with the Kisler, sent her to
Constantinople, to a place where she was absolute Mistress, and where she kept
her concealed under an unknown Name. However she pursued her first intentions,
went to Calcedon, and returned with the Sultan, who was more perplexed for the
loss of Abra, then for all his other misfortunes. On the other side, the Kisler
informed the Visir of what had befallen the Muscovite, which pierced him to the
Soul, finding that he had lost her again, though he thought himself a competent
gainer in having released her from slavery to the Sultan.

During these amorous motions, the preparations for the Campaign were carried
on might and main, and the Visir left nothing omitted that lay in his Power to
put himself into such a condition that he might repair his losses; while Siaous
and Cuproli prepared the minds of the Soldiers every where for mutiny,
instilling it into their heads, neither to have any confidence in the Grand
Visir, which is the Soul of obedience, nor any esteem for him, which preserves
respect.

The Visir stayed but a while at Constantinople, for the Sultan obliged him to
hasten away for Belgrade; and this it was that occasioned the report, as if he
never had been there. His first care was to repair the Bridge of Esseck,
notwithstanding those difficulties which appeared unsurmountable; and soon
after he put himself at the head of his Army.

On the other side Prince Charles, and the Duke of Bavaria, having rendevouz'd
together above Sixty Thousand Men, advanced at the head of 'em, and resolved to
decide the Fate of the Campaign by a pitched Battle, and to that purpose
crossed the Drove. But the Vizir, who had been more speedy in his march then
they expected, came and Encamped with Fourscore Thousand men in view of the
Christian Army; and in regard he understood perfectly well how to make choice
of his Ground, he had got the Drove upon the right, a Forest upon his left,
Esseck in his rear, and an intrenchment in front, fortified with a double Moat
forty foot wide, and a double Rank of Palisado's: So that he forced Prince
Charles, after some Rude Encounters, to retreat for want of Provision. But he
made his Retreat in so good Order, that he repassed the Drove in view of the
Enemy without the least disturbance, and Encampt within a league of Mohatz.

The Visir, flattered with this first Advantage, and desirous to make the best
of it, past the Drove, and being posted between Esseck and Darda, sent out
numerous detachments to harrass the Christian Army. As for his own Camp, he had
entrenched it with a Palisado'd moat which secured his Front, he had Esseck in
his rear, from whence he was plentifully supplied with Provisions, the Danaw,
and Impassable Morasses secured his Right Wing, and his Left was covered with a
Wood, by the side of which lay a long Morass; so that it was a difficult thing
for Prince Charles to venture the forcing his Camp without hazarding the loss
of his whole Army.

Therefore he made use of all manner of stratagems and motions, to try whether
he could draw the Visir from his Post, and bring him to a General Battle. But
he, who found himself better supplied with Provisions then the Imperialists,
sought to ruin 'em by frequent Skirmishes, and therefore keeping close in his
Camp, sent out Parties continually to disturb the Enemies Forragers, or to
attack 'em in their Movements.

But all this while he was ignorant of what Siaous was plotting in his Camp, in
Conjunction with Basha Yeghen, a Man Daring, of a Turbulent and Seditious
Spirit and the Visir's particular Enemy, insolent in his language, but
Eloquent, gifted in persuasion, and who by his familiar deportment had gained
great Credit with the Soldiery. Their Design was to force the Visir to a
Battle, and so to order their Affairs that he might lose it, that it might
serve for a pretense for the Soldiers to revolt.

All things being thus concluded, upon the 12th. of August Prince Charles,
faigning a Retreat passed a narrow Lane full of Hedges that covered his March,
and gave order's for his Army to embattel in the Plain of Siclos. The Visir
having Intelligence of this General motion of the Christian Army, sent away
some considerable Bodies to follow 'em, and fall upon their Rear commanded by
the Elector of Bavaria. The Basha of Arabia also was ordered with one part of
the Army to second the Detachments. But Siaous who judged the Opportunity
proper for his design, presently put the Soldiers into such a fit of
Murmuring, as if their General had deprived 'em of a certain Victory, that the
Visir finding that the Basha acting beyond his Orders, marched on with the
Detachments, and not being able to restrain the Heat of the Soldiers, drew his
whole Army out of their Entrenchments, and advanced directly toward the
Impe^ialists in Battle array.

The Vanguard of the Turk's overtook the Rear of the Christians, before they
had passed the narrow Lane; so that the whole stress of the first Charge fell
upon the Elector of Bavaria. However, having gained the rising Ground designed
him for his Post, in despite of all the Enemies Efforts, he stood firm, and
Prince Charles reinforced him with the second Line of the Vanguard, to prevent
the Enemies Charging him either in Flank or Rear.

The Turks charged him with great fury, and he withstood 'em with no less
prudence then undaunted Bravery, and venturing in the hottest of the Enemies
firing, he was wounded in the left hand with a Musket Bullet.

In the mean time Prince Charles, who was advanced a great way farther, thought
it convenient to draw the Enemy into the Plain, where they might have more
Room for Action, and succor one another with more Freedom. This caused the
Elector to quit his Ground, though Skirmishing all the while, so that his
Rear-guard made the Left Wing equal with the Right, which Prince Charles
Commanded.

Presently the whole Army of the Turks appeared in Battle array, and the
Princes who had now what they wished for charged 'em on all sides: The Insidels
also fell on with great Fury, and at first had some considerable Advantage,
having routed the Croates, and almost cut in pieces Comercy's Regiment; and the
success of the Ba^ttel had been very dubious, had not the Spahi's by the
contrivance and treachery of Siaous, Yeghen, and the Basha of Arabia, left the
Janisaries that fought against the Duke of Bavaria, who taking his advantage of
that disorder, fell upon the Infantry opposite to him with an extraordinary
fury. However, the Janisaries instead of being brok'n, retired in good order as
far as their Entrenchments, where at first they fell a firing at a prodigious
rate, but not being seconded by the Horse, they betook themselves to flight,
and this Rout of the Turks Right Wing striking a Terror into the Left, the
Disorder became General, the whole Army was denfeated, and the Camp. taken and
pilladg'd; at what time the Vizir retreating of Esseck, and having rallied his
scattered Troops, found he had lost above Twenty thousand Men.

Siaous would not let this Opportunity slip, which he had taken so much pains
to bring about; so that the Mutiny began with the Quarrels between the Spahi's
and the Janisaries; but they being soon reunited, vented all their fury in
Murmurs against the Visir; who not understanding whence the mischief proceeded,
thought to have appeased 'em, by distributing among 'em all the Money he had.
But the poison was too well prepared, and had spread it self too far; so that
the minds of the Soldiers being more and more envenomed, their Clamours
augmented, while the Imperialists prosecuting their Victory, made themselves
Masters of Esseck, and the Passage of Drove. Nor was Siaous contented with
stirring up the Soldiers to murmur, but incensing them to an open Revolt, put
himself at the Head of 'em, and Yeghen had the boldness to enter the Visir's
Tent, and demand in the Name of the Army the Seals of the Empire, and Mahomet's
Standard, declaring, they were resolved no longer to obey him.

This Insolence producing a great Uproar, the Visir made his escape, got by
water to Belgrade, and thence posted to Constantinople, to give the Sultan an
Account of the Campaign, Siaous's Treacheries, and the Condition of the Army.

The Visir having thus withdrawn himself, Siaous became Master of the Army, and
deputed six Officers to demand, in the Name of the Soldiers, the Heads of the
Vizir, and of all his principal Friends, of which they drew up a List. The
Vizir being informed of these furious Proceedings, sent the Seals of the Empire
to the Grand Teffterdar, for him to deliver 'em into the Sultan's hands, and
with only one slave stole privately into Constantinople, and went to the
Kiamakan's House, where the Kisler came to him, and assured him, in the
Sultan's Name, that neither his Misfortunes, nor the Mutinies of the Soldiers,
had shaken his Favor; that he loved him; that he pitty'd him, and that he was
not only resolved to see him, but to defend him against the fury of the
Revolters.

However, nothstanding all the weight of these Misfortunes with which the Vizer
seemed to be overwhelmed, he had still his thoughts fixed upon the fair
Muscovite.

We gave an Account, how some few days before the departurte of the Vizir for
Belgrade, she fell into the Hands of the Sultaness Asseki; but the Vizir was so
far from being able to get to her in the place, where she was kept concealed,
and under another Name, that he could hardly procure the delivery of a Letter
to her; nor had he received any from her, though the Kisler had had credit
enough to keep Sarai about her still.

However he understood by a Eunuch, that the Sultan knew very well that she was
not burnt in the fire, and that he had private Intelligence that she had made
her escape out of the Serraglio of Looking-Glasses; nevertheless that he knew
not who had contributed to her escape, and that all the Diligence he had used
to find out the Place of her Retirement had proved fruitless. That Prince
Soliman had been better informed; for that Marama who held her Correspondencies
every where, had dived into the Secret out of a Conceit she had that her escape
was a stroke of the Sultaness's jealousy, and that upon that discovery she was
negotiatiog with the Sultaness Asseki; with whom she had entrusted the secret
of Prince Soliman's Love, and had put it into her head that the only way to
deprive Mahomet of her was to deliver her up to his Brother.

This drove the Visir to his Wits end, to see the utter Ruin of his Fortune and
his Love both at one time: However the Kisler carried him privately to the
Sultan, who received him tenderly, and assured him not only of the continuance
of his favor, but of his Protection against the Fury of his Enemies.

In the mean time the Commanders from the Army arrived, and Mutaferaka, the
chief of 'em, an intimate friend of Siaous's, after he had privately conferred
with Soliman hautily demanded an Audience, which the Sultan would fain have
refused him.

He declared, that the Soldiers, having found that the Visir Soliman was not
able to command 'em, would no longer obey him, that they demanded him Head, and
the Heads of the Kaymakan Redgeb, the Grand Teftarder, the Kisler Agasi, with
the heads of several Others, of which he delivered a List in writing: That
while they received his Highnesses Orders they had made choice of Siaous for
their Captain, a person of accomplished Experience, and Zeal for the good of
the Empire; that they hoped the Sultan would approve their Choice, and would
send him the Ensigns of an Employment which he merited by his Services and his
Fidelity.

But this Insolence of the Army which went about to give Laws to their
Sovereign, shook not Mahomet's Resolutions as yet, for he thought by
distributing Money among the Soldiers to appease their fury; and they who
either shared in his growing Troubles, or feared the Consequences of the
mutiny, readily contributed to the raising a considerable Sum. The Sultaness
Asseki gave two Thousand Purses, of five hundred Crowns each; the Kisler Agasi
furnished almost as much, and others proportionably: But the minds of the
Soldiers were too much exasperated; they took the Money indeed, but it was all
thrown away to no purpose.

The Mutiny therefore growing more outrageous, and Siaous and Yeghen being
Masters of the Army, and in Constantinople, where Soliman caused the Directors
of the Mosquees to act their Parts, and the Sultan remaining Obstinate, and
resolving rather to lose all, then deliver up the Visir to the Mercy of his
Enemies, bethought himself of taking another Course; which was to degrade the
Visir and the Caimacan, and to conferr the Employment of the first upon Siaous,
and upon Cuproli his Brother in Law the place which the latter held; imagining
that the Ambition of the Ringleaders being satisfied, the tumults would cease.

With these hopes, he sent for Cuproli from the Dardanells, and made him
Caimacan, instead of Redgeb, and dispatched away the Seal of the Empire and
Mahoment's Standar'd to Siaous; but he declared he would never consent to the
death of Officers whom he esteemed both Loyal and faithful.

So soon as Cuproli saw himself advanced to the second place in the Empire, he
had a private Conference with Soliman, and then it was that the Prince
descover'd to him his design to make himself Master of the Empire, which till
then he had always kept concealed in his Breast. Now in regard it was the
Interest of this New Caimacan and Siaous, who found the power in their hands to
attempt what they pleased, to correspond with the ambitious Designs of Prince
Soliman, he found Cuproli inclined to second his desires, and undertook for
Siaous, that he should concur with 'em in the Accomplishment of their wishes.

Things being in this Confusion, and Mahomet still resolved not to abandon the
Visir to the Rage of the mutinous Soldiers, had caused him to resolve upon a
safe Course, which was to withdraw himself from the impetuosity of their
Hatred, by retiring to the Prontiers of Persia, and there to stay till Affairs
might recover a new face, and furnish him with a favorable Opportunity to
regain his Reputation.

This was concluded between 'em, and ready to have been put in Execution: But
the Visir, who in the midst of his Misfortunes could not forget his Dearest
Abra, desired the Kisler that he would engage himself to procure the delivery
of but one more short Letter to her, and afford that last comfort to a Friend
whom perhaps he might never see again.

The Kisler moved with compassion of his Friends overwhelming Misfortunes,
would not refuse him that last favor; so that being entrusted with the Letter,
he gave it into the hands of an Eunuch, who was wont to carry others of the
same nature to Sarai. But a most cruel Destiny, and unexpected accident
hindered it from falling into the hands of that beloved Confident. For the
Eunuch gave the Letter to another slave, who seeing Sarai in the arms of Death,
and believing there was some secret in the Gold Box, wherein the Letter was
enclosed, her curiosity made her open it, and understanding by the reading of
it, that the unknown person whom she served was that Abra, for whose loss the
Sultan was so extremely troubled, she thought the discovery of such a secret
would raise her Fortune, and therefore being introduced into Mahomet's
presence, she delivered the Box into his Hands; at what time the Sultan having
opened it, read the following words.

Soliman Visir to the Faithful Abra.
HEaven has overwhelmed me with misfortunes; it only raised me to the highest
Pinnacle of Honor to precipitate me thence. But, my dear Abra, all my
Afflictions would signify little to me in comparison of the loss of your
heart. If you continue faithful to the most unfortunate of Men, or if you
withstand the Sultan's Power, from whose Embraces I have so luckily wrested
ye, and to the troublesome Passion of that other Rival, who as is reported, is
laboring to purchase ye from the Sultaness, I shall look upon it as the
Consolation of all my Misfortunes. I am going a long journey, and I carry along
with me, the dear Picture which you gave me. I kiss it a thousand times a day;
and speak to it what I cannot speak to your self. Love me, pity me, and be
assured, that the last sigh of faithful Soliman will be for faithful Abra.


Never was surprise to be compared with that of the Sultan's; and never did so
violent a Fury seize the heart of a Lover enraged, and a Master betrayed. He
made a considerable present to the slave, and being exactly informed of every
thing, and understanding that the Letter passed through the Kisler's hand, he
bid her be silent, and so dismissed her.

No sooner was he alone by himself, but with a fuming Indignation sparkling in
his Eyes, and looking a second time upon the Letter, the Traitors shall dye,
cried he, with a sigh of high displeasure. How! a Favorite, upon whom I have
heaped my Favors, is it he that rends from my Bosom the Person whom I adore!
An Infamous Eunuch, who my Bounty has raised from the Chains of Thraldom to
excessive Power and Wealth betrays me in my own Serraglio, and in concert
together both the one and the other make me their sport, while I hazard the
loss of my Diadem to protect 'em from the fury of their Enemies. It Is too hard
on my side, but they shall perish both.

Afterward he racked his Brains, to penetrate who might be his other Rival. He
knew the Sultaness could easily resolve him, but he was loath to mention the
matter to her. But at length after the first commotions of his Fury were over,
he gave Orders to seize the Visir, the Kisler Agasi, and all the rest whom the
Soldiers demanded, as Victims to the tranquillity of the Empire.

He ordered Abra's Picture to be brought him, which was found about the Visir
in a little Case, and which he wore upon his heart; the sight of the Picture
redoubled his inward Vexations, and the fire of his Anger over ruling his
Friendship which he thought abused by the foulest of all acts, Ingratitude, he
resolved the Visirs Ruin. Nevertheless he was willing that the victim which he
offered to his Love, should be looked upon as an oblation sacrificed to the
public good. To which purpose calling a Divan, wherein the new Caimacan
Cuproli presided, he decreed the Death of the Visir, the Kisler Agasi, and of
all the rest whose Heads the Soldiers demanded, who under Yeghen, followed by
Siaous, were marching with all speed toward Constantinople.

This decree was put in Execution the same day upon the Visir; and the Sultan
would needs have him tortured, to make him discover who was that other Lover
mentioned in his Letter; but his generosity would not permit him to make any
Confession: So that after he had suffered the Rack, he was strangled in the
Serraglio, and his Head sent to the Soldiers; and to give 'em entire
satisfaction he ordered the Kisler Agasi, the Caimacan Redgeb, the Grand
Teftardar, and all the other unfortunate Objects of their Fury to be delivered
up in Chains to their Fury, who no sooner appeared before the Army, but they
were cut in pieces with a more then barbarous Inhumanity.

The Army had already past through Adrianople, and were still advancing, while
the Sultan who thought he had fully satisfied 'em by this Bloody Sacrifice, was
desirous that his Love should in some measure reap the Fruit of what he had
done; to which purpose the New Agasi took away Abra from the Sultaness, and
shut her up again in the Serraglio of Calcedon, whither he went to Visit her,
showed her her Picture, together with the Visir's last Letter, and upbraided
her with all the severest Reproaches that she could expect from an enraged
Sultan, and a furious Lover.

During this cruel Catastrophe, Prince Soliman saw his ambitious Aims advancing
toward their Accomplishment. The Visir, and all his principle Friends, most
Loyal to the Sultan, were now cut off. Siaous and Cuproli possessed the two
chiefest employments in the Empire, the Old Musti was changed, and a new one
put in by Cuproli, and the Imans still heated the People, and supplied 'em with
fuel to feed the Flames of premeditated Revolt; but all this while he missed
the satisfaction of his Love, in regard the Sultan having broken all his
private Measures with the Sultaness, had got Abra into his own Possession; so
that he saw no other way to wrest her from his Embraces, but by ascending his
Throne, and making himself Lord of his Serraglio.

Every day brought some new Persons over to his Party, and Cuproli, who by
virtue of his employment presided in the Divan, in the Visir's Absence had
gained by his Artifices the new Kisler Agasi, whose Assistance was very
necessary in case there should be any Tumult in the Serraglio.

The Prince therefore finding Abra forced away by the Sultan into a new
Captivity, was afraid least he should make use of violence to procure the
Satisfaction of his Love; and this it was which engaged him to precipitate the
Execution of his Design, for which he had all along taken his Measures with
Cuproli, who was well convinced that Siaous and he enjoyed their Employments
only by virtue of that Force which had wrested the Grant of 'em from the
Sultan, and that they could not preserve 'em but by placing Soliman upon the
Throne.

By this time the Army that still marched forward under Yeghen, was not above
two days March from Constantinople, and Siaous followed with the Main Body, and
the better to conceal his Design, faign'd a Quarrel with him, but their common
Aim was the Deposal of a Master whom they had offended, and who could never
have a real Affection for 'em. As for Cuproli, he had made all the Provision
that could be for the execution of the Enterprise, as well in the Serraglios
and his preparations of the Mufti.

Soliman therefore, for the sake of his Amor, desirous to hasten the Business,
went to Cuproli, laid open to him the bottom of his Heart, and his Passion for
Abra, and gave him moreover to understand, that in placing him upon the Throne
they fulfilled the Importunities of his ambition, but did nothing for the
Repose of his Mind, which depended upon the Enjoyment of Abra, and preventing
Mahomet's Passion from offering Vielence to her.

She was in the Serraglio of Looking-Glasses deeply plunged in sorrow and
Affliction, nor could she reflect upon the unhappy Fate of her dear Visir,
strangled by the order of his Rival, in whose power she was, without abandoning
her self to all that Rage and Despair could inspire of most Dismal and
Mournful. She had seen her Picture in the Sultan's Hands, which he had not
showed her, had it not been to triumph the more barbarously over the Ruin of
his Rival. By that, and by the Visir's letter, she knew that the Discovery of
his Love was the only cause of his death and her Grief being so much the more
bitter, by reason that death had deprived her of her dear Confident, nothing
but only the Resolution she had taken to revenge herself upon Mahomet, had put
a stop to the dire Effects of her own Despair.

In the mean time, the new Kisler Agasi having Engaged himself in Soliman's
interests, and being informed of his Amors, offered himself to speak to the
Muscovite in his behalf, and after he had discoursed her in private, he found
her highly incensed against Mahomet; and therefore to excite her the more
willingly to correspond with Solimons Passion, he thought it proper to impart
to her the inclinations of the great Officers of the Empire, to set Soliman
upon the Throne.

Upon this Discovery, Abra who breathed nothing but Revenge, put the Kisler in
some hopes, that so soon as Prince Soliman had satisfied her Revenge upon the
Sultan's barbarous Cruelty, she would be more inclined to favor his Passion.

The Kisler gave Prince Soliman an account of this seeming Compliance; and that
was enough to make him seek all ways to hasten that Revolution, which he
thought the only means to arrive at Abra's Heart. In the mean time he deemed it
necessary to assure her, by a Billet under his hand, that there was nothing
which he would not willingly undertake, or endeavor to bring to pass, so he
might deserve her Love.

Now in regard that Mahomet had placed a very faithful Slave to attend upon
Abra, that she might have a watchful Eye upon all her Actions, this Billet fell
unhappily into the Sultan's Hands, who by that means found out who was that
same formidable Rival whom the Visir never would confess; so that he no sooner
had read it, but without any deliberation he determined a speedy Revenge.

'Twas Night, and therefore only attended with two of his Guards, he took his
Arms, and flew to Soliman's Appartiment with a furious Precipitancy, in hopes
to sacrifice him with his own hand to the atonement of his Rage.

Nor is there any question but he had succeeded in his Project, had not Cuprilo
and the Kisler Agasi, by taking true measures to prevent whatever might
disappoint their designs, and by giving forth all necessary Orders to secure
the life of him they looked upon already as their Sovereign, frustrated the
Effects of his Fury.

The Eunuchs who guarded Soliman, defended the first door of his Appartiment,
but Mahomet himself who fell upon 'em with more then ordinary fury, after he
had killed one and wounded two more, had forced the first door, and without
doubt had beat down the second, had not the Kisler Agasi hastened to the noise,
with a Company of armed Eunuchs, who fell upon Mahomet's Guards, and
constrained 'em to stand upon their own defense.

The Sultan enraged to see the Agasi in Arms against his Person, laid about
him with his Scimiter upon the Eunuchs, well seconded by his Guards, so that
the Combat was beginning to be somewhat bloody, at what time the Bostangi Bachi
arrived with a good number of armed Bostangi's. Mahomet thinking he had been
come to his assistance, ordered him to seize the Kisler, and to put all the
Eunuchs to the Sword; but the Bostangi, who was one of Soliman's Creatures,
looking fiercely upon the Sultan, We no longer Acknowledge your Commands, said
he, Your Life depends upon that Brother, who you are going basely to
Assassinate. The Sultan was so surpised at these insolent Words, that he stood
like a Statue, while his Guards betaking themselves to flight, left him in the
Power of the Bostangi, who caused his Attendants to surround him, and after he
had seized and disarmed him, carried him to his Appartiment, where he was locked
up under a strong Guard.

In the mean time the Kisler carried the Princes into the old Serraglio, and
Cuproli having assembled the Mufti, together with the Principal Officers in
Mosquee of Sta Sophia before day, there the Mohammedan Pontiff signed the Fetfa
for the Deposal of Mahomet.

This first Ceremony being over, Cuproli repaired to the old Serraglio, caused
Soliman to be placed upon a kind of a Throne, and having proclaimed him Sultan,
was the first himself that paid him Homage. After this, they referred it to
his pleasure to dispose of Mahomet's Destiny, who thought it sufficient to shut
him up during the Remainder of his days.

His Ambition being thus satisfied, the only thing he applied his Mind to next,
was to gratify his Love. To which purpose he commanded the Kisler Agasi to
repair with all speed to Calcedon, and bring away the Sultaness Abra; whom he
declared his Asseki, and to deliver her a Letter which he wrote to her in the
following Terms.

Sultan Soliman to the Sultaness Asseki, Abra-Mule.
YOU are revenged, fair Abra, Mahomet is punished, and I am upon the Throne;
the Only reason I attempted to ascend it, was only to make you the Mistress of
my Empire, as you are of my heart. Come then and satisfy the Impatience of my
Love, and enjoy all the Grandeurs you deserve. Your Word is a sufficient Pledge
for the Pleasures I expect from you, and for that which you ought to take, in
being the Only Sultaness of

Sultan Soliman.


Abra joyfully received the news which the Kisler brought her, that she was
revenged upon Mahomet; but in regard she was not ignorant that the Visir's
Misfortunss had been the Effect of a Conspiracy between Siaous, Cuproli, and
Soliman, and consequently that the Prince was the real Author of his death, she
abhorred him with the utmost Hatred that an Injured heart could be capable of.

Therefore she listened very heedfully to the Kisler, read Soliman's Letter,
and then fixing her Eyes upon the Eunuch, Never, said she, did Woman Love a man
with that Fervency and Fidelity as I loved the Visir; for his sake I disdained
and contemned all the Advantages wherewith Mahomet could flatter my Ambition;
nor have I less despised Prince Soliman's vehement Passion. Mahomet put to
death my Lover and I am revenged, but the Disaster that befell that Lover was
the Workman ship of Sultan Soliman's artifices, and I have not a Heart so base
and treacherous to seek my Revenge upon his person, by foul and ignominious
means, with which a counterfeit Affection might furnish me, so that not being
able to punish him any other way, then by wresting my self from the Embraces of
his Passion, you shall tell him how I corresponded with his Love. And having
pronounced these last words; she drew forth a dagger which she held concealed
under her upper Garment, and stabbing herself through the heart fell dead at
the Kisler's feet.

Such was the dismal Catastrophe of Abra-Mule's Amors; so fatal to the Ottoman
Empire, and to three Unfortunate Lovers. The Visir, whom she loved, was
strangled; Mahomet lost his Empire, and Soliman fell into such a terrible fit
of Melancholy and dozing Vexation, that he only languish'd upon the Throne in
a profound and continual Pensiveness, the cause of which few persons knew; and
at length, falling into a kind of insensibility of every Thing, excess of
inward Grief, that never left him, brought him to his end.

The END.

