Elixyrlogia: OR A Compendious Discourse, wherein the Eminent and Effectual
Virtues and Properties of the Universal ELIXYR are set forth: Not only for the
particular Use of them that would prevent the Contagion of the PLAGUE, (so far
as Art and Medicine can reach) but for the general Cure, Remedying, and certain
Prevention of most Acute Diseases Incident to Mankind: Together with common and
daily Accidents (terrible in themselves) which outwardly happen, and are often
accompanied with Death, if not prevented.

With the manner of Taking it; the Time when; and how Outwardly to be Applied
when the Distemper is without.

And a Rational Account how it may certainly Conduce to the prolonging of Life,
if Medically Administered in a little quantity every Morning to an empty Stomach.

By THEOD. Le MEDDE, M D.

London, Printed for Henry Eve^sden at the Greyhound in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1665.

To the English Lady.
MADAM,
MEn Quack to get money (I doubt you will say so of me too when you come to the
last page) Gentlewomen do good gratis, and like the Samaritan when they have
poured in Wine and Oil, and bound up the sores of the wounded give Money to the
relief of the Sick; of such there are several persons in this Kingdom of
Honorable Degree, who are also so good proficients in the Therapeutick, or
Curative part of Physic, that without a strein we may term the daughters of
Apollo and Coronis. I may seem then to supererrogate in offering this (though a
choice Medicine) when they are furnished with Medicines, apt for all
intentions; yet Madam, how well so ever you are provided, let me add this one
to your store, and if you find it not as efficatious as is pretended in the
Title Page, let me be blamed for impertinence; Until then suspend that censure
upon, Madam,

Your Ladyships most humble servant, Le Medde.

Elixyrlogia.
THere is an Herb which is called Panax, it is a Greek word, (...) quasi (...),
an Herb which heals all Diseases: That the due use of this Herb produces
health to all that use it, let the world judge: But let us understand the
Etymoligers aright, and take their meaning, which was this, because this simple
was of good Medicinal use, and proper in many cases; they called it Panax or
All-heal.

For better reason do we put this Epithete upon our Elixyr, and call it
Universal, not that it will Cure all Diseases whatever man's body may be the
subject off; but that it is absolutely proper for preservation from all malign
Contagion, and of great and effectual use in the general Cure of malign
Distempers, and several accidents which daily happen to mankind. I know there
be, and have been, some who pretend to a Complete Panacea, or Universal
Medicine; but with what deceit, their imperfect cures (and by its use and
administration sometimes worse rendered) do declare. That which in short is here
promised is, That we would not so mueh as seem to pretend to more then can be
made good; neither will it be convenient to give this Medicine its utmost due
Encomium, least we flatter the vulgar sort into the belief of working wonders
(as is the usual Custom of Pamphleteers) which is not here intended, but the
bare knowledge of the truth.

Having given you the reason why this Medicine without injury to the truth, in
that it is of absolute use in the Cure of all malign and venomous Diseases, and
of effectual use, in the general Cure of other Distempers not malign, with
other accidents, in themselves terrible, and often accompanied with death, if
not prevented, such as Gangreens, Bitings of Venomous beasts, etc.) is termed
Universal, it will be needful in order to dispose what these Diseases are that
it is most effectual against.

To all malign Contagion, and venene or poisonous qualities (whether arising
from putrefaction, and so bred within the body, or conveyed to it insensibly by
malign Contagion, or sensibly by external instruments, as the Bitings of
Venomous creatures) it is the most proper and powerful Antagonist or adversary
to be used by way of prevention, or expulsion of Infection, poison or poisonous
qualities received.

To prevent malign contagion, there are appointed by Authors Medicines of
virtue Antidotal to be used externally and internally. The external to be hung
about the body, or so conveniently placed that by the heat of the body, their
virtue may be exhaled, (or being by an innate quality effluvious of themselves,
as Gums, Spices, Herbs, Roots, etc. for the altering and correcting the ambient
air (that which is continually about us) drawn into the mouth and nostrils, and
so into the Lungs: These they call Amulets by a general name; and were
compounded of many bodies, as Pomanders; or Simple, as some sorts of precious
stones, Amber, Mercury, Arsenic, etc.

That Amulets are of use is not to be disputed, but it may be a question
whether these Minerals shut up within their intranspirable Occluders, do
eradiate or beam forth spirituous Vapors; if they do not, what use can they be
of, if they be placed about, or born about the body, and do emit or send forth
any spirituous and thin parts, we may suppose them of ill consequence: But
being placed about the body, if their spirits emitted, could be made friendly
to ours, but in reasonable proportion of Homogenitie, they might be of
excellent use when the cause is ab extra. That Roots, Herbs, Pomanders, etc.
are of good use to salubriate the Air while they are held to or about the Nose,
we doubt not, but held or placed, or carried at a distance alter it not to our
purpose.

These are neat and cleanly things, and take with all; I wish they were as
effectual.

But if you would use an external Medicine as a preservative against Infectious
Air at any time or upon any occasion, (not that you are advised to rely in an
Internal or External Antidote, only to use them as the lawful means) one shall
be commended to be used in form of an Ointment, it is but a plain Medicine,
think of it as you please, the efficacy of it is known; The Ingredients are
Brimstone poudered very fine, or rather the flower of Brimstone, fresh Lard, or
Butter, Oil of Elecampane, with the addition of a little of the Chemical Oil of
Wormwood; There is a common Medicine in the country made of Brimstone and
Cream, its use is known to all; The person that uses this Ointment, is
perceived at a distance, by reason that the Brimstone being heated by the body,
its spirits are drawn out, and mixing themselves with the Air are drawn (with
the Air) into the bodies of them that are standers by, who perceive it, and are
apt to say that there is a stinck of Brimstone, and so people are apt to say of
other things, whose Odours are healthful and resist putrefaction, when in as
propriety we are only to attribute stinches to those bodies whose Odours are
unwholesome and promote putrefaction. But the Camphire and Oil of Wormwood,
added in their due proportion, as they add to the efficacy of the Medicine, so
they render it not unacceptable, but grateful to the Brain; rub it upon the
Breast, Arms, and Thighs, and you may trust to it as to a Medicine or Antidote
External against Infectious Air, at any time, and for other uses.

Their outward preservatives you have been told, and their use.

The Internal Medicines are Gallenical or Chemical; The Gallenical are
Confections, as Methridate; The Treacles, (of late invention) the London
Treacle, Diatessaron, Bezoardick-waters. Simples, as Gumms, Herbs and Roots,
such as to instance a few, Myrh, Aloes, etc. Rue, Wormwood, Masterwort,
Gentian, Aristiloch, etc. The Chemical (...), Antidotus (...) Quercit. Elix.
Prop. with many others; the mineral preparations as they are nimble in their
operations, and do good things when they hit on it, being of themselves
poisonous and adverse to our natures, unless duly prepared by art, become not
Antivenal or effectual against poison, therefore with great care to be
administered by grains and drops, that the Dose be not exceeded; cannot be taken
with that courage by the Patient, as those Medicines which unprepared are not
unwholesome, nor in no sort destructive to our natures. The Galenical Medicines
abovementioned, that they are good and profitable all do allow, but being
Harsh, Gross, and Nauseous, to Squeamish Stomachs, and to most Especially being
sick, in so much that the smell does much offend many, but much more the taste
(as that of Methridate, or any of the Treacles) that when it is as it were forced
down by a man's reason it is forced up again.

The consideration of which has given occasion to some to endeavor some neat
Preparations of most eminent efficacy against most Distempers whereunto man is
commonly subject, well tasting, not at all Nauseating the Stomach, (unless the
very name offend, for diverse are observed to spit at the very nameing of
Physic) and indeed nothing more grateful and friendly; Such as is this our
Universal Elixyr or Spirituous Liquour (a Medicine haing in it the Quintescence
or the purest parts of its Ingredients, which is essentiated with the most
powerful and effectual resisters of Putrefaction and Malignity.

Now those things that are most adverse to our natures are poisons, or
poisonous qualities (which as Authors say; are occult rnd hidden, and there is
reason so to think, for if they were not hid from our understanding, possibly
something might be found out not only to encounter, but to overcome them
(oftener then is usual) with Medicine: Moreover as these enemies to nature are
occult, we may conclude they are of exquisite thin parts: you may also believe
that those things we take into our bodies, to expel poisons, should be of
quality proportionable to their Antagonists, and be endued with rare and
tenuious parts, and heat also; which may beget this objection in some that do
not so well understand how Venene and Malign Distempers, which are for the most
part accompanied with intense heat) can be cured by Medicines that are hot,
because in the general practice of Physic, contraries are cured by their
contraries, which is that; As to those who ((...) or natural temper) are hot
and dry; to such Cordiack refrigerants; to the contrary temper, Cale facients
are appropriate. But in malig'n and venomous Diseases which are always
accompanied with heat, Coolers though Cordial, are less useful if not altogether
improper; but those Medicines that are found by experience to be most prevalent
and ought to be placed in the front in defense of the spirits which are in
danger of being overcome by their assailants, whose qualities tho hid, yet
furious and impetuous, are Medicines of vigorous Warmth, Heat and Activity, as
are all true and effectual Alexapharmacaes, or Medicines having power and
virtue seated in them (by the Author of all virtue) to cure and expel poison,
and Diseases of venomous qualities. That this is so, the examination of the
qualities of the simples that are in compositions accounted Specific in this
case, will inform the doubtful. That Medicines, that are proper to cure malig'n
Diseases are hot, we may believe our own taste, that this our Universal Elixyr
is hot, your own sense will tell you, that it is not too hot, your own
experience after you have taken a little quantity; may inform you: That it is
familiar to Nature and agreeable to the Stomach, and not at all too hot and may
indifferently be taken by all, do but once believe the word of a stranger. I
shall speak but a word or two, of two or three of the Ingredients of this
Universal Medicine (wherein there is not a few) and then shall show you how to
use it. At my being in India An. 45. where I observed the Pagans practice and
administrations in desparate cases, high Fevers, Impoisonings, etc. I found
they dealt much in simples, and learning their usual Dose, which was but
little in quantity, I supposed them of sovereign virtue to produce so good
effects, so speedily; tasting of them, I was confirmed in my opinion; since
that time the continual use of them (in many dangerous cases) by here and there
one that understood their property, has rendered events as prosperous as
Natural causes could allow.

Some others of much longer date in Europe, yet not of so frequent use in the
practice of Physic as there (shall I say) inaestimable worth does deserve.

I shall now proceed to show you how, and in what manner it is to be taken as a
preservative. Immediately before you go abroad in the Morning, take half a
Spoonful of this (it is to be understood that if you do not go forth you are to
take it, either before or after you have eaten what you intend) and at night
when you go to bed. The same quantity you may take at any time of the day, if
your business leads you into company or place suspicious. This small quantity
having in it the purer part (call it Essence or what you will) of what can be
imagined to be proper and effectual in a very little and not unpleasing draught
we take into our mouths, where we let it remain a very little while (which we
ought to do when we take it as a preservative from Contagion) before it passes
down the throat into the Stomach; now as it passes along it leaves its flavor
by the way, so that the Air received into the body, as it is receiving and
drawing in, receives alteration and notable correction by virtue of the
impression obtained in its stay and while it is swallowing down the throat: when
it is come into the Stomach, being of spirituous and thin parts, it is
immediately conveyed to the Neighboring parts, into the Lungs by
transmeation, and then to the heart, which it makes robust to keep off any
poisonous vapor; and if it be drawn in, mixed with the Air, presently it expels
the same, before the spirits be affected, which if they once be, soon begin to
dissipate and scatter abroad.

The use of the External Antidotes is (in short) to correct the Air of the
inward Antidotes or expellers of poison, to strengthen the Heart and Spirits.
That the taking of this Spirituous Liquor, two, three or four times a day (if
you have occasion so often to do it) is supplemental to all inward and outward
Antidotes you can think of, is not improbable; for as I said before, the
impression it leaves in th'mouth and throat, corrects the Air drawn into the
Lungs; and when it arrives in the Stomach, it becomes a powerful Cordial, or
Antidote, Corroborating and strengthening the spirit, enabling them to rise up
against their mortal foes; such are all poisons, poisonous, and malign
qualities.

Shall I tell you what commendation Rufus (an ancient Physician gave of a
preparation of Myrrh, Aloes, Ammoniac and Wine, a bitter yet wholesome
Medicine, haud novi qui hoc potu non superraverit Pestem, speaking as if that
Medicine was of such efficacy, that he scarce knew the man that took it once a
day but did overcome the Sickness. It is not my business to Eulogize, or
commend, what is here treated on. I think I said before by way of Caution, that
none ought wholly to rely upon any Medicine whatever; but that we use all
lawful means is our duty; that we use the most effectual is our discretion;
That this is, IN leave to the censure of opinion, seeing it wholly consists of
the virtue of those Ingredients, whose property is Specifickly and intensly
adverse to all poison, and by an innate quality does naturally expel all Venene
and malign qualities.

I shall only add thus much, that it stands to very good reason that those that
receive into their bodies those Antidotes that have power given them from the
Almighty to resist, withstand, and expel poison, should be in a better
condition then those that leave the tuition of their health, only to the
strength of Nature.

So much shall suffice for the efficacy of this Medicine touching preservation
from Contagion, or Infectious Air; I shall now proceed to its use in case of
Infection, or suspicion of Infection: It will be first convenient to acguaint
you, what are the most usual signs, whereby Infection may be suspected.

The symptoms, Accidents that attend, are not unlike the signs of some other
Acute Fevers, but usually more furious; They are these, Pain in the Head; in
the Back, and Loins; Sickness in the Stomach; Vomiting, Giddiness, Trembling;
Shivering and Chilness over the body, with some others.

When any of these happen, especially in sickly times, defer not going to bed;
but first of all, if your Stomach be offended at any thing you have taken, and
you incline to Vomit, forward it what you can; when you are thus free from what
offended your Stomach, then being in your bed, dispose your self to Sweat as
soon as you can; which that you may do to the purpose, help nature with this
Antipharmack, and take about two spoonfulls of it by its self, if you please,
and to choose if you are rather chill, then hot; but it you be very hot put to
it of Juice of Citrons, Lemons, Orenges, Juice of Sorrel clarified, Elder
Vinegar, Rose Vinegar, as much as will sour it well; or you may take it in a
draught of Sorrel, or Lemon Posset; (Sage and Carduus Posset are not amiss)
when you begin to Sweat, drink of either of the Posset-drinks well warmed, and
Sweat plentifully; when yon have Sweat as much as is judged convenient, cool by
degrees, and when you have rested three or four hours, if your Distemper be
removed, and as you perceive, quite gone, sweat no more that day; but if the
Distemper be rather increased, after you have taken the quantity of two
spoonfulls or thereabouts, the next time take three, and Sweat again, and the
third time with three, or if there be occasion, four spoonfulls,

In case of Infection sweat thus three times in 24 hours, resting between
whiles; if strength would suffer, a good breathing sweat so long together would
be very effectual. The next day as soon as strength permits sweat again, taking
as much of this as you find expedient, and so for four or five days together,
until (if it be possible) the malignity be spent wholly in sweating (sweating
is the only means that helps nature in this case) or thrust out into swellings,
which if they prove kindly, ripen with ordinary means.

But if the Distemper for which you took this Antidote wholly remove, you need
not take it the second time.

In the beginning of this Discourse, I told you that this Elixyr was the proper
Antagonist to malignity, whether insensibly conveyed to the body by Infection
or sensibly by external Instruments, as the bitings of Venomous Creatures,
which is the next thing in order to be spoken to.

What great affinity there is betwixt the poison conveyed by the wounds
inflicted by Venomous Creatures, and the poison of those occult thanatopherous,
and killing qualities in malignant Diseases, shall not here to be handled. The
method used in cure, nor the Medicines appointed by the Learned Ancients were
not much unlike, where we find the King of Pontus his confection, I mean
Methridate in use, (although a Medicine frequent amongst us, yet not to be
disesteemed; The Treacles, Electuar. Orv. Dietessaron dictamn. Gentiana,
Aristoloch, St. John's Wort, etc. with many others which are used to this day,
and that with good success: you need not then wonder that I direct the
Universal Elizyr) though there is not in this Medicine one grain of Methridate,
nor any other of the above recited) for cure Internal of poison so communicated.

To any one that is hurt by a Venomous Creature give a spoonful thereof with
some Juice of Citrons (which is best) Lemons or Orenges, and let him sweat
reasonably; how often you will find occasion to do it, the present occasion
must inform you; to the part that is hurt do as you shall be directed when you
come to the ontward use of it.

As malignity may be communicated by Infection.

So it may be generated within the body by putrefaction, and that two ways.

1. By taking too great a quantity of meats (though affording good nourishment)
or drinks, into the Stomach, which cannot be digested by its heat; from
indigestion, arises putrefaction; from putrefaction malignity.

2. By the eating of those things which naturally have propensity to
corruption; to give you but a familiar instance, Melons, Cucumbers, etc. The
Distempers arising from replition, etc. generally called Surfeits.

When it so falls out that you have eaten too much, whether of meats, or
fruits, and you find your Stomach somewhat burdened (rather then run the
hazard of a possibility that nature may overcome what you have eat) cause what
you have eat to be brought up the same way it went down, then take half a
spoonful, or somewhat more, if you find it convenient; and if you find your
self ill, gently sweat, and it is likely you may hear no more of it. In case you
cannot easily Vomit, take the like quantity, and it will forward nature to
digest what you have taken.

After the eating of any Cold or Windy Fruits, or meat, a little quantity
hereof will profit you not a little.

In defect of the spirits, whence happen swoonings, faintings, and a
distillation or scattering of the spirits; in this case this is the most
appropriate Cordial.

Heaviness about the Heart, often arising from grief and other causes, it
removes.

Pain in the Stomach, caused by Wind, and Crudityes; it not only helps but
removes the cause.

Pain in the Stomach by tough and Cold Humors it eases, and attenuates them
for expulsion.

Wind in the bowels it expells effectually.

The pain in the belly, if arising from a Cold cause it wholly removes.

Inconcoction, usually proceeding from the weakness of natural heat (sometimes
from the intemperature of the Stomach, caused by the drinking of cold water, or
other small Liquor in extremity of heat, it wonderfully remedieth.

Pains in the sides it takes away, by taking a little draught of it in Posset
Drink, and Sweating; but these pains must arise from flatuosity, not from the
inflammation of the Pleura.

If you have no appetite to eat, it usually provokes one.

If you have an appetite to eat and are faintish for want of something to
refresh you, it is the best thing in the world to be taken, especially if you
be hot.

Toward the prolonging of Life it is not a little conducing, if constantly
taken in the Morning.
That great naturalist the L. Ver. Visc. St. Alban says, take his own words.
Whatsoever is given with good success in curing of Malignant and Pestilentiall
Diseases; etc. may very happily be transferred to prolongation of Life; and in
another place, It is consonant to reason that those things which being taken in
Cures, do defend and fortify the heart or more truly the spirits against
poisons, etc. being transferred with judgment and choice into diet, should
have a good effect in some sort toward the prolonging of Life. page 190, etc.
Some of those Cordial simples he mentions, as Lignum, Aloes, fol Indam, Mint,
Saffron, Cardaus, etc. he propounds waters to be made of these, not such as our
phlegmatic common distilled waters, but waters that are lively, and sending
forth a Benign vapor; he objects against burning waters of spirit of wine;
Some may suppose that the spirit of this Elixyr, is too hot or burning, and may
yield an heat preditory to the Spirits, which may be an objection against its
continual use directed, and advised, as conducing to long life; to which I
answer, That as wine or any other cordial Liquor, if immoderately taken, does
prey upon the spirits, so this may; but if it be taken in the quantity advised
(or in somewhat a greater, for the person that takes it may easily judge what
will be convenient) every Morning, instead of preying upon the spirits, making
them eager or thin, it shall notably condense or thicken them, for I do not
intimate hereby the transferring of this Elixyr into a diet, drinking of it as
old women do Ale in the Chimney-corner, but only commend it medically, that is,
a little quantity to be taken every Morning (instead of all other Mornings
draughts) for the corroborating of the Spirits, the preventing of Infection,
for the resisting of putrefaction, for the correcting of crudities that abound
in the Stomach, I commend it as the most salubrious, or healthful thing that
can be taken fasting in the Morning.

1. By Cold and Phlegmatic Persons, such are most ancient people that are
stricken in years.

2. By them who have Cold, waterish, and as they call them raw, Stomachs, such
are those who have accustomed themselves to drink strong drinks in their
younger days.

3. By them that abound with wind and crudities in their Stomach and Bowels.

4. By them who have no appetite through indigestion, from whence a source of
weaknesses and infirmities and Diseases do spring, that being a lingering,
sometimes a sudden death.

By all generally that live a sedentary life, whose callings require not
laborious exercises; to such, if the would live long, let me leave this caution
with the medical use of this Elixyr (...), thar is, Be moderate in eating and
drinking, etc. and I may warrant you as far as the Art of Physic will reach.

I say I commend a little quantity hereof (which you may guess by discretion,
as half a Spoonful, or a little more) to be taken every Morning instead of all
other liquors whatever, which you should do well to take upon an empty Stomach.

About an hour after eat what is convenient for you.

I shall last of all show you of what admirable use it is of, to be used
outwardly, and how to be applied.
1. To any part bitten with any Venomous Creature whatever, apply it upon a
fine ragg or pledge at of lint dipped therein. But first of all let the Lady with
her little sharp incision knife make some little incisions on the place that is
hurt till it bleed, then after this manner apply a Cupping-glass; take the
Glass, dry it, rub it that there be no moisture in it, dry a little flax or tow
at the fire, put it into the Glass, and light it with a Candle or Paper; and as
the flame is almost ready to go out put on the Glass and hold it a little hard
too, untiil their appear a swelling arise under the Glass; take away your hand
and the Glass will stay on of its self, there let it stick a quarter of an
hour, remove the Glass and the blood, and wash the incisions and the hurt with
this Liquor; dip lint therein, and apply it, putting over it a warm Plaster;
observe that wounds made by Venomous Creatures, must be kept open very long,
and while any ill symptoms appear, use this as one of the Choysest Medicines;
when you have thus dressed the wound, let the person wounded go to bed, and give
him of this one full-Spoonfull at the least, with as much of the Juice of
Citrons, Vervane, Rue, or Mugwort, and sweat thereon; the next day (if you
think the Venom in good measure drawn out, you need not apply the
Cupping-Glass the second time) did your lint again and apply it as at the
first, and so till all be well. In want of Cupping-Glasses (though they are much
more effectual) apply the vents of pullen, etc.

To any part bitten or hurt with the teeth of Animalls, not Venomous, as Man,
Horse, Dog, (not mad) if the part hurt become of an evil color and stincketh
use this; many times it happens through a fall or blow upon the mouth, a Tooth
may bruise the flesh, if the breath smell or the place look white, the place
bruised corrupts; wash it with this there, is nothing better.

To any part that is gangreend apply it. That there is a gangrene in any part
you may know it by these signs, the place affected will become of an ill
color, blackish, look livid, sometimes it will blister, as oftentimes in
Hydropick Distempers, it will send forth an evil savor, if you prick it or
touch it with the point of an incision knife, it will not bleed, nor is
sensible of pain. Let the Lady take her incision knife, and make some incisions
in the place till it bleed, and the part sensible of smart, dip a fine ragg,
(lint is better) in this Elixyr a very little warmed, and apply it with a warm
Plaster over it; do this once in twelve hours; if after some few applications
you see a separation or division betwixt the sound and the unsound, or dead
part that is gangreend, health and cure may be promised; use this until the
black and stinking flesh be wholly removed, then to your own salve again to
skin it up.

To any sore that looks blackish and stincks it, may prevent a gangre'n, it
will quickly correct its evil smell, if you wash it therewith.

To ulcers in the mouth and throat, if they look white in the bottom, if not
preceding from a venereal cause, used by its self it is effectual but if they
do, then mix with it as much of the Oil of Vitriol as will render it notably
tart, touch the Ulcers gently therewith.

To Impostumations in the mouth, after they are opened it cleanses and heals
them sound,

To the Gums (if rotted with the Scurvy, stinck, and look ugly) lanced and
washed therewith twice a day makes them perfectly well, and is the best thing
can be used.

Into an hollow Tooth if it cause the breath to smell, dip a little lint
therein, and put it into the hollow, and it will preserve the breath.

Into the Ears, when there is dullness, of Hearing and pain, if proceeding from
a cold Cause, instill three or four drops, and stop them with Wool, Lint or
Cotton, to keep out the Cold.

In all which Cases, and many more herein not mentioned, if inwardly taken, or
outwardly applied, it is a second to none whatever.

To conclude; After a man has spent himself with hard labor, whether of mind
or body, weary with traveling, spent with heat, or any otherways debilitated,
let him take but a little of this, and it cannot be Imagined how it will raise
up his spirits, almost to admiration.

It is therefore of most necessary use to be at hand upon all occasions, and
not amiss to carry a little glass with you in your pocket when you travail, and
before you eat or drink, if you be hot, faint, tired, or any way indisposed, I
commend it as the best, and truest Cordial you can take.

Note, That its virtue never abates by keeping.

Note, If any Glass be not full, or one fuller then the other, it is not that
it wants its just quantity, but because the Glasses cannot be equally fixed.

The Stationer to the Reader.
THe Author has attributed many, (and not underserved) virtues to his
Universal Elixyr which are confirmed by several that have made use thereof, and
no faults I have espied but one (which I thought good to publish for
Information of the people that is, it cannot be bad without money; yet the price
is inconsiderable in regard of its worth: You may have it at the Greyhound in
St. Pauls-Church-Yard at a Stationers shop ready put up in Glasses containing
about five Ounces, for 2 s. 6 d. a Glass.

FINIS.
These things following, are sold likewise at the Greyhound in St.
Pauls-Church-Yard. And by William Terrewest, Bookseller in Oundle in
Northamptonshire.
POmanders, (to be smelt to) to prevent the Infection of the Plague, prepared
according to the Advice of the College of Physicians; And are to be sold at
the Sign of the Greyhound in St. Pauls-Church-Yard; the price is one shilling.

Dr. SEE'S Internal Balsom, at 5 s. a whole Box, and 2 s. 6 d. half a Box, with
a Book of Directions how to use it.

Dr. MAYS Lozanges, against Coughs, and Consumptions, the best for that kind as
ever was yet made, at 2 s. 6 d. the paper, each paper being a quarter of a
pound.


