A COPY Of The SPEECH Made By Sir John Lenthall To The LORD MAYOR and ALDERMEN
In The GUILD HALL LONDON, The (...)of (...) 1659.

For the satisfying of such as either by mis-report or mis understanding of
some passages in it, have excepted against it.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Leach 1659

My Lord Mayor,
I Am very happy that you have given this Committee of Parliament such
satisfaction, and also that we have given this Court the knowledge of our
Intentions: How far the Parliament is from giving you any just occasions, I
have already given you Assurances of, and I hope this Conference will give us a
better and more firm Confidence one in the other, that so we may walk together
in a mutual and happy Compliance; It was hinted by the worthy Alderman that
spoke last, how that the Posts and Chains were set up for the Security of the
City, and to prevent such Dangers as they were so lately threatened with. This I
must confess was a just occasion to secure your selves from hazards of this
nature, but why it should now be done when your dangers are past, and when that
Authority is in being, which you pretended to have so ardent desires too, and
which (I may say) you cannot fear, when you consider how tender they have been
to the People, how great Friends they have been to the Commerce and Trade of
this place, and how desirous they formerly have been to preserve the Privileges
and Rights of it against all Danger and Invasion; And me thinks it is no small
happiness, that from a Confusion so lately here, there should be this Calm and
this Tranquillity.

In the several discourses, I apprehend there has been a little glance at the
form of Government, and though we have no instructions as to that, yet since
the opportunity is given, I will let you understand what I perceive the
intentions of the Parliament are. Their whole design is a Commonwealth
Government, that is, that the Nation shall be Governed by successive
Parliaments freely chosen by the People. I must confess I know not how this
may agree with the inclinations of the English Nation, for it has been my
misfortune never to have known a quiet or an established Government amongst us,
so that I can speak but of such a one as I have been informed of, and such a
part of one, as I a little time lived under. The first is determined by the
hand of war, the other disturbed before it was brought to perfection, yet under
that little glimpse we had of what we should have, it might easily be
discovered, that was not likely to be an unproffitable one: And I am of
opinion, that most of this Honorable number will affirm the same; it being a
season wherein Trade so flourished, and the Merchant made so successful
returns, that I believe most of you can date the begetings of your wealth from
the time you were under that Authority; And if any of you have had losses, you
must derive them from succeeding times, which have been very unfortunate to
this Nation, and most unhappy to this City.

There are in Europe several forms of Governmernt, some under Monarchies,
others under Free-States, the first may be good, the other we are certain are
very beneficial to the people that live under them, as there are many of you
can witness from what you have observed in some parts of Italy, Germany,
France, and from our rich and near Neighbors, the Free-States of Holland, who
have now mastered the Trade of this part of the world, and swallowed the
English glory and wealth. And I am of opinion this proceeds from the very form
of Government, which is amongst them, but yet I do not like it so well, as that
I could wish an imitation of it here, for it will neither agree with the
interest nor the people of this Nation, it not being generous enough for so
magnanimous a people.

I have spoke all this my Lord brokenly, because it is only to answer objections
that have been made, and I am very sensible of the trouble I have detaind you
with, I shall therefore conclude with this advice, that this City would be
careful how they make causeless jealousies, and by making preparations against
them you may create real dangers; For it is not my observation only, but of the
best Historians; That when too much mistrust of their dangers have been infused
into the multitude, they make their resorts to numbers and very quickly
increase and commonly the most indigent are the most luxurious, when having
their opportunity they become their own Carvers, and if underhand this be
composed for the bringing in of the King, (as that is the opinion of many) why
then certainly if he found the indigent did his business, it is his interest to
enrich them with the wealth of those that were less active though not less
desirous to have the thing done.

Thus my Lord, I have given you my opinion, and my advice must be, That your
Lordship, with the rest of this Honorable number, would make it your endeavors
to appease the distractions not to inflame them, the one relishes much of
prudence, the other of Precipitancy.

FINIS.

