A SERMON Preached at Lincoln Assizes. March, the 6th. 1691/2.

Imprimatur,

Guil. Lancaster R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domest.
March 24. 1691/2.
A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES HELD AT LINCOLN, March the 6th. 1691/2.
Before the Right HONOURALE Sir JOHN HOLT, Knight, Lord Chief Justice of England.

By WALL. LEIGHTONHOUSE, Rector of Washingburgh nigh Lincoln, and late Fellow of
Lincoln College, Oxon.

Printed at the earnest request of the Gentlemen of the Country.

(...)
(...).
Phil. in Palamede. London, Printed for W. Crook, at the Green-Dragon without
Temple Bar, 1692.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOHN HOLT, Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the King's
Bench, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council. AND To the Right
Worshipful EDWARD PAIN, of How, in the County of Lincoln, Esquire, High Sheriff of
the County of Lincoln.
Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful,
THO I was importunately solicited to make the following Discourse public, not
only by the Gentry of the Country, but likewise by most of the Learned in the
Law, who were part of that numerous Auditory before whom it was delivered; yet
the Sense of my own incapacity at the best, together with those few days which
my pressing Occasions would allow me, to fit my self for such an undertaking,
made me demur for some time ere I durst correspond with their Requests. And
indeed nothing but the consideration of Two such great Patrons your selves,
(who may each of you lay just Claim to it), could have prevailed with me to
have reprieved it to a longer Life. You both are so great encouragers of the
Subject it chiefly Treats of, ( Justice and Mercy) that as they seem riveted in
your very Constitution; so you may claim a natural Right to this Discourse. So
that as most Persons are necessitated to screw up their Inventions to fit
Epistles Dedicatory, by Flattery and Applause, to make the Subject of which
they Treat, and the Person to whom they Dedicate, to quadrate with each other.
There is such an agreeableness between your Genius and the Matter comprised in
the subsequent Discourse, that should I say it decyphers each of you, there is
no part of the World that is thoroughly read in either of your Tempers, which
would think the Encomium undeservedly placed. You my Lord, from your first
setting out into the World, have had the Character of Wise, Just, Good, and
Benign, and as every day adds to your Knowledge, so does it to the luster of
your Glory too. For by the continual and impartial Exercise of Justice, still
bestuded with Mercy, you beautify your Place, high as it is, abundantly more
than it can adorn you; and thereby embellish that Fountain from whence you
derive your Commission. And were you really to hear the sentiments and
expressions of all good Men in your late Circuit, concerning your Lordships
Wisdom, Industry, and Compassion, joined with an unbias'd Care for Equity,
'twould outstrip Hyperbole itself, and constrain you to blush at their so
frequent admiration of your Virtues.

And as for you Sir, you have always moved under that excellent Character of
having obliged all that know you, by your extraordinary Candor, Clemency, and
Justice. And although the Sphere, you move in, be not so conspicuous as that of
his Lordships, yet that Specimen which you have always given of a strict regard
to Justice and Commiseration, is a sufficient evidence, that in what Post
soever you were placed, you would act according to the Rules of Prudence and
Sincerity. But besides all this Sir, I have a greater Tie to lay this at your
Feet, as an expression of that indelible Gratitude which I must ever owe to
you: And tho Flattery be so sordid a thing, and so much against my Temper, that
you know Sir, I would sooner die than be guilty of it; yet the fault would be
as great on the other hand, should I wrap up such favors as I have received
from you, in a dark obscurity. For I must not be ashamed to own, that (besides
all other kindnesses, which are vastly great) I owe that which is dearer than
Life, even my Liberty itself, to your exceeding great Favor; you alone having
been the Instrument of freeing me in a great measure, from those sorrows which
a Romish Adversary forced me to grapple with. And therefore be pleased to
accept of this, as a Monument of my public acknowledgment, which is all the
favor I shall at present ask from you; only that you will both of you
vouchsafe to excuse the freedom of this Dedication, and Patronize it (not for
the merits of its Author, but) in hope that it may, in some measure, promote
that important Work, which is the Subject of the following Papers; which will
add infinite Satisfaction to,

April 2. 1692. Your Honors and Worships, most unfeignedly Devoted, and most
humble Servant, Walter Leightonhouse.

A SERMON Preached at Lincoln Assizes.
2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. Take heed what you do, for ye judge not for man, but for the
Lord who is with you in the judgment.

Wherefore let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it; for there
is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of
gifts.


ALthough mankind be by the instinct of Nature a sociable Being, and delights
in Converse and Society; yet such is the pravity of his Inclinations, that were
there not a Coercive Power from without, as well as a Sense of God and Religion
from within; the whole World would in a little time be turned into one single
Aceldama.

The sturdy Lion or the bloody Tiger, the Leopard or the Panther, will rarely,
if at all, prey upon their own Species: Yet Man tho endued with Reason, sticks
not to be guilty of a more brutish Cruelty. The Firstborn of the World, did
inhumanly Butcher his own Brother: and Israel (Gods chosen one) supplanted and
over-reacht the Firstborn of Isaac.

And men are so mighty prone to these things, that were it not for humane
Sanctions, the Dens and Caves of the Earth would be our safest retreat, to
secure our selves from wrong and injury. Natural Religion indeed lays strong
Ties upon a man's Conscience to answer the Ends of his Being, and revealed
Religion does much more so; but yet the Axes of a Temporal Authority, are so
much more cogent than natural Truths, or supernatural Revelation, that Aaron's
Rod would do little good unless fortified by the Power and Scepter of Moses. If
there were no Law to restrain man within the Fences and Mounds of Justice, his
Strength would be the only Rule of his Will, and the Standard of his Actions.
That would be mine which I could get by force; and yet I should have Right to
it no longer than whilst a more powerful Arm graspt it from me. The Sons of
Violence would engross what their Swords could reach, and the best Patriot
might starve, whilst the unjust Banditti were surrounded with Plenty. Trade and
Commerce would be empty Names; and Rapine and Injustice would be as common as
Stones in the Streets. Liberty and Property would be banished the Earth, and
our Lives as well as our Estates would be in continual Jeopardy. A Tumultuous
Rabble would insult over the greatest Potentates; and an illbred Mob tread upon
the learned and grave. Tribulation and Anguish would be the Portion of the
virtuous and religious, and perpetual Dread and Fear would crowd into the
Hearts of all the Sons of Adam.

These and innumerable worse Calamities would, like an unbridled Deluge,
overflow universal Mankind, were there no restraints but what are imposed by
Nature or by Grace; and were the Purple and the Scarlet taken from us, the
State and the Altar would soon be so too.

So that it is to such as you, my Lord, that we owe both the safety of our
Persons, the security of our Estates, and the enjoyment of our Religion; and
all military Conquests abroad would do us little service, unless you kept our
Peace at home. It Is by your Administration alone that Piety is advanced; Truth
preserved, Tranquillity settled, Privilege bounded, Innocence protected,
Learning encouraged, our Persons secured from Violence, and our Estates from
Plunder. In short, It Is Judgment alone that establishes a Land. Prove. 19.4.
And the exercise of that is by the Great King of Heaven and Earth reposed in
your Hands: And therefore you have need to Take heed what you do: for ye judge
not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment. Wherefore let
the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it; for there is no iniquity
in the Lord our God, nor respect of Persons, not taking of gifts.

Which words were spoken by good Jehosaphat King of Judah, and may properly be
called his Charge to the Judges, when he Commissioned them to go their several
Circuits; and import as tho he had expressed himself more largely thus,

I am now about to entrust you with a concern of no less Moment, than the
Welfare of my Subjects, the Honor of my Person, and the Establishment of my
Kingdom; and therefore it is necessary that I advise you in a Matter of so great
Weight, to be careful and circumspect how you behave your selves, in the
Management of so great a Charge; greater perhaps than you, at first sight,
conceive it to be. For although it is true you have your Commission from me, yet
the Judgment which is committed to your Charge, belongs to a much greater than
I am; for it is not mine but the Deuteronomy. 1. v. 17. (...). i. e. Judicium est Dei
and Deo utroque enim modo reddi forest, commendatum vobis est a Deo and Dei
nomine illud administratis
Lords, who is constantly present in your Courts of Judicature, and stands by
and sees all your Proceedings, hears all your Awards and Arbitraments, and
understands the whole Process of the Hall. Wherefore let his dreadful Presence
strike you into an awful regard of him, and let it oblige you to act as
impartially, as tho he was really visible to your bodily Eyes.

I doubt not, but were I your King personally upon the Bench with you, no
Judgment which was evidently false, would either for Favor or Affection, Lucre
or Interest, proceed out of your Lips. Yet alas! what am I when compared to the
great King of Heaven and Earth? I can it is true at my pleasure send you a
Quietus, but what is that to the Terrors of the Omnipotent Jehovah, who when
provoked is a consuming Fire? and who will most certainly summons you before
the Tribunal of Heaven, call you to a strict Account, and if you have accepted
of the person of the wicked, and overthrown the righteous in Judgment. Prove.
18.5. notwithstanding your Vestments of Honor, if your Sins be of the same Dye,
you shall in the Day of Vengeance be covered with a Robe of shame, and be clad
in confusion as with a Cloak. For there is no iniquity with the Lord our God,
but justice and judgment are the habitation of his Throne. Psalm. 89.14. from
whence he cannot be moved at any time, thorough respect of Persons or taking of
Gifts, but be the Circumstances of the Man never so poor, or never so lofty,
God judges not according to outward appearance, but judges righteous
Judgment, and from the Equitableness of those proceedings, no Interest or
Passion, no gilded Title or honorable Employ, no Trust or Ability can divert
him; therefore let my Advice seem seasonable to you this Day, and take heed
what you do, for you judge not for Man, but for the Lord, who is with you in
the Judgment etc.

This is briefly the Paraphrase of the Text, which suggests unto us these
following Particulars.

I. That Judges do personate God himself, who is II. A constant Eye witness of
all their Proceedings, and therefore, III. They ought to be very circumspect,
and to have a reverential Awe and Fear upon them, for that, IV. If they pervert
Judgment God will vindicate his own Honor, and punish them severely for it. For
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons nor taking
of gifts.
All these seem plainly implied in the Text. Upon each of which, I purposed to
have enlarged at this time, but in the treating of them, I found my Meditations
crowd in so thick upon me, that (for fear of being too tedious) I was obliged
to confine my self to speak only to the Two former of them.

I. That Judges do personate God himself, who is II. A constant Eye witness of
all their Proceedings. Of which in their Order,
And first, Judges do personate God himself.

And for this Reason it is, that the Greek Fathers do frequently denominate
Magistrates (...), Coassessors with God in the Throne of Judgment. Not that he
delivers up an absolute Sovereignty to them; but they as his Stewards, Deputies
or Lieutenants, are substituted to represent him, in administering Justice and
Equity, maintaining Order and supporting Peace, among the Children Men, helping
them to right who suffer wrong, justifying the righteous and condemning the
wicked. Deuteronomy. 25.1. And for this purpose the Almighty has been pleased to
impress his own Character upon them, and to style them by his own peculiar
Title. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people, Exodus
22.28. And who those Gods there mentioned were, you may see, if you please to
have recourse to the 8 Verse of that Chapter. If the thief be not found, then
the master of the house shall be brought unto the Judges, those were the Gods
before mentioned; thus again Psalm. 86.6. I have said ye are Gods, (...) Gods,
i. e. in respect to the Fountain of their Power, which was from the Most High,
who for that reason honored them with his own Name. And it is a most remarkable
place to our purpose, which we have from the Mouth of God himself, Exodus 4.16.
where speaking to Moses he says Thou shall be to him (...) a God, which the
Seventy render thus, Tu autem eris ei in his quae ad Deum pertinent. Nonnulli
recentiores perspicne admodum reddiderunt, and ipse tibi pro Deo.
(...). i. e. Thou shall be in the stead of God; thou shall represent my
Person, in commanding and judging and revealing my Will to him; which is the
very same with that of Exodus 7.1. (...), I have appointed thee God over
Pharaoh; I have given the Power of Life and Death into thine Hands, I have
placed thee in his Throne, in his Authority who judges right; I have
substituted thee chief Agent in this weighty Matter. But that which will clear
the point most effectually, is what is recorded in Psalm. 82.1. God stands in
the congregation of the mighty, he is a Judge among Gods; the Word in the
Original is (...) which is the Name of the Omnipotent God; and then these Words
must be read thus, God stands in the Congregation of God, i. e. in his own
Judicature, or in that Judicature which is erected and authorized by him, i. e.
it is by Gods Commission that Judges act, and they do really personate God
himself. Thus the Jewish Arab (as Dr. Hammond observes) glosses upon it,
observing that there is a repetition of the Name again instead of the Affix.

But I shall not stay any longer upon the proof of this Proposition, but shall
rather choose to proceed to draw such Observations, as are deducible from this
first Head; and therein I shall observe.

I. That if Judges do personate God, then they ought to act, as they are
convinced God would do if he sat in their place, as they do in his.

And here perhaps some Persons would not think it any digression, should I draw
a Scheme of the Magistrates Duty, and show wherein they ought to be Righteou as
Goa is Righteous, and Merciful as that great Judge of all the Earth is so. But
this, my Lord, would be (...). To light a Candle in order to add Luster to the
Sun in its noon day Glory. And should I herein go about to instruct you in your
Duty, I should think that I transgressed my own. But yet I hope it may not be
unbecoming this place or this Assembly, if I a little descant upon those two
Cardinal Attributes of God, which he exercises as a Judge, viz. His Justice
and his Mercy, and leave it to your particular Breast, to consider how far you
are concerned to Copy after so fair an Original.

First then, I desire you to consider of the impartial Justice of that great
God whom you personate. Surely he will not do wickedly, neither will the
Almighty pervert judgment, etc. Job 34.12. For who ever perished being innocent,
or where were the righteous cut off? Job 4.7.

There are two things which are more particularly pressing upon a Person to
deviate from the Rules of Justice, viz.

First, Favor or Affection, and Secondly, Interest. Now that God is no way
wrapped or biased with either of these, even the Words in the latter part of my
Text assure us. For with the Lord our God, there is no respect of persons nor
taking of gifts. The greatest Pomp and the most splendid retinue, is no motive
to his Favor; nor can the largest Fortune bribe him to be unjust. It is
Innocence alone that can bespeak his Love, and Simplicity of Heart that can
engage his Affection; All his ways are Righteousness and Truth, and the Man
that is not upright, be he what he will, must tremble at his Bar. There the
poor helpless Orphan shall have his complaint heard, though he cannot plead for
himself; and the Tears of the Widow and the Afflicted shall be a convincing
Dialect. There is no respect of (...), Col. 3.25.
Face or Fortune with him; but the Rich and the Poor, the Course and the
Well-favoured, shall be weighed in the Balance of Justice, and sentence shall
be passed without (...), 1. Tim 5.21. Metaphora sumpta a libra cujus lanx
alter'a praeponderat. ita ut nullum est aequilibrium.
Partiality and without Hypocrisy.

It is recorded of Caesar, that in hearing of a Cause betwixt Cassius and
Brutus, he confessed, Melior causa Cassii, sed denegare Bruto nihil possit;
That Cassius had Justice on his side, but yet Brutus was his Favorite, and
therefore he must give Sentence for him. But far be it from God that he should
do wickedness, and from the Almighty that he should commit iniquity. Job 34.10.
He will be just in all his Ways, and righteous in all his Works, his Ways are
equal tho done in the dark, and his Justice irreproveable tho acted in secret;
in a Word, Impartial Justice is the Habitation of his Throne, and without any
respect of Persons; he gives to every Man according to his Works.

It is an Observation as old as Tully, 2 Ac, in Verrem.
Ingentes divitiae judiciorum religionem veritatemque solent perfringere; which
I shall choose to explain by the Mouth of God himself, Deuteronomy. 16.19. A gift does
blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous. But now God
will not be caught with such trifling Baits as these; For their silver and
their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the wrath of the Lord. Ezech.
7.19. It is true indeed, Interest is the great Wheel of Motion in this lower
Orb, the Ploughman and Mechanic, the Soldier and the Merchant, the Lawyer and
the Statesman, the Politician and the Magistrate, nay I may add the Scholar and
the Preacher, do all exert their Faculties, and spend their Labor and their
Oil, in hopes of Interest and Advantage. The Fatigue and Heat of the Day, would
be really grievous and uneasy, were there no recompense of Reward even in this
World. But yet that Person who justifies the Wicked for Reward, and by that
means takes away the righteousness of the Righteous from him, deviates from the
Rules of his great Master, whom he personates, who has without any reserve
declared, that The wickedness of the Wicked shall be upon him, and the
righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon him. Will the Lord be pleased with
Thousands of Rams, or Ten Thousands of Rivers of Oil; will Agag 's fatter
Cattle be to him a Peace Offering, or will the richest Oblations of the Sinner,
be grateful in his Eye? No, To do justice and judgment is more acceptable to
him than sacrifice. Prove. 21.3. and in these he has more pleasure than in
Burnt Offerings for sin. Heb. 10.6. God never passes by the Failures of a Man
because rich, nor does he ever disregard a just Plea, because the Person is
poor, or a Widow: he suffers not the Plaintiffs Cause to want weight, only
because the Clients Pocket does so, nor will he wink at a false Verdict, in the
behalf of the Defendant, for all the Riches of Licinius or Achoemenes. For the
righteous Lord loves righteousness, and his eyes behold the thing that is
upright, yea his eyes are always open to the righteous, and his Hands always
ready to deal to every man according to the fruit of his doings. Jer. 17.10.
But then.

Secondly, as God is just so he is merciful likewise, yea his mercy is over all
his works. And although in this, Earthly Magistrates have not power to act
according to the measures of the Almighty, because he has an absolute Dominion
over the Creature, and may do what he will with his own; whereas Earthly Judges
are obliged to pass Sentence Secundum allegata and probata; yet Mercy being the
Triumphant Attribute of Heaven, it is fit that they, who personate God in his
Justice, should in some measure tread in the steps of his Compassion too, tho
they cannot make so deep an impression. And in order to this, I shall only
desire them to consider, That God does not at all times inflict an equal
Punishment upon two Persons, tho guilty of the Breach of the same Law; but has
Recourse to a Geometrical Proportion, and either increases or abates his
Inflictions as it suits to his Justice, intermixed with his Mercy, and directed
by his Wisdom; as for instance. This Man was hurried on by a violent strength
of Temptation; That wilfully run himself into the same Sin; This Sin has grown
to a Habit in that Person; but it is the first time, and that by surprise, that
ever this man sinned in that nature. That Man broke through all the strong
Enclosure of God's assisting Grace; This Person was laid open to the
Temptation. This was but a babe in Christ; That has been fed with the strong
meat of the Gospel. This Persons Bashfulness led him to sin in the dark; That
had a whores Forhead, and committed his Iniquity at Noonday.

Here, tho the Sin be the same in several Persons, yet these Circumstances will
engage God to exert his Mercy more largely toward one than toward the other:
Thus does he make way to his anger, or as we read it in the vulgar Latin,
Librat viam ad iram suam; He weighs the way to his Indignation, considers each
Punctilio of the fault, and catches at every Circumstance which will open a
Door to the poor Offender: For although he does not respect Persons, yet he will
not destroy the Righteous with the Wicked: The Righteous, who although Sinners,
yet are comparitively Righteous, with the wicked, who are habitually or
wilfully such. And as God observes a measure in criminal, so does he likewise
in judicial Proceedings. He will not encourage those who contend for Smoke, for
a Trifle, (tho their Cause be just) so much as he will those whose all lies at
stake. i. e. God would not, did he sit in our Courts of Judicature, give Light
for so large damage to a Boutifeu, or a common Barretter, as he would to an
oppressed Widow, or a defrauded Orphan; for he always has a favor to the
peaceable; but the Turbulent and Contentious his Soul is not with them. He
especially shows Mercy to those who are not able to do themselves Justice, and
will relieve the oppressed innocent out of his hands who is too strong for him.

These are briefly the Rules, This the Method, which God Almighty follows in
the Exercise of his Justice and his Merty. To which I might add several weighty
Reasons to move you to go and do likewise; but your known Integrity and great
Wisdom will be a sufficient bar for my not doing so; especially since I may,
and that most justly too, accost you in the same words that the Widow of Tekoah
did King David, That as an Angel of God, so are you, my Lord, to discern
between good and bad. 2 Samuel 14.17. And therefore 'twould be the greatest
breach of Charity in the World to think you would act against Knowledge, since
you have never yet given one instance either of your Injustice or Incompassion.
However be pleased to give me leave to speak to you in the words of one of the
first Fathers and Martyrs of the Primitive Church; (...), Justin Mart; God has
given you his own Honor, his own Place, his own Name; therefore do you judge
the People, as he himself would judge them. Which is our first Observation
deducible from our first Particular, That if Judges personate God, then they
ought to act as they are convinced he would do, were he in their stead, as they
are in his.

Secondly, If they personate God, then we ought to honor and pay a Civil
Regard to them. And here I shall not Treat of that Respect which is due to them
when off the Bench; for that every one will yield that understands the Measures
of Civility; and those that do not, their Scarlet and their Trophies, their
Coaches and Attendance, will attract them to do so. But I shall insist on that
part of Regard which is due to them as Vice Gods, in order to the promoting
Justice and the advancement of Truth and Judgment. And herein every man ought
to consider, whether, if God were in Peron upon the Bench, he would dare to
give that Almighty Being the trouble of deciding that Cause, in which he knew
in Point of Justice, a Verdict ought to brought against him. Would a Defendant
put in a Plea, which would appear evidently unjust in the Eye of that Judge who
sees all things? Or would a Witness attest that which his Conscience told him
was an untruth, were he to Swear in the visible Presence of that God, who has
enjoined him not to bare false Witness against his Neighbor? Would an Advocate
call good Evil, or evil Good, would he by a sly Suggestion endeavor to
enervate the Sinews of the Law, did he really see God in the Court; or would he
say to his Client thy Cause is Right, when he knew nothing could make it so but
Favor or a Fee, a sophistical Pleader, or a corrupt Judge? Would he dare to
pick the Clients Pocket by subtle delays and falsehood, or supplant and
undermine the Truth, to obtain either Interest or Reputation to himself? These
things would not be done if God were in Court in some visible Schechinah; and
therefore, Whoever is guilty of any of these fallacious Quirks, is as really
peccant as if God stood as Judge before him. For since we cvnnot see him Face to
Face and live, it is a Mercy that he is pleased to consult our Interest and
Security so far, as to Commissionate one to Act in his stead; and therefore if
we be guilty of any of these collusive Tricks, and disingenious Behavior; we
may suppose that he will reason with us in those Words of our Savior in
another Case, In as much as you did it unto one of these, you did it unto me,
Math. 25.40. In that you have gone about to stop the Current of Justice, and to
turn judgment into wormwood, Amos 5.7. by glossing over a bad Cause with the
Paint of Insincerity an Falsehood; in that you have given in a false Testimony
against your Neighbor, or brought in a false Verdict against the innocent and
oppressed; in that you have not, to the best of your knowledge, laid all things
naked and open before my Deputy; but have, through the Cloud of your Impiety,
darkened his Understanding and his Knowledge; you have, as much as in you lay,
endeavored to cheat and delude the judge of all the Earth; and have in effect
in open Court boldly proclaimed, How does God know, can he judge through the
dark Cloud, Job 22.13. Tush he sees not, is there knowledge in the most High?
Which leads me to the Second thing considerable, viz. That as Judges personate
God, so he is a constant Eye Witness of all their Proceedings. Take heed what
you do; for you judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the
judgment.

I am not ignorant that many Learned Commentators have interpreted these words,
is with you in the judgment, in a twofold Acceptance

First, That he is with them to take notice of and eye all their Proceedings.
Secondly, to assist them, or as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 28.5, 6. To be a
Spirit of judgment to him that sits in judgment.
But I shall for Brevity sake, confine my self at this time to speak to these
words only in the former Sense, that being most suitable to strike all that are
concerned in this public Solemnity, into an awful Reverence of that great Judge
of Heaven and Earth, by reason of his immediate Presence in the midst of them.

It was wholesome Advice that one gave to his lewd Friend, That he should have
the Picture of his grave and serious Father in the Room where he was wont to
celebrate his Debauches; imagining that the severe Eye of the good old Man, tho
but in Effigy, would give check to the wanton Sallies of the intemperate
Youth. And to the same purpose Seneca advised Lucilius, to fix the Idea of some
grave Person a Cato or a Laelius before him, Epist 11.
as a very convincing Method to restrain him from Vanity and Excess. To which I
might add that of Zeno, who being asked by his Friends how they might keep
themselves in a regular and due Order when he was gone, he made this reply, Si
me presentem semper putetis; by imagining me to be always present as a beholder
of your Actions. But we who live under the Dispensation of the Gospel have no
need of such Foreign Exhortation as these, we have a more sure word of
Prophecy, which does direct us to level our Thoughts and fix our Apprehensions
upon an Object infinitely surmounting those in profane Story. We are taught
that God is a constant Spectator of all our Actions; that we are in the Eye of
our Friend, our Father, and our Judge; that we can go no whether from his
presence, Ps. 139.7, 8. but that all things are naked and open before that
great God, with whom we have to do. Heb. 4.12, 13. And that no man let his
attempts be never so earnest, can hide himself or his Actions in secret places,
that this Lord shall not see them. Jer. 23.24.

And indeed these Thoughts are so riveted in the mind of every Christian, that
nothing but a dark Cloud of Impiety can obscure our belief of it. An upright
Judge is fully convinced that God sees the intention of his Heart; and an
incorrupt Pleader is the very same. A faithful Witness knows that the Almighty
is in the Court; and an impartial Jury does so too. In short, The good man sets
the Lord always before him, Ps. 16.8. and does really think that God stands by
and sees all the Passages of his Life. And therefore I shall be so charitable
as to believe that you all agree in the Assertion, and shall insist no longer
upon the proof of it, least by so doing, I should seem to bring the Integrity
of some of you into question. Proceed I therefore to draw only one practical
Observation from this second Proposition, and so I shall conclude.

Does God eye all your Proceedings, Then I pray you, consider to what purpose
it is to varnish over a bad Cause with the Fucus of Oratory, or the Paint of
specious Pretenses? What signifies the being bribed in the dark, or suborned in
a corner? To what purpose is the smothering your Falsehood from the eye of Men,
when it is seen and viewed by that great God, who knows all the hearts of the
children of men, 1 Kings 8.39. and the secrets thereof, Ps. 44.21.

It is an ingenious Comparison, (and very well suits this Case) which is put by
a modern Writer. Suppose (says he) that you beheld the Almighty, Dr. Scott 's
Christian Life. part 1.
being fitting upon a Cloud in some visible Form, with a Thunderbolt in his
Hand, and from thence looking down upon you, curiously observing how you demean
your selves, and closely pursuing you with his awful Eye, through all your dark
Retreats and Privacies; would not the Thought of any Action that is displeasing
to him be ready to strike you into Trembling and Horror; could you imagine your
selves to be any where secure in your Wickedness, while you saw your selves
uncovered to his Allseeing Eye, to which your Closets lie as open as your
Halls, and your Hearts as the Highways? To which he adds farther, If I were
thoroughly assured that the King were listening behind the Curtain, and heard
every Word that is spoken in the Room, I should doubtless be as much afraid of
talking Treason against him tho I saw him not, as if he stood just before me.
And so if God be in your Court in an invisible manner, and you are not able to
see him through that thick Curtain of Matter, which is drawn between you and
his spiritual Essence; yet you may be well assured, that he is behind it, is
listening to what you say, and prying into what you do; keeps intelligence with
your Thoughts, and is intimately acquainted with all your Pleadings, your
Evidence and your Awards; and therefore you ought to be every jot as cautious
of all your Proceedings, as if you saw him standing by you, to record every
Thought, every Word, and every Action that there passes, and to enter into his
Debt-Books every Item of your Guilt, against the great Day of Account.

Justice is every Man's Birthright, and a Man can with no more Equity bereave
me of it, than he can take away my Life, my Liberty or Estate; and therefore he
that either does so himself, or by false Witness, or the like, occasions others
to do so, is not only unfaithful to his Trust, but is indeed a Felon and an
Usurper; robbing me of that, to which I have not only a Claim by Nature, but by
the Laws of the Realm too; and therefore must expect to have a very severe
Sentence passed upon him, when he gives up his Accounts to that God, who was an
Eyewitness of his Failures.

To conclude; I remember it is recorded of Henry IV. that so great was his
Wisdom, so considerable his depth of Knowledge, that 'twas said, that he that
would corrupt his Council, must first begin with the King. And blessed be God,
we may as truly say that our Laws are so exactly contrived, our Courts so well
filled with Men of Polity and profound Parts, that he that would pervert
Judgment must begin with the Bench; for it is scarce possible to imagine, that
Injustice can be so closely managed, either upon the account of Witness, Jury,
or Advocate, as that a Cause shall suffer without the Knowledge of the Judge,
who like Solomon, will in all probability find out the Fallacy, under the most
close Disguise.

And therefore give me leave my Lord to add, that if you be not wanting to your
self and to us, we may be assured, that Justice will run down like a mighty
Torrent, and that there will be no complaining in our Streets. Let me take the
Freedom therefore once more to remind you, that you must one day appear at the
Bar of that great God whom you personate, and who is a Judge among Gods. Hear
therefore the word of the Lord etc. Thus says the Lord, execute ye judgment
and righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor; do
no wrong, do no violence to the stranger, neither shed innocent blood in this
place. Jer. 22.1. etc. Ezekiel. 42.27. but defend the poor and fatherless, do
justice to the afflicted and needy, and rid them out of the hand of the wicked;
and in all your Proceedings, both Judicial and Criminal, Take heed what you do,
for ye judge not for man but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment:
wherefore let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it, for there
is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons nor taking of
gifts.

FINIS.

